Title       : Survey of Arid Region Herpetofauna of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9322600

Award Number: 9322600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Nussbaum nuss@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Raxworthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5992,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9322600  Nussbaum   Madagascar is a large, continental island located in the
              western Indian Ocean off the east coast of Africa between 12 degree and 25
              degree S latitude.  It has been completely isolated for at least 100 million
              years.  Because of its large size and long isolation, it has developed a highly
              diverse and largely endemic fauna and flora.  It has many small and unusual
              groups, such as the lemurs with only 24 species, and other equally distinctive
              groups that have speciated spectacularly.  These include the orchids with more
              than 1,00 species and the amphibians and reptiles with an estimated 500
              species.  The high degree of endemism and the great diversity of Madagascar's
              fauna and flora combined with an astonishing rate of habitat destruction has
              prompted conservation organizations to give Madagascar top priority for
              conservation efforts.  Two years of a 3-year survey of the amphibians and
              reptiles of the diminishing tropical rainforests of Madagascar have been
              completed.  The main purposes of this survey are to (1) identify centers of
              endemism and high diversity in order to understand the evolutionary history of
              the herpetofauna and to aid in developing new rainforest reserves; (2) obtain
              specimens for systematic studies which will result in a better understanding of
              the origins and relationships of the Madagascan herpetofauna; (3) publish
              taxonomic monographs and field guides; and (4) train Malagasy students,
              scientists and other personnel charged with managing natural resources. 
              Results from the first two years include a dramatic increase in the knowledge
              of the distribution, ecology, life history, and evolutionary relationships of
              rainforest amphibians and reptiles; the rediscovery of 31 extremely rare
              species; and the discovery of 132 new species.  A national research and
              teaching collection of amphibians and reptiles has been established in
              Madagascar, and two Malagasy graduate students have completed their M.S.
              degrees in association with this project.  The current proposal  is to continue
              surveying amphibian and reptile communities in Madagascar, but to shift
              attention from the eastern rainforests to the dry forests of western
              Madagascar.  These dry forests contain some of the most interesting and unusual
              species of plants and animals in the World; and their distributions,
              abundance's, habitat requirements, and adaptations are poorly understood.  The
              dry forests are already degraded and threatened to at least the same degree as
              the rainforests, and their destruction is accelerating as the demand for
              resources increases.  Very few reserves exist to protect the unique habitats of
              madagascar's dry forests.  Twenty-two sites throughout the arid regions would
              be surveyed over a 5-year period, including sites in all four major types of
              dry forest (deciduous, gallery, spiny calcareous-canyon).  The same methods
              used successfully during the rainforest surveys would be employed.  The goals
              are much the same as for the rainforest surveys, and when combined with the
              results of the rainforest surveys would give a comprehensive picture of  the
              diversity, ecology, evolution, systematics, and conservation challenges of the
              Madagascan Herpetofauna.
