Title       : REU: Honey Bee Neurobiology and Behavior Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9322202

Award Number: 9322202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fahrbach susanfah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322202  Fahrbach  This award provides support to the University of Illinois to
              continue a successful REU  program.  Summer research programs will be focused
              on the behavior and  neuroanatomy of honey bees.  Students will have the
              opportunity to combine  compelling fieldwork with modern neuroanatomical
              techniques. Student training will  be a three-fold process.  First, lectures
              will be given on the structure and function of  the insect nervous system; the
              hormonal regulation of insect metamorphosis and neural  development; and the
              experimental study of animal behavior.  Second, students will  receive
              practical training in the safe handling of colonies of honey bees and in 
              observation of honey bee behavior, with ample opportunity provided to practice
              these  new skills.  Third, students will receive laboratory instruction in
              histological  techniques for the light microscopic study of the honey bee
              nervous system, including  many aspects of stereology.  Students will then be
              divided into two teams of three  students each.  These teams will then carry
              out a research project in which an aspect  of brain organization, nerve cell
              number, gene expression, or hormonal responsiveness,  etc. is studied in bees
              of known age and behavioral status.  The goal of this project is  to introduce
              students who already have an interest in behavioral biology to the value  of
              social insects as models for the study of the neurobiology of complex behavior,
               including learning and memory. This project represents an extension of an
              ongoing  collaboration between two laboratories in the Department of Entomology
              and the  Neuroscience Program at the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign.  It will be  based in the University of Illinois Bee Research
              Facility and in the co-PIs  laboratories in the Department of Entomology.  This
              unusual combination of field and  laboratory research environments coupled with
              the different but complementary  backgrounds of the co-PIs will provide
              undergraduates with a rich summer research   experience.  The program currently
              proposed reflects the success of a past REU Site  program centered around the
              same theme (offered Summer 1992), with a new  emphasis on research teamwork as
              a means of helping students complete meaningful  research projects.  ***
