Title       : CRB: Inbreeding Depression and Adaptive Genetic Variation in Gila Topminnows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9322655

Award Number: 9322655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Hedrick hedrick@hedricklab.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendell L. Minckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9285,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322655  Hedrick   In this research, the PI's will examine inbreeding depression
              over two generations for several components of fitness in different populations
              of the endangered species, the Gila topminnow. In a series of experiments, the
              PI's will compare fitness values between progeny of sib matings and the progeny
              of random matings between individuals within the same population. Next, the
              PI's will measure the effect of crossing individuals from different populations
              on the same fitness components. Populations of topminnows were thought to
              undergo periodic oscillations with population bottlenecks, local extinctions,
              recolonizations, and even crossing between populations. As a result, it is
              important in determining the pattern of genetic variation over populations
              whether crosses between individuals from different populations are no different
              than within population crosses, are heterotic, or show outbreeding depression.
              These crosses should give information on whether the different populations are
              fixed for detrimental alleles that can be covered up by outcrossing or are so
              different that F1 and F2 progeny have reduced fitness.   The major
              histocompatibility complex may be the most important adaptive genetic region in
              mammals, conferring resistance to various pathogens. Recent work in fish has
              demonstrated that there is extensive variation for MHC in several species and
              that the pattern of variation is consistent with that in mammals. The PI's will
              document the extent and pattern of MHC in the four metapopulations of the Gila
              topminnow to determine if this species, which is fixed for allozymic variation
              in all populations except one, has variation in this important adaptive region.
               %%%  The primary principles of conservation genetics are related to inbreeding
              depression and the retention of potentially adaptive genetic variation. It is
              therefore of fundamental importance to characterize both the extent of
              inbreeding depression and adaptive genetic variation in particular endangered
              species.  In this study, the PI's have a unique opportunity to measure these
              values in the endangered Gila topminnow which exists in only four natural
              populations in sub-basins of springs and headwater streams in Arizona. In
              addition, this research will add further information on variability in the
              major histocompatibility complex which has received only limited attention in
              fish.  ***
