Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program: International Chautauqua Short
               Course Program in Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9322269

Award Number: 9322269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas G. Eror   (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis P. Collea  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Calif St Univ, Trustees
	      400 Golden Shore
	      Long Beach, CA  908024209    310/985-4275

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5912,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322269  Collea    The Chautauqua Short Courses are an annual series of forums
              in  which scholars from various sciences meet for several days with 
              undergraduate faculty to communicate new knowledge, concepts and  techniques
              which are immediately beneficial to teaching and  research.  This program,
              which was initiated in 1970, continues  to receive National Science Foundation
              funding.  This award,  under the direction of Dr. Francis P. Collea, Director
              of  Research and Sponsored Programs for the California State  University
              System, and Prof. Nicholas Eror, Executive Director of  the U.S. Chautauqua
              Program and Chair of the Materials Sciences  Department at the University of
              Pittsburgh, will examine the  transferability of this mechanism from an
              American to an  Australian setting.  Prof. Terry Hore, Director of the Higher 
              Education Advisory and Research Unit at Monash University in  Clayton,
              Victoria, serves as the primary Australian counterpart.  Australia was selected
              for this internationalization of the  Chautauqua Program based on the belief by
              the U.S. organizing  group that Australia offered the greatest opportunity for
              the  widest dissemination of the courses, the Australian counterparts  would
              aggressively promote attendance, and that nine Australian  universities have
              agreed to participate in the program.    Over the past three years ten
              Chautauqua Short Courses received  outstanding reviews in that every
              participant gave it an  outstanding rating.  In consultation with the
              Australian  organizers, three of these courses have been selected for use in 
              Australia.  These courses are: Research on Learning Physics and  Implications
              for Instruction; Molecular Approaches to the Study  of Genetics, Evolution,
              Ecology, Systematics, Behavior, and  Conservation Biology; and, Creating
              Interactive HyperMedia Using  HyperCard.  Each of the three courses will be
              offered three  times, thus the nine participating Australian universities will 
              each serve as a course site.  This award primarily covers the   travel and per
              diem expenses of the American scholars providing  the course instruction.  Some
              additional support costs including  supplies, publications and evaluation costs
              are also included.  It is anticipated that through the support of the American-
               Australian Studies Foundation a reciprocal program will be  mounted during the
              1995-1996 academic year in which Australian  scholars will present short
              courses in the U.S.
