Title       : Highly Continuous Sub-Half-Micron MOS Transistor Models for Low-Voltage,
               Low-Power VLSI Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1996       
File        : a9322279

Award Number: 9322279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bing J. Sheu sheu@pacific.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9322279  Shen  With rapid device miniaturization in microelectronic technologies
              and the recent drive for portable systems, very large-scale integration (VLSI)
              systems have been pushing toward low-voltage, low-power operation. In a mixed
              analog-digital VLSI circuit, many transistors will be biased around or below
              the threshold voltage to achieve the greatest performance.  As the minimum
              device feature size decreases to below 0.4 micron, a reduction of the power
              supply voltage from 5 V to 3.3 V is necessary to avoid reliability problems
              caused by hot-carrier effects, thin-oxide breakdown, and metal
              electromigration.  In the future, an even smaller power supply voltage in the 2
              V range is anticipated.  The fundamental objective of this research is directed
              towards the innovative development of complete MOS transistor models for
              deep-submicron digital and analog VLSI circuit designs including low-voltage,
              low-power applications.  Three major research tasks are proposed: (1)
              comprehensive development of a sub-half-micron circuit-level MOS model based
              with major emphasis on physics-based parameter extraction; (2) derivation of
              continuous charge-based capacitance model for transient and small-signal
              analyses based on the same theoretical foundation for the drain current and
              conductance model; and (3) creative inclusion of analytical modeling based on
              continuous surface potential with special focus on efficiency.  This research
              will establish the urgently needed sub-half-micron MOS transistor model for
              accurate analysis and simulation of logic and analog VLSI circuits, including
              low-voltage and low-power applications.  It will provide the microelectronic
              industry and academic institutions with a new OS circuit-level model with high
              accuracy, good computational efficiency, and comprehensive completeness for
              computer-aided design applications.  ***
