Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problem in Set-Theoretic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9322613

Award Number: 9322613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Nyikos nyikos@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322613  Nyikos       This project is aimed at some problem areas where 
              interaction between topologists and set theorists seems likely to  lead to
              significant progress in both areas.  Set-theoretic  topology has grown
              explosively in the last two decades as a  result of such interaction,
              stimulating much fruitful research in  set theory as well.  In the last few
              years, however, the flow of  results has shown signs of abating, and the
              development of new  set-theoretic axioms and techniques will probably be needed
              to  keep this area of topology in good health.  The problem areas on  which
              particular stress will be laid are hereditary normality;  the structure and
              products of countably compact spaces; and the  theory of nonmetrizable
              manifolds.       Set-theoretic topology is more of a foundational subject  than
              the rest of topology, primarily concerning itself with very  abstract spaces
              and with the impact on topology of the adoption  of variants of the axioms of
              set theory.  Secondarily, it has  applications not only to set theory and the
              rest of topology, but  also to analysis and algebra, particularly the theory of
              Boolean  algebras.  Nyikos's research has emphasized all these aspects.  For
              example, he has done an extensive study of the differential  structures (i.e.
              smoothings) that can be imposed on the long  line, and of the associated
              2-dimensional manifold of its tangent  vectors, providing valuable heuristics
              for those wishing to  understand nontrivial smoothings of more familiar but 
              higher-dimensional manifolds. (This is a subject of major  importance today,
              especially in 4 dimensions, where the interplay  with theoretical physics is
              strong.)  Some of the smoothings of  the long line required axioms outside the
              usual axioms of set  theory.  Nyikos has been a leader in the use of these
              axioms in  set-theoretic topology ever since his involvement over a decade  ago
              in the discovery that a famous unproved conjecture concerning  Moore spaces was
              actually independent of the usual basic axiom s  of set theory.  Moreover, this
              conjecture was shown to be  inconsistent with the Cantor Continuum Hypothesis,
              a far more  familiar proposition that most working mathematicians would be 
              likely to choose if they had to make a choice.  This result  suggests the
              flavor of the best set-theoretic topology.  ***
