Title       : RUI: Computational Modeling of Antifreeze Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9322602

Award Number: 9322602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry D. Madura   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Wierzbicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9162,9178,9183,9215,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         9322602  Madura  The objective of this proposal is to investigate the
              binding of  Type I antifreeze proteins (AFPs) to ice.  The results from the 
              binding study will then be used to develop an improved adsorption-  inhibition
              mechanism.  This will be accomplished by applying modern  molecular modeling
              techniques on native AFPs bound to an ice  surface and at the ice/water
              interface.  These calculations will be  used to study what effect hydrogen
              bonding, hydrophobic and  hydrophilic effects, salt bridges, and electrostatics
              has on the  binding of AFPs to ice.  Most important is to understand how these 
              properties contribute to the adsorption-inhibition nature of  antifreeze
              proteins.  Initially, a docking program will be used to  locate potential
              binding sites on different ice surfaces.  Once  potential binding sites have
              been identified, energy minimizations  will be used to determine the binding
              energy of the AFP bound to  the ice surface.  Molecular dynamics simulations
              will then be  performed to study the interactions of the antifreeze at the 
              ice/water interface and provide starting configurations for free  energy
              perturbation calculations.  The free energy perturbation  simulations will be
              used to quantify the free energy contribution  of individual amino acids to
              binding.  Finally, Brownian dynamics  simulations will be done to study how
              electrostatics, between the  AFP and ice, effects the translational and
              orientational steering  of an AFP's approach to the ice surface in water.  The
              results from  this work will provide both a qualitative and a quantitative 
              molecular description of the properties of AFPs which will be  useful to the
              biologist, chemist, and biochemist in their attempts  to "design" better
              synthetic analogs.  These synthetic AFPs can  then be used to protect frost
              sensitive food crops, in food  storage, in cryosurgical methods, and in the
              prevention of  frostbite.  In summary, the data from this work will have an
              impact  in chemistry, biology, physics, compute r science, and  biotechnology. 
              %%%  The objective of this proposal is to study the interactions between 
              antifreeze proteins (AFPs) and ice.  This will be accomplished by  applying
              modern computational and visualization techniques on  native AFPs bound to an
              ice surface and at the ice/water interface.  The results from this work will
              provide both a qualitative and a  quantitative molecular description of the
              properties of AFPs which  will be useful to the biologist, chemist, and
              biochemist in their  attempts to "design" better synthetic analogs.  These
              synthetic  AFPs can then be used to protect frost sensitive food crops, in 
              food storage, in cryosurgical methods, in inhibition of gas  hydrates in gas
              wells, in the prevention of ice formation in  concrete, and in the prevention
              of frostbite.  In summary, the data  from this work will have an impact in
              chemistry, biology, physics,  computer science, engineering, and biotechnology.
                Other faculty members in the Chemistry Department will be able to  use the
              results from this proposal in their teaching.  For example,  visualization, in
              "real time", the motion of a moderately sized  peptide at the ice/water.  This
              "movie" will provide a mechanism in  which to describe the different molecular
              interactions taking  place, e.g. hydrogen bonding, solute-solvent interactions,
              salt-  bridges and etc. which are usually discussed as abstract concepts  in
              the classroom.  ***
