Title       : REU Site: Supercomputing Program for Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9322321

Award Number: 9322321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Guckenheimer gucken@cam.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9216,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322321  Guckenheimer    The National Science Foundation's initiative in high
              performance computing has had a tremendous impact on scientific opportunities
              for the national research community. The Theory Center's Supercomputing Program
              for Undergraduate Research (SPUR) complements this initiative by extending the
              opportunities of computational research to undergraduate students. By providing
              students with an early research experience, this program is an effective mean
              of motivating students to pursue careers and graduate education in mathematics,
              science, and  engineering.    Through this program, undergraduate students will
              investigate problems in an area of computational science research under the
              joint guidance of a Cornell University faculty member and a member of the
              Cornell Theory Center's scientific and technical staff. While working on their
              research projects, the students will not only participate in scientific
              research but will also learn about computational methods and receive training
              in high performance computing techniques. The research projects will take
              advantage of the advanced computational tools of the Theory Center, including
              the use of scalable parallel processing and visualization tools.     The
              research experience will be enhanced by the interaction among students from
              diverse institutions with multidisciplinary backgrounds and research projects.
              Building on longstanding relationships, the Center will aggressively recruit
              from historically black colleges and women's colleges and also target
              thoseinstitutions which lack a strong research orientation. Students at
              colleges and universities with otherwise limited computational research
              resources will thus have the opportunity to undertake significant research
              projects as part of their undergraduate education.
