Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences in Computer Science and Computational Mathematics
               for Undergraduates at Liberal Arts Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9322371

Award Number: 9322371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123885             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Berque dberque@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Singer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9218,9250,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322371  Berque  This program is intended to encourage talented undergraduates
              to pursue graduate study and research careers in Computer Science and
              Computational Mathematics. To achieve this goal, the program helps the students
              to experience, first-hand, several of the most rewarding activities that
              characterize most graduate programs and research careers. Specifically, the
              program gives eight student participants during each of three summers the
              opportunity to:    1. Conduct Research: Each of the eight students are paired
              with a faculty mentor who guides the student in carrying out a research
              project.    2. Disseminate Information: The program sponsors a seminar series
              in which the students regularly explain the progress of their research to the
              entire group. Each student also prepare a final written report summarizing the
              results of the research. As part of the recruiting process, each student
              provides a letter of support from a faculty member who agrees to arrange for
              the student to present the results of his/her research at the student's home
              institution during the following academic year.     3. Participate in a
              Community of Scholars: By providing a set of common experiences for the
              students, the program encourages these young researchers to build an informal
              community of scholars among themselves. The common experiences include
              participation in critiques of student talks, periodic group lunches, and
              attendance at presentations given by faculty members and guest speakers on
              various topics (e.g., discussion of a research interest, description of a
              particular career option, and discussion of the process of applying  to
              graduate school.)    u     software design, and     (4) The production of
              undergraduate research papers which can be published and presented at regional
              or national conferences.     u    projects from neural network based learning
              in robotics to machine vision to VLSI design and implementation. This diversity
              makes it possible to stimulate students with a broad spectrum of professional
              interests9322371  Berque  This program is intended to encourage talented
              undergraduates to pursue graduate study and research careers in                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          U   W                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         !   
                     !           !           !           !              G                    
                                                                           Times    Symbol  "
              Helvetica    Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New    Palatino   
              Arial Narrow    Book Antiqua    Bookman Old Style    Century Gothic    Monotype
              Corsiva    Monotype Sorts    Century Schoolbook    Wingdings    MT Extra       
                                       "                       &                           # 
                    me Tracey Zeigler                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
