Title       : REU Site: A Center For Undergraduate Research in Multi-Paradigm Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9322553

Award Number: 9322553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Messa messa@loyno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio M. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bogdan D. Czejdo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ New Orleans
	      6363 Saint Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701186143    504/865-2011

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9218,9250,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322553  Messa  Many methodologies have been promoted for the development of
              large, complex software systems. Among these the most prevalent have been based
              upon the standard topdown structured analysis and design. This methodology is
              associated with the traditional procedure-oriented paradigm. However, the
              introduction of other paradigms such as logic-oriented, object- oriented and
              database-oriented paradigms suggested the possibility of developing new design
              methodologies. In particular, there is currently extensive research in
              integrating the logic-oriented, object-oriented and database-oriented design
              paradigms. The study of systems that are based on these multi-paradigms,
              provides a rich spectrum for undergraduate research.    Undergraduate research,
              like any other kind of research, is open- ended, requires innovation, and
              involves the incorporation of knowledge from a variety of sources. Research
              experiences includes experimentation, the comparison and evaluation of
              different viewpoints, and the production of publishable papers and their
              presentation to peer groups and professional organizations. The undergraduate
              researchers will review software development methodologies and will get
              instruction on the use of CASE tools. They will gain insight into the
              multi-paradigms involved in the study, and, they will learn how different
              paradigms encourage alternate solutions to problems.     This center has four
              primary goals:     (1) The involvement in research of undergraduates from
              underrepresented groups,     (2)  The exposure of these undergraduates to the
              state-of-the-art software engineering methodologies,     (3)   The research in
              multi-paradigm software design, and     (4) The production of undergraduate
              research papers which can be published and presented at regional or national
              conferences.     u    projects from neural network based learning in robotics
              to machine vision to VLSI design and implementation. This diversity makes it
              possible to stimulate students with a broad spectrum of professional
              interests9322553  Messa  Many methodologies have been promoted for the
              development of large, complex software systems. Among these the mo             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            d   f           )   +   }               $   &    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 !        4        !        4        !       
              4        !           !           !           !              G                  
                        '             '                                      Times    Symbol 
              " Helvetica    Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New    Palatino  
               Arial Narrow    Book Antiqua    Bookman Old Style    Century Gothic   
              Monotype Corsiva    Monotype Sorts    Century Schoolbook    Wingdings    MT
              Extra                                 "                       %   "            
                        #        me Tracey Zeigler                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
