Title       : The Morphological Evolution of Particles in Elastically Stressed Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9322687

Award Number: 9322687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Voorhees p-voorhees@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9322687  Voorhees    The properties of many alloys of engineering
              significance are  related to the morphology and spatial distribution of
              coherent  second-phase particles.  In many cases elastic stress is present in 
              these two-phase systems resulting from either a difference in  lattice
              parameters between the minority phase particles and the  matrix, or an applied
              stress.  As an understanding of the factors  controlling the morphology of a
              particle in a stressed crystalline  solid is not at hand, it is difficult to
              predict the properties of  these multiphase materials.  This lack of
              understanding can be  traced to the limited number of studies that have
              investigated the  factors controlling the equilibrium shape of a coherent
              misfitting  particle, i.e. the shape that minimizes the total energy of the 
              system subject to all possible variations in particle morphology.  
              Nevertheless, these few studies have shown that the presence of  elastic stress
              can lead to qualitatively different phenomena than  in the absence of stress,
              such as multiple equilibrium shapes for  a given set of materials parameters,
              particle splitting and non  convex, hourglass-like, equilibrium shapes.    %%%%
                 A major goal of this project is to provide a picture of the generic  role
              elastic stress plays in the development of the equilibrium  morphology of a
              misfitting three-dimensional particle.  As the  equations which determine the
              equilibrium shape of a misfitting  particle are highly nonlinear, a far more
              complex particle shape  bifurcation structure is present in three-dimensions
              than observed  in previous work on the equilibrium shape of a particle in two- 
              dimensions.  Despite the numerical nature of the study and the  specific
              assumptions employed in each section of the work, a  general framework for
              understanding and predicting the  morphological evolution of particles in
              stressed solids will be  provided.  Finally, this theory will be used in
              concert with  experiments to investigate the effects of a nondilation al misfit
              on  the morphology of misfitting particles in an elastically  anisotropic
              system.  ***
