Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9322274

Award Number: 9322274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hoff hoff@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              -  The proposer will investigate various questions relating to the  existence,
              stability, regularity, large-time behavior, and numerical  approximation of
              solutions of systems of certain partial differential  equations arising in the
              theory of viscous, compressible fluid flow.  Discontinuous solutions are of
              particular interest, and play a unifying  role in the project. A fairly
              well-developed theory has been attained  in previous work for flows in one
              space dimension and for flows which  are spherically symmetric.  More recent
              research has extended some of  these results to general multidimensional flows.
               A great deal of work  remains to be done for multidimensional flows, however,
              and this will  occupy the greater part of the project. It is also proposed to
              continue  work on various issues remaining for one-dimensional flows,
              especially  the rigorous mathematical analysis of viscous contact
              discontinuities.    The proposer will study various mathematical questions
              concerning  important models of compressible fluid flow.  These models arise in
              a  broad range of applications, from supersonic flight to dynamic  meteorology,
              among many others.  While the main purpose for  constructing these models is to
              achieve a predictive capability, they  are far too complicated to be "solved"
              in any explicit sense.  On the  other hand, adequate approximate solutions can
              often be generated  by computer methods. However, the intelligent design of
              such methods  depends crucially on a rigorous understanding of why solutions do
               exist, in what sense, and in what ways they are sensitive to noise in  the
              data.  The primary goal of this project is therefore to provide  such a
              rigorous mathematical analysis for these models; a secondary  objective is to
              apply these mathematical insights to the intelligent  design and analysis of
              algorithms for generating approximate  solutions.
