Title       : CRB: Ecological Consequences of the Recent Introduction of Green Crabs to the
               Pacific Coast of North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9322797

Award Number: 9322797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Grosholz tedgrosholz@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory M. Ruiz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Hedgecock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,9285,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9322797  Grosholz  Introduced or exotic species represent a serious threat to
              the integrity and sustainability of natural ecosystems.  The rate and extent of
              species introductions in natural habitats has been increasing over time, with
              the potential to profoundly change community structure on a large scale.  Our
              knowledge of the impact of introduced species in marine ecosystems is
              particularly poor, and thus our ability to predict the affects and assess the
              risks are extremely limited.  Our goal is this project is to investigate the
              introduction of the predatory green crab, Carcinus maenas, into embayments
              along the coast of California.  Within the last year, C. maenas has been
              observed for the first time on the reserve of the University of California
              Bodega Marine Laboratory, where extensive data have been collected for ten
              years prior to the introduction on the population dynamics of many species of
              invertebrates, and the shorebirds which feed on them.  We plan to use these
              data collected before the introduction to quantify whether this predator can
              significantly reduce the abundance of its invertebrate prey, and whether its
              impact could have a cascading effect on the large wintering shorebird
              populations that depends on these invertebrates for food.  Our data from
              previous natural perturbation of this system provides evidence that reductions
              in invertebrate abundance manifest themselves as reductions at this higher
              tropic level.  In this proposal, we will rigorously monitor changes in the
              abundance of targeted taxa, and simultaneously conduct a series of experiments
              to elucidate the mechanisms by which predatory crabs might impact the native
              fauna.  These experiments will involve short and long term manipulations to
              document both the immediate response of the benthic invertebrate communities to
              green crab predation, as well longer-term response to this perturbation.  These
              data will allow us to assess the broad consequences o a novel alien predator in
              a nearshore marine habitat, and allow us  to more accurately predict  the
              potential impact of future introductions.  This will be important in
              determining not only the risk posed by future introductions, but how much of 
              our resources should be devoted to reducing the rate at which new introductions
              occur.
