Title       : CRB: Collaborative: The Importance of Hybridization in the Evolution and Ecology
               of Carpobrotus Species in California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1994    
File        : a9322795

Award Number: 9322795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla M. D'Antonio dantonio@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina A. Schierenbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9322795  D'Antonio   The widespread occurrence of biological invasions offers
              the opportunity to study changes in the dynamics and genetics of populations
              and the ecological effects of those changes. Such changes are important in
              light of the increasing mixing and homogenization of the world's species and
              habitats. This study will address the evolutionary and ecological importance of
              genetic changes resulting from hybridization between two closely related plant
              species which have recently come into contact as a result of human activity.
              Carpobrotus edulis is an aggressive South African perennial introduced into
              California in the early 1900's where it invades coastal dune, grassland and
              scrub habitats. Carpobrotus chilensis is a less aggressive species that was
              common throughout California before the introduction of C. edulis. It exhibits
              little competitive pressure on native dune species. In this study, the
              investigators will combine genetic techniques and field experiments to
              establish the extent to which hybridization is occurring between these species
              and examine the effect of hybridization and introgression on morphological,
              ecological and fitness characteristics important to successful establishment
              and invasion. Also, some of the community-level consequences of hybridization
              will be identified.   %%%  The historical separation of these species provides
              the ideal system in which to measure gene flow and corresponding changes in
              fitness and ecological adaptation. The results of this study will contribute to
              understanding the impact of hybridization on the genetic integrity of native
              species and the conservation of native ecosystems.
