Title       : CAREER: A Robust, Low-Cost Vision System for Assessing Surface Appearance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9984867

Award Number: 9984867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johne' M. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A long-range goal of this research is the development of a low-cost, robust,
              automated on-line monitoring system that controls the automotive painting
              process based, in part, upon perceived surface appearance.  As a significant
              first step, this CAREER research plan will:   (1) develop a vision system
              hardware and software design which has reflectance models as a rational basis; 
              (2) determine the best image attributes and processing techniques to exploit
              the link between this design and perceived surface appearance; and (3)
              construct a prototype classification scheme to assess surface quality based on
              captured images.  The four-prong approach, which employs small-scale
              experiments, simulation, prototype testing and on-site testing in parallel with
              existing methods, is expected to yield an illumination design and sensing
              protocol which also yields improved results for current evaluation methods,
              captured images (and derived attributes) which are readily interpreted by both
              system software and line operators and a low-cost, flexible design which can be
              built with commercially available components.  Performance demands for
              automotive coatings are considerable.  In addition to providing protection and
              enhancing durability, coatings also have to be visually appealing.  It is well
              established that the appearance of a painted surface greatly affects a
              customer's perception of that product's quality and automotive manufacturers
              spend considerable sums each year to repair paint-related problems.  Therefore,
              robust methods to monitor surface quality on-line are critical.

Since there
              is a widespread fascination with automobiles and students intuitively
              understand how the quality of the paint job fuels that excitement, this
              research plan is very easily integrated into a variety of educational
              activities.  Specific educational and outreach objectives projected as part of
              this effort include (1) a diverse research group that provides outreach and
              mentoring to undergraduates, K-12 students and their teachers; (2) capstone
              design projects; and (3) the analysis of research data (and subsequent
              dissemination of research results) in existing undergraduate courses.  Expected
              benefits of the educational plan include collaborative, hands-on research
              experiences and mentoring for a diverse population, and enhancement of the
              principal investigator's ability to build and maintain a competitive research
              program which attracts a well-prepared, diverse group of students.

