Title       : CAREER: Investigations of RNA Folding: A Combinatorial Approach to
               Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a9984129

Award Number: 9984129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Bevilacqua pcb@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9984129
Bevilacqua 
Nucleic acids (NA) are polymers consisting of four
              building blocks--A, C, G, and T (or U) bases--attached in a linear fashion like
              beads on a string.  Naturally occurring nucleic acids can be formally divided
              into two types, DNA and RNA, based on subtle differences of a single oxygen
              atom or methyl (CH3) group.  Two fundamental functions essential to life are
              the storage of genetic information that determines an individual's identity,
              and the increase in the rate and specificity of chemical reactions essential to
              life, for example in metabolism and replication.  In the cell, DNA is used to
              store genetic information, while proteins act as enzymes to accelerate reaction
              rates.  Strikingly, RNA can both store genetic information, as evidenced by
              certain viruses such as HIV-1 which causes AIDS, and act as an enzyme, with RNA
              enzymes referred to as "ribozymes".  These properties implicate RNA in a wide
              variety of biological processes and diseases, making the structures and
              functions of RNA of significant interest.  Furthermore, RNA has been implicated
              as an important molecule in prebiotic chemistry and the origin of life, since
              RNA potentially solves the "chicken and egg problem" of which came first,
              enzymes or genetic information. 
The functional properties of RNA arise from a
              wide range of complex three-dimensional structures.  Research described in this
              proposal has as its primary goal understanding how RNA folds into these
              structures.  The sequences of RNA, or the order in which the four bases occur,
              can be readily obtained.  For example, sequencing of the genomes of
              approximately 25 different organisms has been completed, and sequencing of the
              human genome with 3 billion DNA bases is expected to be completed in the next
              five years.  To understand the function of these RNAs, structural models are
              indispensable, and computer methods to predict structures are essential for
              keeping pace with sequencing projects.  The PI's laboratory is working to
              obtain rules for computer prediction using a novel methodology.  Investigators
              are developing a combinatorial approach in which a collection of molecules
              containing up to a million billion different sequences are prepared and then
              separated in a single experiment according to thermodynamic stability, or the
              resistance of the structure to heat denaturation.  Separations are on a gel
              electrophoresis apparatus containing a temperature gradient (TGGE). 
              Exceptionally stable and unstable sequences will be isolated and identified by
              cloning and sequencing, and rules for structure prediction obtained by further
              physical characterization of selected sequences.  These methods will be applied
              to a wide range of structural motifs in nucleic acids.  The proposed research
              should provide a better understanding of basic principles of RNA folding. 


