Title       : CAREER: Gangs, Underground Economies and, the African-American Urban Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9984082

Award Number: 9984082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudhir A. Venkatesh sv185@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-9984082
Sudhir Venkatesh

The CAREER proposal seeks funding to extend the
              PI's ethnographic research on urban gangs in "Bronzeville" in Chicago, Illinois
              by adding a comparison group in Harlem, New York and adding a historical
              framework. The research explores the relationship of the underground economy
              and the gang, which involves interaction with over 100 gang members in these
              two communities over a two-year period.  Specifically, the project will examine
              community-based dynamics and street gang activity (i.e., what is the
              relationship between a community and the gang's community-based activities);
              ways in which individuals age in the gang; and the centrality of underground
              economies (or non-state regulated economy) in the social reproduction of the
              trade of illicit and licit goods and services. The study enhances research on
              gangs by being one of a few longitudinal studies in this area and by using
              multiple methods.  This longitudinal study enables the PI to examine
              life-course development of gang members.  Data collected using multi-methods
              (i.e., participant observation, historical analysis, and interviews and survey
              methods) allows the investigator conduct a more comprehensive and thorough
              analyses.  For example, the analysis of historical materials and interviews
              with older community members permits the PI to trace the start of the gangs'
              involvement in the underground economy to better understand why members became
              involved.  Participant observation allows the investigator to develop
              relationships necessary to see "what is really going on," an essential aspect
              of all research with gangs and others who are suspicious of outsiders. 
              Interviews with both gang members and other entrepreneurs lets the PI to
              develop an understanding of the economic landscape while the surveys will
              permit him to follow the economic accounts of the several of the underground
              entrepreneurs.

The research demonstrates the application of several
              methodologies to an empirical case, i.e., demonstrates how the simultaneous
              incorporation of multiple techniques can be used to yield insights that move
              beyond the use of one in isolation.  To allow students and faculty to benefit
              from this comprehensive methodological approach which integrates quantitative
              and qualitative methods, the PI will sponsor a workshop on "quantitative
              analysis of qualitative data," and teach two seminars on the use of multiple
              methodologies.  Additionally, the substantive findings from the project will be
              disseminated to students through an advance undergraduate and graduate course
              on sociology and the black community.
 
