Title       : CAREER: Anaerobic Degadation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Marine
               Harbor Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9984285

Award Number: 9984285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracey R. Pulliam Holoman tholoman@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9984285  Pulliam Holoman  Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) tend to
              associate strongly with organic matter in sediments, which are normally
              anaerobic.  The widespread distribution of PAHs in these sediments has led to
              the need for efficient, cost-effectifve methods for the remediation of
              PAH-contaminated sediments.  Aerobic degradation of simple aromatic
              hydrocarbons has been well characterized, and in recent years, a few studies
              investigating the anaerobic degradation of simple PAHs such as naphthalene and
              phenanthrene (2 rings and 3 rings, respectively) have been reported.  To date,
              no studies have demonstrated the anaerobic biodegration of 4- and 5-ring PAHs,
              such as pyrene and benzo[a]pyrene. This research will investigate the anaerobic
              degradation of PAHs by microorganisms isolated from marine harbor sediments
              that have been heavily contaminated with PAHs.  The research objectives include
              isolation and characterization of naturally-occurring microbes with anaerobic
              PAH-degradative potential, elucidation of the metabolic pathways of PAH
              biodegradation and its important enzymes, development of unique biosensors for
              rapid monitoring of PAH degradation potential and activity, both in the
              laboratory and in situ, the use of bench-scale bioreactors to study anaerobic
              PAH degradation in complex mixtures and the development of mathematical models
              to predict the rate and extent of PAH degradation in the bioreactors.. The
              results of this research will provide guidance for the engineering design of
              processes to decontaminate harbor sediments containing high molecular weight
              PAHs.  The educational plan has three components.  First, the research will be
              integrated into a combined senior-level undergaduate and graduate course that
              the PI has developed.  The course focuses on the design of innovative solutions
              to complex environmental problems requiring an interdisciplinary approach. 
              Second, the PI will design an anaerobic PAH-degradation reactor that will
              integrate the results of this research as well as allow process safety to be
              introduced and evaluated in the undergraduate chemical engineering laboratory. 
              Third, the PI will develop one-day workshop seminars to target female and other
              underrepresented minority middle and high school students.  The goal of these
              workshops will be to introduce students from local schools to environmental
              research applied to the nearby Chesapeake Bay.  *** 
