Title       : CAREER: Broadcast and the Bits: Enhancing Educational Television with Digital
               Justification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9984773

Award Number: 9984773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on children's television and how it can be enhanced with
              digital technologies.  We envision the convergence between television and
              computing leading to new types of learning interactions between children and
              parents around television content.  In particular, we may be able to borrow
              features from educational reform movements to develop novel, informal learning
              around television.  For instance, if we can model question-asking and inquiry
              strategies to parents and children, they may be able to adopt and use them to
              structure learning conversations in the home.

We add a new layer of digital
              information to the analog television experience, justification structures that
              explain how and why a television program is intended to facilitate learning. 
              By providing additional meta-information about the educational intentions of a
              program, we hope to engage parents and children in critical reflection and
              inquiry around television content.  The justification structures are digitial
              design rationales, capturing elements of the production process that would
              otherwise be hidden from viewers (e.g., historical justifications for the
              inclusion of content, alternative viewpoints and additional questions that were
              omitted from the final program).

To develop the justification structures, we
              will examine how television producers currently design and develop their
              programming.  As we understand their practices and conceptions of learning, we
              will define justification structures that make explicit the tacit assumptions
              underlying their programming decisions.  We will then design and deploy digital
              television technologies to families in low-income housing projects with the
              goals of:

o Developing a theory of justification that describes the content
              and rationale behind children's television programming

o Assessing the
              impact of justification structures on parent-child interactions and
              learning

o Rethinking the content of educational television in light of
              these justification structures
