Title       : CAREER: Robust Control of Large-Scale Constrained Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9984104

Award Number: 9984104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi (Alex) Q. Zheng zzheng@spock.ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Zheng - 9984104

Most chemical process are nonlinear.  In the past,
              process control techniques based on linear models had been adequate largely due
              to relatively loose environmental regulations and industry's ability (e.g., via
              process over-design) to design processes to operate in regions where
              assumptions of linearity are valid.  However, a combination of stiff global
              economic competition and strict environmental regulations is pushing process
              operational windows into regions where assumptions of linearity break down and
              where operating constraints (e.g., equipment, environmental, safety, etc.) must
              be satisfied.  Furthermore, today's processes are large-scale in nature as they
              are becoming more integrated to improve capital productivity.  Consequently,
              these trends have driven the process industry's need for improved control
              technologies, which can deal effectively with large-scale nonlinear processes
              subject to operating constraints.  The rapid development in computational
              hardware and software has provided the opportunity for developing advanced
              control techniques, which optimize process profitability in real time.

The
              goal of the planned research is to develop a novel nonlinear model predictive
              control (NLMPC) technology which addresses practical concerns (e.g., low
              on-line computational demand) and is theoretically sound (e.g., robust
              stability and performance guarantees) for control of large-scale constrained
              non-linear systems.  The research involves a combination of theory, simulation
              studies, and industrial applications and, specifically, consists of the
              following projects: 
(1) Develop a computationally efficient MPC algorithm
              which can be implemented on nonlinear systems with tens of inputs and
              outputs.
(2) (2) Prove that the closed-loop system is asymptotically stable in
              the presence of both model uncertainty and constraints
(3) (3) Derive
              necessary and sufficient conditions for the robust stabilization of constrained
              nonlinear systems.
(4) Develop a first-principles based model for a
              terephthalonitrile (TPN) plant, a large-scale chemical process, and carry out
              simulation studies on it.
(5) Implement the algorithm on a methyl acetate
              reactive distillation column where it is known that linear controllers would
              fail in some operating regions.
(6) Develop educational software based on the
              theoretical results and disseminate via CACHE.

Several educational
              innovations are planned:
(1) Develop interactive-learning modules, which allow
              the instructor to focus more on the "discovery-based" teaching method than the
              traditional "I-talk-you-listen" teaching method.  The modules would transform
              the students from passive listeners to active participants.
(2) Develop
              open-ended problems which require not only engineering know-how, but also other
              aspects of the decision-making process.
(3) Develop projects to get selected
              undergraduate students more involved with frontier engineering research.
(4)
              Have the PI's students take industrial assignments.

