Title       : CAREER: Time-Critical Applications of Nonparametric Regression: Harnessing the
               Power of Information Technology for Infrastructure Systems Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9984149

Award Number: 9984149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Smith bls2z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Brian L. Smith
University of Virginia
Department of Civil
              Engineering

Proposal Number 9984149


Time-Critical Applications of
              Nonparametric Regression:  Harnessing the Power of Information Technology for
              Infrastructure Management Systems

As greater demands are placed on
              infrastructure systems, civil engineers are being called upon to develop
              management systems to enable the efficient use of infrastructure capacity. 
              Advances in information technology allow infrastructure management systems to
              collect large quantities of data describing the state of the system. 
              Currently, this data is used to develop management strategies that react to
              current conditions.  However, it is desirable to develop proactive strategies
              based on forecasted demand for service. Nonparametric regression models have
              high potential to support demand forecasting. The premise of nonparametric
              regression is that by searching a database of past experiences, one can find
              cases that are similar to the current state of the system.  Then, these past
              cases can be used to predict the future system state. Unfortunately, the
              complexity of searching a large database is so great that nonparametric
              regression may be unable to meet the time requirements of infrastructure
              management systems.  The purpose of this effort is to address the search
              complexity of nonparametric regression, making it a viable tool for
              infrastructure management demand forecasting.

The research will focus on
              data management, data structure, and advanced computing approaches.  Data
              management will be considered to attempt to intelligently prune records of the
              database without unacceptably degrading the accuracy of the model. Data
              structures will be investigated that will reduce search complexity through
              sorting/storing the data in innovative ways.  Advanced computing technologies,
              particularly distributed computing, will also be explored. 

The education
              effort will focus on preparing civil engineers to effectively apply information
              technology, a critical infrastructure management requirement. Materials will be
              developed to strengthen information technology education in the civil
              engineering curriculum, students will work on interdisciplinary teams, steps
              will be taken to attract and retain underrepresented groups, and web-based
              educational materials will be developed.

