Title       : CAREER: An Infrastructure for Multi-Technology Network Fault Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9984811

Award Number: 9984811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia S. Hood hood@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Computer communication networks are evolving from convenient communication
              mechanisms
offering "best-effort" service into key elements of our national
              infrastructure that we depend on for both business and personal use. As such,
              the need for improved fault management techniques is increasing and the open
              problem of network fault management continues to grow in complexity.
     A
              major cause of the increase in complexity of this problem is the heterogeneity
              of networks.
Today's networks are comprised of a variety of technologies (e.g.
              Wireless, ATM, Ethernet), that
are required to support a diverse set of
              networked applications (WWW, electronic commerce, video conferencing).
    
              The fault management problem has been studied in varying degrees for different
              technologies, but
there are many open issues and the research is unaware of
              any methods that can effectively be
applied across technologies. Current
              methods are largely ad hoc and rely on the expertise of a
human network
              manager. Even within single-technology networks (e.g. Ethernet LANs);
              strategies developed for one network cannot easily be generalized to other
              networks. In addition, the rate of change within a network makes it difficult
              for the network manager to maintain a high enough level of expertise to develop
              and maintain effective fault management strategies. New techniques that can be
              generalized and applied across technologies are needed to ensure network
              reliability in an efficient manner.
     The long-term goal of this research
              is to move toward self-managing networks by automating as
much of network
              management as possible. Within network management, the project will first focus
              on
fault management. Fault management encompasses a large, complex set of
              problems that have not been well studied or defined. Before methods for
              automation can be studied, the fault management problem must be better
              understood. The research proposes a set of studies aimed at discovering aspects
              of the problem that are common across many different types of networks.
    
              The proposed studies are primarily experimental. The research plans to use
              network fault insertion to study the impact of various faults on a network.
              Faults will be inserted into simulated networks, a
network testbed, and a
              campus network. The experiments will provide insight into fault propagation and
              allow the researcher to study how various aspects of the fault management
              problem change from fault to fault, with network dynamics, and with different
              network types. Data collected from two operational networks (CS Department
              network and Motorola wireless networks) will be analyzed and used to validate
              simulation accuracy. A set of benchmarks for testing and comparing fault
              management results will be created and made publicly available.
     In the
              short-term, results can be used to develop fault management methods that (1)
              can be applied across different technologies, (2) can generalize from network
              to network, and (3) can adapt to changes in the network. Common traits
              discovered through experimentation can be used to formulate a theoretical
              foundation. This foundation coupled with the availability of benchmarks allows
              researchers to systematically decompose and demonstrate progress on widely
              applicable fault management problems. In the long-term, the results can help us
              understand how to design components for manageability.

