Title       : CAREER: Codes on Graphs, Factor Graphs, and Iterative Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9984515

Award Number: 9984515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Koetter koetter@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Codes on Graphs, Factor Graphs, and Iterative Algorithms

The primary
              focus of this research is the investigation of creative new
methods for
              reliable transmission of information in the context of modern
error-control
              techniques. Error-correcting codes are an essential part of
modern
              communication and storage systems and much of today's technology
would not be
              possible without them. This study is focused on graph-based,
iterative
              decoding algorithms, which, without doubt, are one of the most
significant
              coding-theoretic developments of the last decade. The goal of
the
              investigator's research  is to develop a broad, analytical, and
constructive
              approach to research and education, unifying  graphical
models, coding theory,
              and iterative algorithms. The interplay  between
codes on graphs and other
              areas, like iterative graph-based algorithms,
system theory, and network
              information theory, is in  the focus of this
investigation with the goal of
              discovering  and utilizing fundamental
connections between these
              fields.

The central notion of this research is the framework of "codes on
              graphs"
and "factor graphs". Three main thrusts of research are present. The
              first
main thrust is directed towards the  analysis and theoretical study
              of
iterative decoding algorithms in graphs with and without cycles. The
              main
tools for this research originate in recent successes in the analysis
              of
codes on graphs as the codelength approaches infinity, and in the notion
              of
pseudo-codewords for short codes on relatively simple graphs.
              Both
approaches are made viable by drawing  heavily on the properties of
              the
underlying graph in the code construction.
The second main thrust
              involves problems arising from generalizations of
minimal realizations of
              codes on graphs. This work has important
ramifications to  behavioral system
              theory, network information theory and
iterative decoding. The goal is  to
              derive algorithms that achieve a
"minimal" realization of a code on a graph. A
              solution to this question is
closely related to important problems in network
              information theory and the
achievability of desired information flows in a
              given network topology.
The third objective of the investigator's study is
              aimed at jointly
optimized receiver functions in a graph-based iterative
              setup. Factor
graphs provide a natural and generic framework for the study of
              iterative,
belief propagation  algorithms on graphical models. One of the
              most
exciting opportunities offered by the factor graph framework is
              the
possibility of incorporating a variety of different  estimation tasks
              into
a joint optimization. The research focuses on opportunities to realize,
              in
jointly optimized subsystems, the gains that are essential for
              future
communication systems.

