Title       : CAREER: Compilation Techniques for Customizing Software Libraries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9984660

Award Number: 9984660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin Lin lin@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project presents a vision for satisfying the world's demand for software:
              increase programmer productivity by building programs out of large software
              components that can provide powerful abstractions, that can be seamlessly
              integrated with other components, and that can easily conform to different
              execution environments. Thousands of software libraries already exist to
              provide such components, but most fall far short of the goal of seamless
              efficiency on all platforms. This project will define and experimentally
              evaluate a new approach for tuning libraries using both domain-specific and
              machine-specific compiler optimizations. The key to the approach is an
              annotation language that conveys three types of information: library semantics,
              machine characteristics, and information about how library components will be
              composed.  This advances other library techniques by encapsulating and
              exploiting domain-specific information to reap benefits of programming
              abstractions without incurring their usual efficiency costs.

The project
              will focus on three important opportunities for improving performance and
              portability: the extension of conventional scalar optimizations to library
              optimizations, the optimization of sequences of library calls, and methods for
              customizing libraries on different machines. The methods and results will be
              validated in experiments using the PLAPACK dense linear algebra library, MPICH
              message-passing library, and object-oriented languages such as Java. Research
              results expected from this project include a deeper understanding of the use of
              domain- and machine-specific information in the compilation process, new
              optimizations based on that information, and a compiler and language that can
              be used in testing the ideas. Just as this research seeks to improve the flow
              of information across interfaces, the project's educational component will
              attempt to bridge interfaces across disciplines and communities of the student
              population by creating a "Fundamentals of Computer Science" course for the
              institution's interdisciplinary Computational and Applied Mathematics
              program.

