Title       : Career: Silicon-Based Nano Structures and Bio-Sensors for the Nano-BioTechnology
               Era
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2000     
File        : a9984199

Award Number: 9984199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rashid Bashir   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As the construction of artificial computational systems continues to become
              insurmountably difficult, more and more engineers and scientists are
              turning
towards nature for answers. The time is ripe to begin to better
              understand biological systems that are self-assembled, sense and relay
              information, and perform complex computational tasks. Further advances in this
              area require interdisciplinary research
integrating nano-electronic
              engineering and biotechnology to develop functional devices and systems (i.e.
              nano-biosystems). This proposal details plans for developing
              semiconductor-based approaches to realize novel nano-biostructures for
              sensing
applications at the molecular level. These sensing devices will be
              needed as future 
hybrid bio-systems start to become closer to reality.
              Silicon 
Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems (MEMS) will be used in the
              development
of the emerging nano-biotechnology area since MEMS techniques can
              provide ways to
interface the electronic world to the organic or biological
              world. The proposed research and education components will be carried out
              within the context of two application domains: (i) Fabrication of silicon-based
              functionalized scanning probe microscopy
cantilevers and sensors for single
              molecule electronic and force detection, and (ii) Silicon-based single molecule
              counter/sensor devices for applications such as single molecule sensing and
              DNA/RNA sequencing. The broad research and educational impact of the work
              will
be a variety of ideas and projects that will contribute to applications
              such as nano-scale
computational systems, functional imaging, DNA and protein
              sequencing, and development of bio-electronic interface devices, all at the
              molecular level. Furthermore, the grand challenge of education of future
              researchers and academicians in the area of
nano-biotechnology, which is being
              faced by the microelectronics and biomedical engineering
departments, will
              also be discussed. The proposal details specific courses at the undergraduate
              and graduate levels and discusses related activities that will help train
              students and integrate research and education in the proposed directions of
              interest. 




