Title       : CAREER: Nitrogen/Sulfur Clusters of Iron: Synthetic Approaches to Nitrogenase
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9984645

Award Number: 9984645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonny C. Lee SCLEE@PRINCETON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research on the mechanism of action of the iron-sulfur
              cofactor in nitrogenase enzymes, by Professor Sonny Lee of the Department of
              Chemistry at Princeton University. This cofactor is believed to carry out the
              reduction of dinitrogen to ammonia, but its mode of action is unknown. Two
              complementary approaches will be employed to obtain information on the
              mechanism: (1) the reaction chemistry of imidoiron(II) cubane cluster
              compounds, in particular nitrogen-nitrogen bond cleavage in cluster formation
              and disproportionation reactions catalyzed by the clusters, will be
              investigated and; (2) new iron-nitrogen-sulfur complexes will be synthesized
              and their reactivities characterized. Clusters containing a new class of
              sterically-hindered, chelating thiolate/thioether ligands will also be
              synthesized and their activation of nitrogen-nitrogen double and triple bonds
              examined.

The goal of this research is to determine how a metal (iron)
              cluster in the nitrogenase enzymes functions. These enzymes provide fixed
              atmospheric nitrogen to living organisms, but the chemistry of this process
              remains a mystery. The results of this study will help to determine the
              mechanism of this critical enzymatic process. In addition, the knowledge gained
              can be used in the design of artificial systems to convert nitrogen from the
              air into ammonia and other useful compounds under much milder conditions than
              in current industrial processes. A new course combining research topics and
              cooperative learning will be developed, as well as an outreach program to the
              area public schools staffed by Princeton student-teachers and local industrial
              scientists. These activities will assist in the multidisciplinary training of
              both graduate and undergraduate students, and improve science education and
              public awareness of science in the primary and secondary schools.

