Title       : CAREER: Integration of Linguistic Knowledge and Language Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9984658

Award Number: 9984658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Work in linguistic theory typically characterizes linguistic knowledge as a
              system of static mental representations. The main goal of psycholinguists, on
              the other hand, has been to provide a more or less explicitly procedural
              characterization of how speakers perform linguistic tasks such as comprehension
              or production. These different emphases are reflected in the widespread view of
              linguistic knowledge and language processing as the products of independent
              systems of the mind-brain: a declarative grammar, and procedural systems
              dedicated to specialized tasks. This division is fostered by the typically
              independent training which students receive in linguistics and
              psycholinguistics. This project investigates the hypothesis that the
              grammatical component of linguistic knowledge and language processing are
              products of the same incremental procedural system. If true, this simplifies
              the architecture of language and closes the gap between linguistics and
              psycholinguistics. The project also develops a program of training for graduate
              and undergraduate students which provides students with the skills required for
              active involvement in an integrated (psycho-)linguistics.

The research
              component of the project has two main foci. In syntactic theory, the project
              will extend the coverage of a model of incremental left-to-right grammar, in
              which grammatical structures are assembled in the same order as sentences are
              comprehended and produced. The focus will be on constituency in head-final
              languages and on the phonology-syntax interface. The remainder of the research
              component investigates the extent to which human sentence processing is fully
              incremental, and the syntactic search mechanisms that make this possible, using
              mainly reading-time measures. A cross-linguistic study of pronoun
              interpretation will compare the immediacy with which constraints on anaphora
              apply in verb-initial and verb-final constructions, using a probe-recognition
              measure. Finally, a pair of studies using high-density ERP recordings will
              investigate the extent to which well-known electrophysiological measures of the
              disruption of syntactic parsing reflect the syntactic search processes
              underlying normal, successful parsing.

Complementing the research program,
              the project will develop an integrated program of training in theoretical and
              experimental linguistics, which emphasizes an active learning approach.
              Graduate and advanced undergraduate students will study experimental
              linguistics in laboratory-based course sequence, which includes training in
              experimental design and analysis which focuses on the specific needs of
              linguists. Beginning undergraduate students in large enrollment introductory
              courses will use linguistics as a vehicle for developing skills in active
              research and scientific theory testing, substantially through the use of
              instructional technology resources.
