Title       : CAREER: Accelerated Analyses of Complex Structures by Frequency-Windowed
               Condensations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9984994

Award Number: 9984994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. McDaniel jgm@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Title:	"CAREER: Accelerated Analyses of Complex Structures by
              Frequency-Windowed Condensations" 
Proposal Number:
              	9984994


Abstract

This CAREER project involves integrated research and
              educational activities whose focus is a new approach to analyzing the
              vibrations of complex vibrating structures.  Currently, efforts to model the
              vibrations of complex structures are severely limited by the computational
              expenses incurred in finding either the modal properties or the forced
              responses of the structures.  The research could dramatically reduce these
              expenses, and hence enable more complete and accurate vibration studies, by
              developing a novel means of condensing the dynamic equations of motion.  This
              condensation will be achieved by an innovative transformation that uses the
              forced responses of the structure evaluated at a few sampled frequencies in the
              band.  Preliminary estimates indicate that, for structures of current interest
              to industry, the reductions in computational times will be several orders of
              magnitude.  Two industrial collaborators will provide finite element models of
              complex structures for use in developing and demonstrating the proposed
              approach.  Educational activities include the development, use, and assessment
              of a unique computer-based educational resource that allows students to
              interactively explore the vibrations of real-world structures.  When combined
              with a course module that introduces students to the vibrations of many
              degree-of-freedom systems, the resource is expected to complement studies of
              lumped-parameter models that are currently the focus of undergraduate vibration
              curriculums.  By employing the research method to expedite response
              calculations, the package will allow students to interactively explore
              vibration phenomena for industry-supplied models of real structures.  It is
              expected that this package will create a new avenue for the involvement of
              industry in engineering education.  

