Title       : CAREER: System Design Under Risk Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9984260

Award Number: 9984260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantino M. Lagoa lagoa@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984260
Lagoa

The research objective of this proposal is to provide a
              comprehensive framework for system design under risk constrains in the presence
              of parametric uncertainty.  The PI aims at developing efficient design
              procedures for both the case when the distribution of the uncertain parameters
              is known and for the case when the distribution is not available.  Recent
              results in the emergent area of Probabilistic Robustness provide the main
              motivation for the proposed research since they provide a framework for risk
              assessment even if the distribution of the uncertain parameters is not known,
              only some of its characteristics are available.

One question that one might
              ask is: Why consider risk constraints when designing a system?  Although in
              many cases it is desirable to satisfy the performance specifications for every
              possible value of the admissible uncertainties, there are cases in which one is
              willing to have a tradeoff between a small risk of violation of the
              specifications and complexity of the system.  Also, there are several problems
              that naturally lead to a formulation involving risk specifications.  One
              example relates to emergency system handling.  In this case, one is willing to
              tolerate some risk of failure of the system in exchange for an improvement on
              the performance and, therefore, a better chance of handling the emergency at
              hand.  Hence, it would be desirable to be able to design a control system that
              maximizes the performance under a small well defined risk of system failure. 
              Results to date on system design under risk constraints are limited.  They use
              random search to determine the system gains and only address the case where the
              distribution of the uncertain parameters is available.  The research proposed
              aims at developing efficient deterministic procedures for system design under
              risk specifications when the distribution of the uncertain parameters is
              available and when only some of its characteristics are known.

The education
              plan described in this proposal includes curriculum development of both
              undergraduate and graduate courses.  The objective is to interconnect the
              Principal Investigator current research with the content of the courses and to
              "bring" the students closer to the latest developments in control science.  As
              for undergraduate education, the emphasis will be put in the improvement of the
              content of senior courses in control, introducing concepts which are not
              usually covered in undergraduate courses such as system uncertainty.  This will
              also include the development of laboratory experiments which will provide the
              students with a hands-on experience in system design.  The PI also plans on
              developing two graduate courses.  The first, whose preliminary title is
              "Discrete-Time Stochastic Systems", is a course whose emphasis will be in the
              analysis and controller design for discrete stochastic systems.  This course
              will be designed as a multidisciplinary course, aimed not only at students in
              control but also at students in other areas, namely at those in the
              communications area.  The second course will be dedicated to the study of the
              latest developments in multivariable control.  This course is to be developed
              in collaboration with the Mechanical Engineering Department.
***

