Title       : CAREER: Investigating Ice Shelf - Ocean Interaction Using Numerical and Physical
               Laboratory Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a9984966

Award Number: 9984966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302595             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Holland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is being made under the Faculty Early Career Development Program
              (CAREER) which is intended to provide stable support at a sufficient level to
              allow the achievement of education and research career development objectives
              of the program.  The research objective of this award is to advance our
              understanding of the numerical simulation of the dynamic and thermodynamic
              interactions between the ocean and polar ice shelves.  The educational
              objective is to communicate effectively the fundamental principles of
              geophysical fluid dynamics, and to discover new solutions and solution
              techniques to complex polar environmental problems.

Floating antarctic ice
              shelves are fed by the flow of ice from the continent, and sooner or later
              break up and melt.  It is a part of the global hydrological cycle that can have
              a significant effect on long-term sea level rise, and by introducing fresh
              water at the ocean surface, can stabilize the upper ocean and reduce the
              vertical exchange of water masses.  These processes are beginning to be
              simulated in numerical models and will be extended and improved with this work.
                The expected result is a more realistic, physically based and observationally
              validated numerical model that faithfully describes the fundamental controls
              and interactive feedbacks of the ice shelf and ocean system.

The educational
              goals will be met through the introduction of computational learning modules
              and laboratory experiments to several courses in a new Center for
              Atmosphere/Ocean Studies, formalized as a joint effort between the Courant
              Institute and New York University. This project will make observationally based
              and theoretically founded computer and physical laboratory models of ice-ocean
              interaction accessible to students in order to provide them with a deeper
              insight into the nature of real geophysical fluid dynamical flows.

