Title       : CAREER: Security for handheld devices and the web environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9984259

Award Number: 9984259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Boneh dabo@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The work conducted in this project focuses on both research and education in
              computer security. The research effort is geared towards providing security on
              the Internet. In particular, the research focuses on providing security for web
              servers and wireless handheld devices. The education effort is aimed at
              increasing awareness of computer security and training computer security
              experts at both the undergraduate and Ph.D. levels. The research conducted in
              this project covers the following topics: 

     Security for handheld
              devices. Handheld devices (e.g. cell phones, PalmPilots, pagers, digital
              cameras, etc.) are a fast      growing market with clear security concerns. The
              project studies how security solutions apply in a low power, wireless, handheld
              environment. For example, the investigators are studying how to use a low power
              wireless handheld for E-commerce; how to perform encryption and authentication
              on a low power handheld; and other related questions.  New cryptographic
              techniques. New cryptographic techniques are required for new Internet
              applications. In this project the investigators are designing new cryptographic
              techniques for authenticating streamed audio and streamed video and techniques
              for preserving user anonymity. In addition, the investigators are studying new
              cryptographic  systems for providing improved security guarantees for digital
              signatures and encryption. The goal is to develop efficient  systems for both
              handhelds and smartcards. 

     Scalable web server security. Security
              operations, such as SSL, are typically a performance bottleneck when used on  a
              heavily loaded web server. As the web continues to grow it will become
              essential to improve SSL's performance on the server. The project studies
              methods for improving SSL's server performance using two techniques: batching
              and  offline preprocessing. The investigators are also developing mechanisms to
              protect a web site's content integrity. This work ensures that hackers cannot
              break into a web site and install their own content. 

