Title       : CAREER: Interfacial Behavior of Microbubbles During Contaminant Stripping in
               Saturated Soils: Multiscale Investigations in Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9984206

Award Number: 9984206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Burns sburns@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1576,9102,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9984206- Burns

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and
              education project addresses the physical factors that govern the formation and
              movement of discrete air bubbles through otherwise saturated soils.  In
              geoenvironmental applications, the transport and distribution of injected air
              bubbles is critical to the effectiveness of the air sparging process -- an
              in-situ stripping technique designed to mobilize volatile organic compounds to
              the vapor phase.  The project involves an experimental, multi-scale
              investigation into the dynamics of air bubble transport through pore, pore
              network, and continuum scale soil models.

The rate and pattern of air
              transport is quantified as a function of injection pressure/velocity, injection
              orifice, and interfacial tension in a model soil pore.  Etched glass
              micromodels are used to simulate air transport through soil pore networks, and
              the air saturation, bubble volume, and transport heterogeneity are quantified
              as a function of the controlling parameters identified at the pore scale.  The
              microscale investigations manipulates the system parameters, such as injection
              velocity and interfacial tension, in order to identify the conditions that lead
              to decreased bubble diameter, increased bubble residence time, and increased
              bubble surface area.  Stripping bubbles with these characteristics
              significantly enhances the air sparging process at the global scale.  
The
              data obtained at the pore and pore network scales is used as inputs for column
              tests performed at the continuum scale.  The column tests quantifies
              contaminant removal efficiency, degree of bubble coalescence, and mass transfer
              effects, based on the enhanced system control parameters identified in the pore
              and pore network scale investigations.

The data obtained in this multiscale
              investigation will significantly enhance the state of knowledge by developing a
              rigorous, fundamental understanding of the variables that control bubble
              movement through otherwise saturated soil systems.  While the objectives
              proposed are set within the framework of air sparging, the results of the
              multiscale, fundamental investigation are equally applicable to similar
              processes, such as petroleum recovery.

Parallel to the developments in the
              research project, the influence of microscale physical and chemical phenomena
              is interwoven into undergraduate Civil Engineering courses, undergraduate
              research, and a workshop targeted to attract middle school girls to pursue the
              study of science and engineering.  Consideration of multiscale physical and
              chemical behavior is integrated into classroom lectures and a series of
              five-minute classroom demonstration experiments.  These "change-up" experiments
              are carefully designed to illustrate the macroscale effects of microscale
              phenomena in engineering practice.  An undergraduate remediation case studies
              course that incorporates microscale physical and chemical considerations into
              remedial design is being developed.   Additionally, an outreach workshop
              designed to encourage middle school girls in the study of science and
              engineering is being developed and implemented.


