Title       : CAREER: Large-Scale Parallel Replacement Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a9984891

Award Number: 9984891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Hartman jch6@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for an investigation into the modeling and solution
              of large-scale parallel replacement problems.  Specifically, investigations
              will be pursued into problems under demand and capital budgeting constraints
              for heterogeneous groups of assets with multiple challengers.  Characteristics
              including economies of scale in purchase prices, asset availability
              constraints, and after-tax implications caused by group asset depreciation
              policies will also be explored.  A variety of modeling and solution procedures
              are to be examined, including:  (1) General integer programming with resource
              directive decomposition solution procedures and cutting plane algorithms
              developed from integer knapsack covers;  (2)Dynamic programming which
              capitalizes on the special structure of optimal solutions under capital
              budgeting constraints and economies of scale; and (3) Stochastic programming,
              with deterministic analyses extended to scenario analysis, stochastic dynamic
              programming and recourse models.  This career plan is also defined by a closely
              related educational component.  As replacement analysis is a fundamental
              problem in engineering economics, investigations will lead to teaching
              improvements in this core engineering subject area.

If successful, the
              results of this research will lead to the solution of new replacement problems,
              both in size and scope, commonly faced by industry, the government and the
              military.  These results are to be verified with industrial partners that
              operate large fleets of diverse assets.  The investigations should also provide
              further insight into the solution of large-scale mathematical programs with
              special structure and their application to real problems.  The educational
              investigation in this project will lead to an improvement and standardization
              of teaching engineering economy, regardless of the engineering discipline.

