Title       : CAREER: Microstructure Evolution and Interfacial Reaction Paths in Cu Alloy Thin
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a9984478

Award Number: 9984478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ganapathiraman Ramanath ramanath@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9984478
Ramanath

This grant seeks an atomic-level understanding of
              solute-induced grain size and texture evolution in metal alloy films. A goal is
              to correlate the effects of microstructure and interface chemistry on film
              properties.  Systematic studies are carried out on two model systems, Cu-Mg and
              Cu-Al, chosen based on their low and high solid-solubilities, respectively, to
              reveal the effects of solubility and supersaturation on microstructure and
              interface chemistry evolution. The specific interrelated goals are: 1) reveal
              the sequence and kinetics of solute segregation, grain growth, and interfacial
              reactions during film growth and post-deposition annealing; 2) reveal solute
              segregation paths (e.g., inter- vs. intra-granular) and surface/interface
              morphology, structure, and chemistry; 3) understand the influence of
              precipitate morphology, precipitate-matrix crystallography (e.g. coherency),
              and interface chemistry on grain size and texture evolution; and 4) understand
              the effects of texture and solute additions on electromigration, and interface
              chemistry on oxidation and diffusion barrier properties.  The overall thrust of
              the CAREER educational plan is to develop innovative teaching tools and methods
              to enable students to acquire top-quality technical knowledge, assimilate the
              art of learning independently, and prepare them for successful professional
              careers.  The distance-learning Materials Characterization course will be
              converted into an interactive format and a graduate seminar course and an
              undergraduate elective on thin film materials and processing will be created as
              well as computer/video modules related to thin film materials for integration
              in interactive class sessions of the above courses and outreach
              activities.
%%%
The resulting knowledge will enable the tailoring of film
              properties by atomic-level control of microstructure and interface chemistry
              through strategic solute additions and annealing.  The focus is on copper
              alloys because of the importance of Cu for interconnect applications in
              microelectronics.  Solute additions to Cu have shown promise for preventing Cu
              diffusion into silica thereby improving adhesion and electromigration
              resistance.  It is essential to reveal the mechanisms of solute-induced
              film-property enhancements in Cu films to reproducibly create smaller (faster)
              and more reliable interconnect structures through alloying.
***

