Title       : CAREER: Development of a Unified Data-Management and Interaction Substrate: An
               Integrated Research and Education Program for Enabling Distributed
               Computational Collaboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9984357

Award Number: 9984357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manish Parashar parashar@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER - Development of a Unified Data-Management and Interaction Substrate: An
              Integrated research and Education Program for Enabling Distributed
              Computational Collaboratories

Simulating complex physical systems is the
              fundamental goal of scientific computing. These simulations have become so
              advanced that they are now seen as a new mode of doing science (joining theory
              and experiment). However, creating, running, and sharing them is still not an
              easy task because of the complexities in the work. This project will study ways
              to improve that situation.

The project will design, develop and evaluate a
              unified computational and interaction engine that can drive distributed
              computational collaboratories, and enable a new generation of realistic,
              interactive and immersive simulations. The fundamental innovation is the
              formulation of unifying multifaceted objects that can simultaneously support
              adaptive computations, interaction and control, analysis, and archival
              storage/retrieval. The engine provides a distributed data-management and
              interaction substrate for these objects to enable a "seamless" integration of
              scalable parallel and distributed computing, interactive computational
              steering, collaborative visualization and analysis, and scientific databases
              and data archives. In the educational arena, the project will establish a
              comprehensive program in applied parallel and distributed computation. This
              will include development of a set of graduate and undergraduate courses
              integrating software engineering and application-oriented parallel computing
              and an instructional program at the high-school and college freshman level
              built on the technologies developed by the research component.
 

