Title       : CAREER: Stratified Motion Planning with Application to Robotic Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9984107

Award Number: 9984107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201848             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Goodwine jgoodwin@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four year continuing award.  The research
              plan of this CAREER award concerns basic theoretical and experimental research
              involving so-called stratified systems, which are systems subjected to
              temporally and spatially intermittent physical constraints.  In particular,
              this research concerns the development of a new robotic manipulation control
              method that can analytically accommodate both rolling contact between the
              object and the manipulators (or fingers) as well as intermittent contact.  For
              anthropomorphic systems, manipulation via intermittent contact is called
              "finger gaiting." The approach is to consider the generic differential geometry
              inherent in stratified systems and to couple this structure with general
              nonlinear control techniques which also utilize tools from differential
              geometry. This manipulation method will be general in that it will be
              formulated in sufficient mathematical generality so that it is independent of
              any particular surface parameterization of the object, any particular finger
              tip parameterizations, and the kinematics of the robotic fingers or
              manipulators. The educational component of this award includes the involvement
              of graduate as well as undergraduate students in these research efforts. A new
              multidisciplinary component of the undergraduate engineering curriculum in the
              PI's department will be developed which will consist of two courses, one
              devoted to general legal topics which affect engineering and engineering ethics
              and the other entirely to intellectual property.  Finally, a local outreach
              program will be developed to enhance the education and enthusiasm of local
              school children in the area of robotics.



