Title       : CAREER: Wavelet Theory and Applications in 3D Physical Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9984619

Award Number: 9984619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Amaratunga kevina@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to conduct a study of wavelet
representations
              for complex surfaces and volumes with the goal of
demonstrating their
              potential for 3D scientific and engineering computing
applications. 
              Multiresolution techniques recently described in the computer
graphics
              literature will be extended to develop high performance algorithms
and
              implementations for simulating the partial differential equations of
common
              physical processes on general three-dimensional domains, including
potential
              problems, scattering problems and problems in elasticity.
Emphasis is placed
              on unifying the mathematical analysis and
signal-processing perspectives of
              wavelets, as this provides new insights
for the large-scale simulation of a
              wide range of problems.

The research consists of two interrelated thrusts. 
              The first develops the
mathematical foundations, including surface and volume
              wavelet constructions
for PDEs, practical discretization strategies for linear
              and nonlinear PDEs,
matrix compression, preconditioner design, adaptive
              refinement, accuracy
estimates and error control strategies.  The second
              thrust focuses on the
practical issues of algorithm and data structure design,
              robust
implementation for large-scale problems involving complex
              geometry,
parallelization, and the interpretation and visualization of output
              aided by
the multiresolution representation.  This will result in a suite
              of
multiresolution techniques and tools that provide (i) researchers with
              a
context for conducting domain-specific studies (ii) engineers
              with
application libraries for simulating large-scale real world problems
              and
(iii) students and professionals with an environment for learning
              about
wavelet theory and applications.

The educational objectives of this
              project are closely linked to the
research program.  The continuing
              development of a course on wavelets and
filter banks will enable the
              dissemination of fundamental knowledge on
multiresolution techniques and it
              will serve as a conduit for the
integration of research experience into the
              curriculum.  Additional courses
are oriented toward issues of computation and
              information technology more
generally within the graduate and undergraduate
              engineering curriculum.  The
integration of educational and research
              activities will be facilitated by
seminars, short courses, and new and
              continuing collaborations with industry
and other institutions.

