Title       : CAREER: Children's Concepts of Urban Space and the Development of Urban
               Geographic Learning in Low-Income School Districts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9984876

Award Number: 9984876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meghan Cope mcope@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1698,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              How do children conceptualize urban space?  And how can our understanding of
              this promote better ways of teaching geographic concepts in the lower grades? 
              These two questions serve as the primary objectives for this study.  In
              addressing the first question, the study will show the ways in which children
              conceptualize space as socially constructed through human actions, flows and
              movement, social relationships, and physical processes.  The project will also
              demonstrate the ways that children play active roles in shaping social space,
              constructing meaningful places, and representing spatial relationships through
              various age-appropriate media.  The research will engage third-grade classrooms
              from two urban neighborhood schools in Buffalo, New York to help identify and
              theorize a "children's urban geography".  The study adopts the view that
              children are active, knowing, and purposeful agents through and upon space who
              -- like the rest of society -- are constrained by factors of their age,
              race/ethnicity, class, and gender.  In the two schools chosen for this study
              over 90% of the children are living in poverty.   Additionally, the children
              come from diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds: one school is overwhelmingly
              African-American and the other serves a mixed neighborhood of Hispanics,
              whites, and Native Americans.   A service-learning course will be taught by the
              Principal Investigator at the University at Buffalo that will enable Geography
              and Education students to participate in much of the research while
              simultaneously themselves learning about inner-city schools, geographic
              concepts, teaching strategies, and research processes.  Research methods will
              include participant observation, informal interviews with children, and
              analysis of children's artwork, games, and stories to learn more about how
              children understand and represent social and physical urban space.   At the
              same time, the development of curriculum materials appropriate for teaching
              geographic concepts will be developed by the Principal Investigator in concert
              with the University students, and tested in the third-grade classrooms. 
              Emphasis in both the research and the development of curriculum materials is on
              using both traditional materials (paper, paint, glue) and multi-media such as
              videography, web site development, computer map-making, communication with
              distant classrooms, and display of creative projects by the children (art,
              maps, stories, and others) on each class's web site.

The significance of
              this study lies in several areas.  First, the theoretical gap in the geography
              on children's understandings of space will be filled.  Further, the discipline
              may one day benefit from greater ethnic/racial diversity if some of these young
              children choose to continue with their geographic education at higher levels
              and become practitioners in one way or another.  Second, the project will be a
              bridge between the University and the local community and will foster greater
              exchange of ideas between impoverished schools and resource-rich educational
              establishments.  Third, the project will expose Geography students to the
              possibilities of elementary education as a career option and will expose
              Education students to the wealth of geographic concepts that can form an
              important part of education in the lower grades.  Further, these students will
              gain experience in racially diverse, low-income schools, participate in
              research for both theoretical and practical purposes, and experience the
              rewards of interacting with young children as part of community service. 
              Fourth, the participating schools and classroom teachers will receive the use
              of computers, software, and other equipment that otherwise would be
              unobtainable, as well as teacher training in high technology, digital media,
              and geographic software.  The teachers will also have new curriculum materials
              to use for the New York State-mandated third-grade focus on "communities".  
              And finally, the children who participate in the project will benefit from
              availability of high-quality computers in their classrooms and structured use
              of the Internet, from engagement with University students who can serve as role
              models, and from the heightened self-esteem that comes from being recognized as
              important and valuable members of the research project. 


