Title       : CAREER: Timing Recovery in Digital Magnetic Recording Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9984297

Award Number: 9984297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleksandar Kavcic kavcic@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As magnetic recording densities increase, powerful signal processing algorithms
              will need to be utilized to overcome a drop of up to 6dB in the signal-to-noise
              ratio. Recently, iterative decoding methods (applied to turbo codes and
              low-density parity-check codes) have shown to approach the channel capacity of
              additive white Gaussian noise channels. Simulation show that turbo codes
              routinely achieve coding gains up to 6dB over conventional maximum likelihood
              detection in magnetic recording partial response channels. A drawback of
              iterative decoding is a decision delay that is intolerably long for the timing
              recovery loop. Clearly, robust timing recovery algorithms that can operate at
              very low signal-to-noise ratios and can tolerate long decision delays are
              needed. This project is developing timing recovery methods for receivers
              employing iterative decoding strategies. 

Since iterative decoders introduce
              a delay of several thousand bits, it is suggested that the waveform be
              asynchronously oversampled, and that the decoding delay be used to refine the
              sampling in an iterative schedule that follows closely the schedule of the
              iterative decoder. This research developing a 'soft' decision-directed timing
              recovery method. During the decoding iterations of an iterative decoder, soft
              information is passed between the processing elements. This soft information is
              the reliability information regarding a specific bit (or a bit-sequence) and
              could be used to refine the sampling instants of the received waveform. This is
              precisely the strategy used here. Iterative decoding is well explained by
              passing conditional probability information on a code-graph. Recently, it has
              been shown that both equalization and decoding can be performed using the same
              message-passing strategy on a joint channel/code graph. The goal here is to
              expand this concept by formulating the entire receiver using a system graph. A
              suitable message-passing algorithm on the entire graph will then perform the
              basic receiver functions (synchronization, sampling, equalization, decoding).

