Title       : CAREER: Identification, Modeling and Computational Simulations of Soil and
               Soil-Structure Using Earthquake Records and Experimental Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9984754

Award Number: 9984754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mourad Zeghal zeghal@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,1576,9231,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9984754- Zeghal

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and
              education project uses experimental data, earthquake records, and computational
              simulations to develop and calibrate analytical models of geotechnical and
              foundation-building systems under conditions of extreme dynamic loading and
              failure, such as is experienced during strong earthquake shaking.  The
              educational component introduces into the civil engineering undergraduate and
              graduate curriculum the following: data analysis tools, modeling techniques
              (ranging from simple models to complex computer simulations), and case studies
              of physical and analytical model development.

The analysis and modeling of
              massive geotechnical and foundation-building systems under extreme dynamic
              loading and failure conditions can rarely be conducted using full-scale
              experiments.  Indeed, the cost of destructive experiments of such systems is
              usually prohibitive, in addition to being impractical.  Response mechanisms and
              system properties for large deformations are therefore inferred from one or
              more of the following: laboratory investigations on small soil samples, scaled
              model experiments, and records of the response to extreme environmental loading
              conditions. Each one of these sources has provided valuable information over a
              distinct range of loading and system conditions, but in some instances the
              results are inconsistent.  This research project uses experimental field and
              laboratory data, and data recorded during major earthquakes to: (1) evaluate
              the dynamic response mechanisms at large deformation and failure and to
              elucidate the associated damping mechanisms, (2) develop improved and
              calibrated computational models, and (3) propose new experimentation strategies
              that maximize the outcome of model calibration analyses. This will provide
              models for computational simulations, elucidate a number of salient response
              mechanisms of geotechnical systems, and provide recommend guidelines for data
              gathering and experimentation for effective modeling and simulation analyses.
              

The educational plan introduces data analysis tools, modeling techniques,
              and computer simulations into the undergraduate and graduate programs, giving
              students hands-on experience in: (1) analyzing experimental data of full scale
              and model tests, as well as records of the response of civil systems to
              environmental loading, (2) building and validating models (ranging from
              simplified to complex), and (3) developing and analyzing computer simulations.
              The students have access to a multidisciplinary set of field and laboratory
              experimental data, and data recorded during major earthquakes. The curriculum
              development integrates research and education, and sets up an interactive
              learning environment through the use of the studio classroom approach.  (Sudio
              classrooms integrate lecture, laboratory and recitation sessions, and thus
              provide an appropriate discovery-based learning environment.)  This project
              will contribute to the development of a paradigm for an integrated approach to
              the teaching of physical modeling and computational simulations.

