Title       : CAREER: Magnetic Thin Films and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9984797

Award Number: 9984797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Romel D. Gomez rdgomez@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Romel Gomez
ECS-9984797


	A comprehensive research and educational
              initiative on the properties of magnetic thin film structures and novel devices
              is proposed.  The research goals are to understand the mechanisms that govern
              the magnetic and electrical characteristics of thin films with reduced
              dimensionality, and to exploit novel phenomena to design devices in the areas
              of ultra high density data storage, spin-dependent electronics, MEMS, and
              quantum computation. 
The research activities are specifically directed
              towards:
a) establishing the correlation between surface morphology,
              micromagnetics and transport properties of thin-film multilayers,
b)
              understanding the  reversal mechanisms of nanostructured ferromagnetic islands,
              
c) developing novel spin-dependent magnetic tunnel junctions with voltage
              controllable exchange interactions and multi-layer spin-valves using
              half-metallic manganite oxide electrodes.
These efforts will utilize the
              existing technical expertise and experimental capabilities in surface science,
              molecular beam epitaxy, scanned probe microscopy, magnetic imaging, and device
              fabrication. Our projects are leveraged with our established collaborations
              with several academic institutions worldwide, national laboratories in the
              United States as well as the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
              at the University of Maryland. This project will also provide educational
              opportunities to train highly skilled professionals in the area of magnetic
              technology; as well as to provide pedagogical tools for magnetism in the
              undergraduate and pre-college educational levels. A specific project involves
              the production of animation videos, derived from experiments, that "show" the
              dynamics of magnetism at the microscopic level.  These will be disseminated
              electronically via the internet to reach a broad audience; thereby enhancing
              the understanding of magnetism and enthusiasm with science and technology.
	
              




