Title       : CAREER:The Internet Congestion Manager
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9984921

Award Number: 9984921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hari Balakrishnan hari@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Internet traffic patterns and applications have been evolving rapidly in
              recent years and network congestion is becoming a problem of extreme
              importance. While the Internet's transport protocol, TCP, incorporates
              congestion control machinery and has largely been responsible for the stability
              of the Internet to date, two problematic trends threaten this situation:
    
              Concurrent flows:   Several applications are characterized by multiple
              concurrent flows between sender and receiver. Today, these flows compete with
              each other for network resources, prove overly aggressive on the network, and
              do not share information about the network with each other.
     Lack of
              adaptation:   An increasing number of applications use UDP-based flows without
              sound congestion control because they do not need the reliable, in-order
              service provided by TCP. Today, they do not learn about or adapt well to
              hanging network conditions. Unfortunately, current protocol architectures do
              not
provide adequate support for this.
     Motivated by these trends, this
              NSF CAREER proposal takes a fresh look at Internet congestion management from
              an end-system perspective and proposes a new architecture built around a
              Congestion Manager (CM). The CM maintains network statistics across flows,
              orchestrates data transmissions governed by  robust control principles, and
              obtains feedback from the receiver, using a congestion Controller, Flow
              Scheduler, and Feedback Prober. It also exports a simple yet powerful API for
              applications to learn about network state and adapt their data transmissions to
              obtain the best possible performance.
     The research thrusts of this
              proposal include: (i) network architecture, involving the design and deployment
              of the CM infrastructure and API, (ii) analysis using mathematical and
              simulation techniques of the impact of   congestion feedback on control
              quality, of the spatial stability of Internet performance, and of the temporal
              stability and potential for caching of network performance parameters, (iii)
              algorithms, for deciding which flows share  congestion state, for new
              congestion control techniques, and for aging congestion control parameters in
              the absence of receiver feedback, (iv) protocols to communicate probes and
              feedback between senders and receivers and allow user preferences to be
              reflected in data transmissions, (v) implementation of the CM and several
              applications including Web and real-time conferencing ones, and (vi) deployment
              of the CM and its applications in the wide-area Internet to  conduct
              performance experiments.
     If successful, this research has the potential
              to fundamentally change the network architecture of end-hosts and greatly
              improve the design and    implementation of Internet applications, forming the
              basis for congestion management in the future Internet. As this work matures,
              IRTF- (Internet Research Task Force) and IETF-sanctioned (Internet Engineering
              Task Force) standardization of some of the CM protocols and API are expected,
              as are discussions with vendors of popular server operating systems to explore
              technology transfer issues. The major expected results of this research are a
              detailed design, analysis, and evaluation of the CM architecture the internal
              algorithms, analysis of congestion, the adaptation API, the CM protocol, a
              reference implementation in the Linux operating system, and several
              applications. The resulting software will be made freely available under the
              standard M.I.T. copyright.
     The education plan in this proposal consists
              of three components: (i) curriculum development, to introduce two new courses
              in networking at the undergraduate and graduate levels, focusing on fundamental
              principles as well as practical issues, (ii) undergraduate research, tapping
              into M.I.T.'s UROP program and involving undergraduate students in various
              aspects of the proposed research, and (iii) a teaching philosophy emphasizing
              the scientific method and experimental computer science in undergraduate
              education, by designing several hands-on experimental tasks and using
              simulation and visualization extensively in lectures the same tools that are
              the vehicles for the research proposed herein. 

