Title       : CAREER The Digital Sky: Bringing Cosmology into the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9984924

Award Number: 9984924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Connolly ajc@phyast.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9984924
CONNOLLY
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the next decade
              will mark the beginning of a golden age for observational cosmology.
              Technological advances have now made it feasible to map the properties and
              distributions of galaxies in the local and distant Universe with unprecedented
              detail. New astronomical surveys are underway, or nearing completion, that will
              produce images and spectroscopy for hundreds of millions of objects each with
              measurements covering the full electromagnetic spectrum (from X-ray wavelengths
              through to radio frequencies). In the near future we will no longer be
              restricted to applying for telescope time at national or private facilities.  
              Instead, people will be able to "dial-up" a region of the sky (a virtual
              observatory is becoming a reality). This new paradigm for undertaking research
              will have profound implications for research at the undergraduate, graduate and
              postdoctoral levels. 

One of the fundamental questions to be addressed with
              these new multi-frequency surveys is how do galaxies evolve as a function of
              redshift or lookback time. Extant photometric and spectroscopic surveys provide
              a framework for this evolution, finding a rapid increase in the total star
              formation rate from a redshift of z = 0 to redshift z = 1 (a factor of 10
              increase in luminosity). The limitation of these surveys is that they extend
              over very small regions of the sky (for instance the deepest image ever
              undertaken, the Hubble Deep Field, subtends only 2 arcminutes on a side) and
              comprise only a few hundred galaxies. Consequently, we do not have the numbers
              of galaxies to identify anything more than the broad features of galaxy
              evolution (i.e. our analyses are shot noise limited) nor do we survey
              sufficient volume to be able to say whether we are seeing a true reflection of
              how the Universe evolves (i.e. we are sample variance limited).

Many of
              these issues will be resolved by the new multicolor sky surveys. The Sloan
              Digital Sky Survey alone will contain > 108 galaxies and cover a huge volume of
              the sky.  For the first time, there will be access to large, statistically
              complete samples of galaxies that can provide an accurate census of the local
              and distant Universe. Through the use of novel statistical techniques we can
              use the multicolor information within these surveys to estimate the physical
              properties of galaxies (i.e. their redshifts, spectral types and luminosities).
              From this we can then directly trace how galaxies change as a function of
              redshift, galaxy type and environment and thereby guide the theories of galaxy
              formation and evolution.

Beyond the insights into the physics of galaxy
              formation and evolution, these data will open new avenues for introducing
              students into the astrophysical sciences. These multifrequency surveys can be
              combined to form a digital sky; a database of stars and galaxies covering a
              large fraction of the night sky that is accessible to undergraduate and
              graduate students alike. Students will, in essence, have access to their own
              telescope and can explore or analyze the data at their own pace. Given the
              enormous research and teaching potential of these new sky surveys, a program of
              research and education designed to build the graduate and undergraduate
              astrophysics programs at the University of Pittsburgh will be carried out. The
              principle goals of these programs are:

o	To quantify how the properties of
              galaxies (their spectral types, star formation and luminosities) evolve from a
              redshift of z = 0 to z = I and to determine what physical processes drive these
              changes.

o	To trace the clustering of galaxies at low and intermediate
              redshifts (z < 1) as a function of lookback time, galaxy type and environment
              and to relate these observations to current cosmological theories of galaxy
              formation and evolution.

o	To develop the new virtual observatories into an
              undergraduate and graduate research and teaching environment (a "virtual
              telescope"). One that enables students to undertake exploration of online
              astrophysical databases at their own pace.

o	To integrate computational
              sciences into astrophysics to enable a cross-fertilization of ideas and
              tech-niques at the graduate and undergraduate level.

This project is funded
              by the Division of Astronomical Sciences.

***




