Title       : Plastid-Associated Genes in Dinoflagellates Identified by cDNA Screening and
               Expression Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9984284

Award Number: 9984284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Delwiche cd105@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eliot M. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Gantt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	The project will explore the genetic and genomic properties of
              dinoflagellates, with the aim of using genomic techniques to study the
              integration of the peridinin-type plastid into its host cell.  The specific
              goals of the project are 1) to identify the most suitable dinoflagellate
              species for molecular genetic studies 2) to examine the fundamental properties
              of the nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial genomes in this dinoflagellate,
              and explore its suitability for genomic studies, and 3) to generate a cDNA
              library that has been enriched for rare transcripts, sequence several hundred
              clones from this library, and screen these sequences for plastid-associated
              genes.  One key question is why these organisms have such remarkably large
              genomes; it is not clear that the complexity of the genomes matches its large
              size.  To understand the organization of the dinoflagellate genome, it will
              also be important to determine whether the genome is polyploid, and the extent
              to which dinoflagellate genes are encoded as polygenes.  This, in concert with
              the identification of plastid-associated genes, will lead to an understanding
              of dinoflagellate genome organization, and the genetic integration of the
              plastid into the host cell.  

	Dinoflagellates are a distinctive group of
              flagellate protists that are distantly related to most model organisms, and
              have many features that are unusual among eukaryotes.  They are important
              members of both marine and freshwater plankton communities, and can be
              responsible for harmful algal blooms and toxin production.  While there are
              several types of plastids (chloroplasts) found in dinoflagellates, the majority
              of photosynthetic dinoflagellates rely on plastids that include the pigment
              peridinin, along with chlorophylls a and c.  These peridinin-type plastids are
              bound by three membranes.  The project will explore the genetic and genomic
              properties of dinoflagellates, with the aim of using genomic techniques to
              study the integration of the peridinin-type plastid into its host cell. 
              Relatively little genetic work has been performed with dinoflagellates, so the
              project will emphasize investigations into fundamental genetic properties such
              as the size and gene content of the nuclear genome, the degree to which poly-A
              tails are present on gene transcripts, and the basis for interaction between
              the nucleus and plastid.    

