Title       : CAREER: I/O-Efficient Geometric Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9984099

Award Number: 9984099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars Arge large@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Geometric problems arise in numerous application areas such as
              computer
graphics, geographic information systems (GISs), spatial database
              systems,
computer aided design, robotics, physics, and meteorology. The field
              of
computational geometry is largely motivated by this fact. In the
              last
twenty years impressive progress has been made in the field. However,
              even
though computational geometry is now a rich and mature discipline,
              the
algorithms and techniques developed in the field have had too
              little
practical impact in application areas. One reason for this disparity
              is
that the goal of traditional algorithms design has been to
              optimize
internal memory computation time (CPU efficiency). However, many
              geometric
applications frequently involve massive amounts of data. Often the
              datasets
are too large to fit in main memory and must reside on disk,
              and
communication between internal and external memory, and not
              actual
computation time, is the bottleneck in the computation.  This effect
              arises
from the huge difference in access time of fast internal memory and
              slower
external memory such as disks.

This project contains a challenging
              career development plan focusing on
Input/Output-efficient (or I/O-efficient)
              computational geometry
algorithms. Key components of the plan are the rich and
              important
possibilities for interplay between theory and practice in the area,
              as
well as the exciting possibilities the area gives for
              interdisciplinary
collaboration and for bringing research into the classroom.
              Theoretical
work will concentrate on developing I/O-efficient algorithms and
              data
structures for geometric problems. A main goal is to develop simple
              and
practically efficient algorithms, and in order to do so,
              theoretically
developed algorithms will be implemented and tested using
              real-life
data. In this work, focus will be on problems with direct
              practical
applications and on collaboration with researchers in other areas
              of
computer science, as well as with researchers in application areas. A
              key
objective of the career plan is for the PI to obtain a certain level
              of
expertise in select application areas and to build up a ``track record''
              in
these areas. Curriculum development is also an integrated part of the
              plan.
Work will be done on incorporating I/O-efficiency into the curriculum
              of
undergraduate and graduate algorithms classes, and new classes, as well
              as
educational material, will be developed.

Altogether, the outcome of the
              project will not only be theoretical
advances in I/O-efficient geometric
              algorithms, but also the development
and implementation of practical efficient
              algorithms as well as curricular
innovations. At the same time the project
              will build a strong foundation
for the PIs continued work in research and
              education.
