Title       : CAREER: Taxes and the Internet Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9984567

Award Number: 9984567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Austan Goolsbee goolsbee@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although it has existed for only a few years, the Internet has grown at almost
              unbelievable rates and is likely to continue to do so. This project outlines an
              empirically based research and teaching agenda that analyzes the Internet
              economy and the implications that it has for tax policy. Policy makers
              domestically and abroad are searching for ways to understand and analyze the
              role of public policy in the 'new' economy. By using the tools of public
              finance and industrial organization on new data sources about the Internet, the
              proposed research seeks to make empirical contributions to the study of this
              burgeoning field.  In conjunction with this research the project also develops
              a new course about economics and strategy in the Internet economy that will
              emphasize the importance of economic analysis for understanding this new
              medium.

The project described has three major research components. The first
              is a study of the impact of sales taxes on Internet commerce. In the United
              States, most transactions over the Internet do not pay sales taxes. Using data
              on the demographics and the online purchase patterns of almost 25,000 Internet
              users, this project examines how taxes affect online purchase patterns across
              locations. The data suggest that taxes have a noticeable effect on Internet
              commerce with people in high tax places being significantly more likely to buy
              online. The data are sufficiently detailed to allow for a number of tests for
              spurious correlation between tax rates and unobserved technological
              sophistication across cities.

The second component of the project is an
              analysis of the demand for high-speed Internet access. Using data on consumer
              valuation of this new service, the project estimates the potential welfare
              gains from broadband access and examine the potential efficiency costs
              associated with taxing Internet access. The project emphasizes that in rapidly
              growing markets with fixed costs such as high-speed Internet access, there are
              important dynamic efficiency losses from taxation that are neglected in a
              conventional tax analysis. The preliminary evidence suggests that these dynamic
              factors may be quite important and that the welfare gains to high-speed
              Internet infrastructure may be fairly large.

The final component of the
              project is an analysis of the degree of competition between online and retail
              sellers of computers. Using hedonic regressions on individual computer purchase
              data, this project creates retail price indices for computers in 50 major
              metropolitan areas and use those to estimate own- and cross-price elasticities
              for computers bought through different channels. The results is important for
              calculating optimal Internet tax policy.

