Title       : PECASE: Dynamic Phenomena in Transportation: A Research and Educational
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9984339

Award Number: 9984339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia Perakis georgiap@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a theory for understanding
              the nature of traffic equilibria as well as various associated phenomena that
              arise in a variety of systems including transportation, communication and
              manufacturing.  Studying these problems is important in transportation planning
              due to the growing congestion of urban and highway transportation systems
              worldwide as well as the development of Intelligent Vehicle Highway Systems. 
              Specifically, this research aims to establish a  more accurate understanding of
              microscopic and macroscopic phenomena of traffic patterns, provide insight and
              lead to a testable theory of equilibria in transportation networks.  It will
              draw upon a broad collection of methodologies including dynamical systems,
              statistical learning, neural networks, mathematical optimization, and queuing
              network theory.  To promote the philosophy of the research program a variety of
              educational activities will also be pursued.

The results of this research
              will develop an alternative theory of equilibrium in transportation problems
              that will be able to make empirically testable predictions of traffic patterns
              and delays in the transportation network.  This research will address a variety
              of questions such as: What is the dynamic nature of traffic equilibrium?  How
              are delays dynamically changing? What is the role of information to travelers
              in the formation of traffic patterns?  How can we control what information to
              release to travelers in order to induce certain desirable behavior?  The
              results of this research will also provide insights concerning variousimportant
              issues such as bottleneck phenomena that arise when capacity of a local
              component in a distributed transportation system decreases substantially and
              causes congestion in the rest of the network (for example, a traffic accident).
               The work will also contribute to the development of dynamic optimization and
              equilibrium analysis.

