Title       : CAREER: Redox-Mediated Cleavage of Peptides and Nucleic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9984874

Award Number: 9984874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Kelly lkelly@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research on the design, synthesis and study of a series of
              imide chromophores to photochemically cleave DNA, by Professor Lisa Kelly of
              the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of
              Maryland-Baltimore County. Thymidine sites will be targeted and cleavage of
              guanine will be measured. The photosensitizers will be recycled in the presence
              of oxygen and double stranded nucleic acid cleavage will be possible.
              Macrocycles will be covalently attached to the chromophores and a variety of
              metal ions coordinated to them. These metal ions will include Zn(II)
              (pyrimidine-specific), Cd(II) and Pb(II) (heavy atoms), and Co(III) and Cu(II)
              (electron acceptors). By use of these metal complexes the effect of
              site-targeting, increased excited state triplet yield, and electron-hole
              separation after photoactivation will be determined. These investigations will
              provide information on the mechanism of  oxidative damage in nucleic acid
              polymers, specifically on the relationship between the initial site of redox
              reactivity and the final site of cleavage.

The goal of this research is to
              develop optimized photoactive compounds which can be used to cleave DNA at
              specific sites in a well-understood manner. These compounds will be useful for
              fundamental studies of DNA damage and also find application to genomic
              sequencing and phototherapy. Using the photosciences as a cross-disciplinary
              unified forum, inquiry-based curricular revisions will be made to both the
              undergraduate advanced laboratory and graduate courses. A regional
              undergraduate research symposium in the chemical and biological sciences has
              been organized which will help prepare the participating students for careers
              in industry as well as for advanced graduate training.



