Title       : CAREER: Laboratory Studies of Small-Scale Processes in Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9984294

Award Number: 9984294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Shaw rashaw@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this CAREER grant consists of laboratory
              investigations of two kinds of small-scale processes that are important for the
              formation and growth of water droplets in natural clouds: (1) kinetic effects,
              as characterized by the accommodation coefficient and the condensation
              coefficient, that determine the rates of exchange of heat and mass between a
              drop and its environment; (2) effects of small-scale turbulence on the
              interactions between drops and the humidity of their environment.  The study of
              kinetic effects are conducted using an electrodynamic levitation cell coupled
              with an environmental control chamber that enables the observation of
              individual cloud particles.  The effects of turbulence are carried out using an
              expansion chamber that includes provision for creating turbulence of variable
              intensity using internally mounted fans.  Objectives of the research include
              (1) independent measurement of the accommodation coefficient and the
              condensation coefficient of pure water drops and solution drops over a range of
              temperature and pressure corresponding to conditions in the atmosphere; (2)
              studies of turbulence-induced humidity fluctuations on the growth rates of
              drops, using observed efflorescence of solution droplets as indicators of
              humidity fluctuations below a predetermined threshold.  Results of the
              experiments will be a better understanding of the small scale processes in
              clouds that are precursors to the formation of precipitation.  The educational
              component of the grant emphasizes undergraduate research.  It consists of (1)
              working with teams of undergraduate students in the design, construction, and
              deployment of simple instruments for atmospheric measurements as part of the
              Midwest Rockets for Schools Program of Michigan Technical University and (2)
              mentoring upper-level undergraduates in laboratory research projects in cloud
              physics as part of the physics department's senior thesis program.  
