Title       : CAREER: Multimodal and Multimedia Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9984858

Award Number: 9984858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tsuhan Chen tsuhan@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves processing of multimodal signals, including speech,
              image, and video signals.  The investigator studies such signal-processing
              techniques for multimedia applications, ranging from videoconferencing to
              immersive collaborative environments.  While the research in this project
              covers several interdisciplinary topics, the result of the project is a
              platform for future research and education where concepts like collaboratories
              and virtual universities become reality.  In this platform, the teacher can
              interact freely with the students and the students can collaborate remotely on
              projects.  As a result of the interdisciplinary nature of this research, a new
              signal-processing curriculum is formed by the investigator, which emphasizes
              the interaction among several traditional courses including image processing,
              speech processing, image analysis, computer graphics, human-computer
              interaction, and communication networks.

This research covers a number of
              interdisciplinary topics.  In the area of media conversion and integration, the
              investigator studies audio-to-visual mapping, audio-visual speech recognition,
              and audio-visual person authentication.  Audio-visual speech data are collected
              to support these tasks.  In the area of image analysis and synthesis, the
              research focuses on facial feature tracking and face animation.  In the area of
              geometry and texture processing of 3D objects, new algorithms for progressively
              representing, transmitting, indexing and retrieving 3D objects are studied. 
              Integrating these technologies into a smart terminal that interacts with the
              user, and connecting these terminals to support interaction between users from
              anywhere at anytime, the investigator builds a networked collaborative
              environment.  While much existing network research focuses on increasing the
              bandwidth and reducing the delay, this research goes one step further to add
              functionalities to the network to support remote collaboration.  While there is
              much study done on human-computer interfaces, the investigator strives to put
              these together to create human-to-human interfaces.  The goal of this research
              is to show that, with multimodal signal-processing technologies, it is possible
              to create an immersive environment in which the physical terminals and networks
              become invisible to the users, so that the users can concentrate on the task at
              hand.





