Title       : CAREER: Methods for Real-Time Fleet Management and Customer Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9984906

Award Number: 9984906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Hickman mhickman@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Mark Hickman
Institution: University of Arizona
Proposal Number:
              9984906
Proposal Title: Methods for Real-Time Fleet Management and Customer
              Information

Abstract:

Both public and private organizations have the
              responsibility to manage vehicle fleets so that their customers receive prompt
              and cost-effective transportation service. Through advances in information
              technology, these organizations may leverage existing real-time operations data
              to evaluate and improve customer service. To this end, this CAREER plan has two
              primary objectives: (1) to develop analytic methods and modeling tools that
              exploit real-time data to improve fleet operations and customer information;
              and, (2) to educate future transportation professionals about the use of
              information technology in transportation.

This CAREER plan is an integrated
              set of research and educational activities that:
1. Explore current public
              transit fleet operations, using new technology for data collection and
              analysis;
2. Develop new analytic methods for real-time fleet management;
3.
              Explore analytic methods to provide customers with current service information
              and real-time itineraries;
4. Develop and evaluate teaching materials to
              interest students in transportation and new technologies; and,
5. Create an
              internet-based "collaboratory" for research and education in fleet operations
              and information technology.

The significance of the proposed research
              activities lies in the development of new tools and methods to exploit
              real-time data from transportation operations. These methods are useful to
              assist in managing fleets at the tactical and operational level and to generate
              useful and timely customer information. Work in this CAREER plan will expand
              both the state of knowledge about, and the set of available tools to solve,
              these transportation problems. The proposed educational activities have
              significance in developing and providing classroom- and internet-accessible
              teaching materials to encourage student interest in public transit,
              transportation systems analysis, and applications of information technology. In
              this CAREER plan, these materials are developed and evaluated, thereby filling
              an important gap in existing undergraduate- and graduate-level curricula.


