Title       : CAREER: Methods for Nonrigid Motion Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9984842

Award Number: 9984842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273357             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra Kambhamettu chandra@cis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four year continuing award.  This proposal
              outlines an extended research program to investigate a hierarchy of nonrigid
              motion classes, along with their identification and analysis. The educational
              component of this plan involves graduate and undergraduate course development,
              efforts for a synergy between research and teaching activities and development
              of active learning strategies in the proposed courses.

Invariant measures
              from differential geometry are mainly used for our purpose of nonrigid motion
              analysis. We propose algorithms for general nonrigid motion analysis, based on
              new distance measures using discriminant, unit?normal and Gaussian curvature
              variations of surfaces. The proposed system consists of a hierarchy of nonrigid
              motion models arranged in a simple?to?complex fashion. Our emphasis is not only
              in designing different classes of nonrigid motions and proposing different
              techniques to extract motion parameters and point correspondences, but also in
              applying these algorithms to extensive sets of real data involving face and
              cloud motion, in particular, hurricane motion. We feel that this is a good
              testbed for designing, testing, validating and evaluating our system, as face
              and clouds involve a wide variety of nonrigid motions.

This proposal seeks
              to address three major scientific issues: (i) How to efficiently estimate point
              correspondences and motion parameters during a general nonrigid motion? (ii)
              What motion parameters are to be used for an accurate model fit of a given
              unknown nonrigid motion? (iii) How to classify nonrigid motion?

The
              strengths of the proposed research are threefold. First, the use of invariant
              differential geometric parameters for nonrigid motion analysis allow the
              ability to be independent of coordinate system and parameterization, especially
              since our optimization functions are based on before motion frame's principal
              coordinate system. The second strength of our approach lies in its ability to
              interrelate the motion parameters of all the nonrigid motion classes in the
              hierarchy. The third strength is the ability to estimate point correspondences,
              nonrigid motion parameters and nonrigid motion type through a single
              optimization procedure.

The educational plan involves integration of
              research activities in teaching and efforts for undergraduate research
              involvement. Proposed new courses include graduate level courses in computer
              vision, video computing and seminar course in analysis and visualization of
              formable bodies.


