Title       : Dissertation Research: Government Accountability: Learning from the People's
               Science Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9984233

Award Number: 9984233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11550              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ravi Rajan srrajan@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While research has demonstrated that public participation is a vital ingredient
              for sustainable development projects, Indian government science and technology
              programs have by and large excluded intended beneficiaries from designing rural
              technologies. On the contrary, People's Science organizations in India have
              leveraged participation so those local users are designing technologies
              themselves. This dissertation research project mobilizes the theoretical
              frameworks of science and technology studies and political ecology to study the
              public participation techniques employed by People's Science organizations and
              to suggest how government programs can be redesigned to recognize and reward
              these actions. People's Science organizations in India have been founded by
              engineers, doctors, activists and academics. These groups are implementing
              appropriate technologies by networking between scientists and rural
              communities. Through multi-sited ethnographies, this research compares the work
              of three organizations-- two People's Science groups and one government
              agency-- that are developing water projects for rural households in the state
              of Maharashtra. The two People's Science projects-- the Baliraja Dam and the
              Naigaon Village Project-- have been identified as model examples of
              participatory development and watershed management by Indian environmental
              activists. The third case chronicles the Krishna Koyna Irrigation Scheme, a
              regional government project under construction. This research compares these
              three cases to draw correlations between organizational attributes, the level
              of community participation and the outcome of the water project. Through these
              comparisons, the research examines if participation strategies applied at a
              local level by People's Science organizations can be feasibly scaled up to
              regional government planning. The project also inquires about the personal and
              professional motivations cited by staff for involving or excluding input from
              local residents. To answer these questions, a range of qualitative methods are
              used, including ethnography, focus groups, in-depth interviews, concept
              mapping, archival research and video documentation. After the three case
              studies are developed, focus groups will be convened to bring together members
              from all three organizations to initiate a dialogue about participatory
              development. The goal of these meetings is to describe the institutional
              dynamics that make it possible to promote democracy and accountability in
              technical development. The results from these sessions will be used to design
              interactive workshops and demonstration projects that bring together government
              staff and non- governmental organizations to encourage capacity building and
              knowledge sharing efforts. While this dissertation research focuses on case
              studies from the same region and within the water sector, the conceptual model
              used to bring together government officials and community members to discuss
              the dynamics of public participation in technology design can be applied to
              other regions and resource sectors, like energy and agriculture.
