Title       : CAREER: Design of Robotic Systems Using Analytical Methods and Rapid Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9984051

Award Number: 9984051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantinos Mavroidis mavro@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for a CAREER award. This project has two principal
              research goals. First, it will propose analytical solutions for the geometric
              design problems of spatial mechanisms and robotic systems using polynomial
              elimination methods. Second, procedures to manufacture mechanisms and robotic
              systems using Rapid Prototyping techniques will be developed and experimentally
              verified. This project has three educational goals. The first goal is to
              develop an advanced educational infrastructure to teach an upgraded and
              renovated version of the undergraduate and graduate courses on Advanced Design
              of Mechanisms. The second educational goal of the project is the initiation of
              undergraduates in research with the incorporation of a novel course entitled
              "Experimental and Computational Research on the Design of Mechanical Systems".
              The third goal is to establish collaborative projects on engineering design and
              robotic systems with the science and technology high schools of New Jersey,
              with the objective to attract new students in this field.

Manufacturing
              industries, robot technologies and design education will benefit from the
              proposed unified framework for designing complex mechanical and robotic systems
              by integrating advanced computer based design tools such as Computational
              Methods, Computer Aided Design packages, Virtual Reality with Haptic Interfaces
              and Rapid Prototyping.  In addition this CAREER project includes broader impact
              activities such as foreign collaborations, participation of underrepresented
              groups and cooperation with New Jersey high schools.
