Title       : CAREER: Incorporating Technology Scaling into the Design, Evaluation, and
               Implementation of Computer Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a9984336

Award Number: 9984336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Keckler skeckler@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT
PROPOSAL NUMBER: 9984336
TITLE: Incorporating Technology Scaling
              into the Design, Evaluation, and Implementation of Computer Architectures
PI:
              Stephen W. Keckler, University of Texas at Austin
		 
The objectives for the
              research funded by this CAREER proposal are to investigate computer
              architectures that simultaneously address the challenges of deep-submicron
              technologies and meet the needs of modern dynamic applications.  The most
              significant technology challenges are the diverging speeds of transistors and
              wires, increased power consumption and heat generation in integrated circuits,
              and higher susceptibility to transient logic faults due to decreasing feature
              sizes.

This research includes three components. First, accurate technology
              models for future silicon fabrication technologies are developed. The focus is
              on communication delay, both along wires and within microarchitecture
              structures such as register files and ALUs and on the reliability of
              microprocessor components when subjected to external energy sources.  Second,
              these models are incorporated into the SimpleScalar toolset to evaluate
              existing architectures under these new technological constraints and provide a
              platform for evaluating future architectures.  Third, multiple processor cores
              on a chip are investigated as a means to construct a "server-on-a-chip" and to
              build a system that tolerates transient faults.  The necessary features of this
              multicore architecture are hardware and system software that dynamically
              schedule jobs to meet latency, throughput, and redundancy (for reliability)
              requirements of the workloads.



