Title       : CAREER: The Evolution of Phosphoryl Transfer and Protein Sequence Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a9984919

Award Number: 9984919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Sanders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9984919
Sanders
In this proposal, the PI wishes to achieve a deeper
              understanding of the information content of the primary structure of a protein
              by studies of the evolution of an ancient and diverse family of
              phosphotransferases.  He will concentrate on the X-ray crystallographic
              determination of the structure of acetate kinase from Methanosarcina
              thermophila.  The chemical details of metal-ion and nucleotide binding, the
              mechanism of catalysis and the roles of each conserved amino-acid residue in
              protein structure and function will be explored.  From these analyses, he
              wishes to gain insight into the changes in the modes of substrate binding and
              catalysis that occurred during the divergence of the sugar kinase/actin/Hsc70
              super-family of phosphotransferases.  The significance of the elements of
              secondary structure that have been added to the core protein fold in various
              members of the family will be investigated.  Catalysis of phosphoryl transfer
              by butyrate kinases and an exopolyphosphatase will also be examined through a
              combination of structural, biochemical, and mutagenesis approaches.  An
              examination of whether the Thermotoga maritima butyrate kinase catalyzes
              phosphoryl transfer through one or more covalent phosphoenzyme intermediates
              will be undertaken.
     A course designed for the introduction of upper level
              undergraduates to protein sequence analysis will be developed further.  It will
              encompass an examination of how the interpretation of a protein sequence
              depends upon both comparison of different sequences and an understanding of the
              context-dependent chemistry of the amino-acid residues in proteins.  The
              students will have the opportunity to explore computer-generated
              representations of protein structures and to perform and probe the principles
              of protein-sequence analyses.  Course materials that may be beneficial to other
              researchers and students will be constructed and disseminated.



