Title       : CAREER: Integrated Municipal Sanitation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9984318

Award Number: 9984318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garrick E. Louis gel7f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              99854318  Louis  The proposed research has two main goals. The first is to make
              the performance of municipal sanitation services (water supply, wastewater
              treatment and solid waste management) accountable to their stakeholders (the
              public, the service providers and government regulators). The second is to
              assure the capacity to satisfy demand for these services over the long term in
              cities of both developed and developing countries. The PI notes the general
              practice of providing municipal sanitation services independently with little
              integration across the disciplines of water supply, wastewater treatment and
              solid waste management and sees this as a key failing.  He proposes to develop
              a systems approach to the development and delivery of integrated sanitation
              services and posits that an integrated approach holds out the promise of more
              cost-effective delivery through identification of economies of scale, waste
              reduction and increased recycling and re-use of resources. 
This project has
              three main areas of activity: (1) empirical research, (2) education and (3)
              outreach.  These activities are centered on a systems approach to evaluating
              and planning municipal sanitation services.  The approach treats the services
              as components of an integrated system and analyzes their technical,
              administrative and institutional parameters as functional requirements of the
              system.
The proposed research plan involves the development of an
              understanding of the functional and operational objectives of the component
              services. The PI will compare the functional objectives, as set out in relevant
              laws and regulations, and the views of the main stakeholders with performance
              measures to assess achievement of objectives and to identify and evaluate
              options for improvements.  Since the integration of these services requires the
              seamless sharing of information among them, the PI will also analyze the role,
              requirements and opportunities for information technology in integrating and
              improving service.
The educational program of this project complements the
              research by offering two new courses, graduate internships and outreach
              projects.  These will build the human infrastructure necessary for
              context-driven, integrative approaches to the design and management of
              municipal sanitation services.  
The research and education components will be
              enhanced by an outreach component aimed at recruiting students of color, women
              and students from developing countries to channel the approaches presented in
              this project back to their home communities.  In addition, the project will
              host a web-based forum on municipal sanitation problems and solutions and
              collaborate with other domestic and foreign academic institutions on related
              research and development projects. ***

