Title       : Nonlinear Smart Diffusion: A Probabilistic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9984067

Award Number: 9984067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid Krim ahk@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on some fundamental problems in pattern/object
              recognition/classification, such as gleaning geometric information from
              images/signals. The investigator proposes to develop nonlinear estimation and
              filtering techniques capable of coping with noise while preserving the
              features
of interest. Starting with the celebrated Perona-Malik partial
              differential equation, the investigator proposes to develop a fully
              probabilistic approach naturally compatible with the presence of the
              perturbation noise as well as with the underlying geometry typically crucial in
              this class of problems. Nonlinear diffusions techniques may then be formulated
              by way of nonlinear stochastic differential equations which in turn, lead to
              nonhomogeneous Markov chains.  In addition to the education goal of motivating
              and improving the classroom experience, this research has four main
              objectives:
	1. To construct a stochastic framework for interpreting and
              analyzing Nonlinear Scale Space Analysis. They intend to apply the Stochastic
              Differential Equations (SDE) mathematical machinery and intuition to advance
              the understanding of nonlinear scale space analysis.
	2. To recast the
              variational formulation usually corresponding to a nonlinear evolution equation
              in  a  ``{\em controlled diffusion}'' setting, and thereby facilitate the
              choice of evolution and impose constraints for a desired solution.
	3. To
              fully use the above insights to construct a unifying framework that embraces
              the multiscale wavelet-based and the scale space analyses, and by the same
              token provide an  analytical track to facilitate performance assessment as well
              as exploit the respective strengths of the two frameworks. The interplay and
              expected synergy will in addition provide  a mechanism for analyzing/extracting
              other features in an image, such as texture, shapes, specific junctions and
              others.
	4.  Apply their theoretical/algorithmic  results to specific tasks
              
in pattern classification and recognition problems (in particular shape
              recognition for wood lumber applications) which have recently been posed to
              them 
by some industrial partners.
