Title       : CAREER: Magnetic Domain Imaging in Nanostructured Ferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9984181

Award Number: 9984181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Gavrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a CAREER project is devoted to the development of a technique known as
              the High Resolution Bitter Method (HRBM), and its application to the study of
              ferromagnetism in nanostructured materials. The colloidal ferrofluids used
              classically in the HRBM method will be replaced by sputtering or evaporation of
              magnetic material into an inert atmosphere to produce nanometer-sized
              particles. The particles are deposited on magnetic materials and aggregate
              along domain walls thus allowing a visualization of the domains. A scanning
              electron microscope (SEM) used to image the colloidially decorated materials.
              The new technique will be applied to the study of ferromagnetic granular solids
              which exhibit Giant Magneto Resistance (GMR). The nature of the domains,
              unexpectedly observed in GMR materials, is poorly understood. the HRBM will
              also be used to study nonuniformities that occur in the preparation of the
              commercially important NdFeB hard magnetic materials. A thorough understanding
              of the process leading to nonuniformities may lead to improvements in the
              properties of these materials. The educational component of this project
              involves the development and dissemination of the Just-in-Time Teaching system.
              This is a novel pedagogical tool that includes the use of the web to deliver
              preparatory assignments that students answer just before each class. The
              students' responses are then used by faculty for lecture preparation and as a
              basis for classroom discussion. This leads to an effective and enhanced
              interaction between students and teacher.
%%%
This is a CAREER project
              devoted to the study of magnetic materials, and to development of new teaching
              methods. The magnetic research component will develop and refine a new method
              to spray a coating of nanometer sized magnetic particles on to magnetic
              materials. The small particles aggregate along grain boundaries in these
              materials, providing a means to visualize and map these domains. The project
              will investigate magnetic materials such as the Giant Magneto Resistive (GMR)
              materials found in the magnetic recording applications, as well as the
              commercially important high-strength neodymium-iron-boron hard magnets. The
              educational component involves development of the Just-in-Time Teaching system
              techniques. This novel pedagogical tool includes the use of the world wide web
              to deliver preparatory assignments that students answer just before each class.
              The students' responses are then used by faculty for lecture preparation and as
              a basis for classroom discussion. This leads to an effective and enhanced
              interaction between students and teacher.


