Title       : CAREER: The Formation and Support of Chemists and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9984106

Award Number: 9984106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Principe lmafp@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-84106 - Lawrence M. Principe (Johns Hopkins University) 
"CAREER:  The
              Formation and Support of Chemists and Chemistry"

This CAREER Award supports
              the development of the Principal Investigator's integrated interdisciplinary
              science-humanities career in both teach-ing and research, specifically in
              regard to chemistry and its historical development. Its teaching and research
              components both relate to fundamental questions about the nature, methodology,
              practice, and disciplinary identity of chemistry and the formation of
              chemists.

Its research component focuses on the early 18th-century Paris
              Academy and its members, a chief locus for chemistry during a critical period.
              In spite of growing interest in the era, there remains no com-prehensive,
              integrated study of chemistry and chemists at the Academy-their formation,
              work, teaching, and interactions. Wilhelm Homberg, the Academy's chief chemist
              provides an organizing theme for the project. The project emphasizes Homberg's
              ideas and his interactions with his teachers, students, and colleagues. Homberg
              was formed as a chemist by a decade of apprenticeship with important figures
              (including von Guericke, Lemery, Boyle, and Kunckel). He wrote a text-book that
              broke completely from the 17th-century cours de chymie tradition, centering
              instead on methodology and a new identity for chemistry. As researcher and
              teacher, Homberg played a key role in shaping the emergent "new chemistry,"
              promoting its importance and (re)forming the disciplinary identity and culture
              of chemistry at the institution that later included Macquer, Four-croy, and
              Lavoisier. Preliminary study also indicates Homberg's hitherto unknown devotion
              to the "old chemistry"-transmutational alchemy-traceable to Boyle, Becher, and
              others. This feature promises to shed further light on the vexed question of
              the continuity of alchemy/chemistry. The project showcases critical issues
              beyond the history of chemistry, including the role of instruments (the
              Academy's burning lens), disputes in science, patronage and court culture,
              experimentalism and "tacit" knowledge.

The project's teaching component
              continues the emphasis on the nature and methodology of chemistry by using
              these subjects as a newly focus for introductory organic chemistry. Current
              teaching of organic chemistry does not reflect the reality or process of
              science as a human activity, and fails to teach how chemists work and think
              about the world. Methodology and independent thought are replaced with rote
              memorization and authoritarian claims. Using the insights of history and
              philosophy of science, the PI plans to reorient the course radically along a
              backbone of scientific methodology in order to give students a more accurate
              understanding of the "nature of chemistry." The goal is to produce students who
              can think scientifically about chemical issues rather than only regurgitate
              facts. Content materials (e.g. reactions, mechanisms, etc.) are to be shown as
              developments from scientific inquiry-a sharp departure from standard
              presentations using 19th-century taxonomies. This class has wide influence,
              affecting more than 50 percent of Johns Hopkins students and all pre-med and
              many engineering students nationwide, and so is a key place to provide a more
              authentic and deeper understanding of science as it is practiced. This project
              features the participation of a chemical education specialist, training classes
              for graduate students to improve teaching skills, and the creation of a Website
              as an adjunct to textbooks used elsewhere. A new history of science class on
              scientific formation (deploying results of the research section) is also
              proposed.

