Title       : CAREER - Maturation of Synaptic Properties During Early Postnatal Development.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9984441

Award Number: 9984441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco J. Alvarez francisco.alvarez@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The brain and spinal cord function through networks of neurons that communicate
              with each other at specialized sites called synapses. Generally speaking,
              synaptic inputs are divided into excitatory and inhibitory. Unchecked
              excitation provokes the breakdown of processing capabilities (as in an
              epileptic seizure) and frequently drives the postsynaptic neuron to death (i.e.
              excitotoxicity). Too much inhibition will silence the neuron. The awardee will
              explore how neurons adjust the strength of their inhibitory synapses to
              counteract particular patterns of excitatory input. The model system is the
              Renshaw cell, a spinal cord interneuron that provides feedback recurrent
              inhibition over motoneuron output. This interneuron receives major excitatory
              input from motor axon collaterals inside the spinal cord. They also express a
              specialized complement of inhibitory glycinergic synapses characterized by very
              large postsynaptic receptor fields that we have hypothesized increase their
              strength. The awardee will analyze the structural and functional maturation of
              glycinergic synapses on Renshaw cells during the first postnatal month using
              anatomical and electrophysiological techniques. These data will then be related
              to the development of the connection between motor axons and Renshaw cells and
              the expression of cholinergic receptors that mediate function at these
              synapses. Finally, a relationship will be sought between the development of the
              excitatory and inhibitory synapses by attempting to block the former using
              Botulinum toxin-A at various developmental stages. It is expected that the
              results will provide insights into mechanisms that could explain the unique
              characteristics of glycinergic synapses on Renshaw cells. Extension of these
              results to other neurons in the brain might provide clues on how individual
              neurons adjust the strength of their inhibitory inputs in conjunction with the
              excitatory input that they aim to counteract. This research program will be
              used by the Principal Investigator to introduce research topics and techniques
              to a variety of undergraduate, Masters level and Ph.D. students. A series of
              postgraduate lectures in synaptic mechanisms will also be developed to fill a
              need in postgraduate education at Wright State University.  

