Title       : CAREER: Study of Electrically Aligned Molecules with NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a9984654

Award Number: 9984654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Guest                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew P. Augustine augustin@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Matthew Augustine of the University of California at Davis is funded
              by a CAREER grant in the Experimental Physical Chemistry program.   He will
              develop a new Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) method for structure
              determination of molecules in solution in which an electric field is applied to
              the sample.  This destroys the isotropic nature of the solution and introduces
              electronically and distance dependent anisotropic line splittings to an NMR
              spectrum.  He has preliminary results demonstrating the effect.  The additional
              information allows structure predictions of unprecedented accuracy.  Multiply
              bonded organometallic compounds and DNA and DNA/protein complexes are to be
              studied.  Professor Augustine plans to modify quantum mechanics and freshman
              chemistry courses to meet diverse educational needs of graduate and
              undergraduate students at UC Davis.  He also plans to educate the public about
              NMR through the High School Chemistry Olympiad and the Sacramento section of
              the American Chemical Society.

Magnetic resonance is a method that is
              rapidly becoming a standard tool in chemistry for the determination of
              structures of molecules such as proteins and DNA.  It is the chemical version
              of the more widely known medical diagnostic, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). 
              Professor Augustine's work based on a more sophisticated experimental setup
              will improve the quality of this type of data and will allow scientists to make
              more accurate structure determinations of chemically and biologically important
              molecules.  Professor Augustine's educational efforts will improve the
              integration of quantum mechanics into university coursework at all levels.  A
              second effort will seek to educate the public about magnetic resonance
              methods.






