Title       : CAREER: Chiral Biopolymer Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9984427

Award Number: 9984427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helmut H. Strey strey@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project is an experimental condensed matter physics investigation of
              chiral biopolymer liquid crystals.  A molecule is chiral if it cannot be
              superimposed on its mirror image. Nearly all molecules synthesized by living
              organisms are chiral, often expressing their chirality by forming helical
              structures, as typified by the alpha-helix in proteins, DNA, and many
              polysaccharides.  Despite the vast number of examples of chirality in nature,
              important details of chiral interactions are still poorly understood.  In this
              integrated research and educational project the self-assembly of chiral will be
              studied.  A connection between structure and thermodynamics of chiral
              mesophases and their molecular-level chirality will be made by measuring their
              equation of state using the osmotic stress method, x-ray diffraction and
              polarizing microscopy.  Biomolecular systems that will be studied include DNA,
              2'-deoxyguaniosine-5'monophosphate, and alpha-helical polypeptides.  Results
              from this project could lead to the development of efficient chiral separation
              techniques which are much needed in the pharmaceutical industry to produce
              enatiomerically pure drugs.  Such drugs are often safer and more potent.  The
              educational part of this project will initiate a collaborative biophysics
              effort in the Five College area.  Students participating in the project will
              receive excellent training in multidisciplinary techniques at the interface of
              physics and biology.

This CAREER project is an experimental condensed matter
              physics investigation of chiral biopolymer liquid crystals.  A molecule is
              chiral if it is not superimposable on its mirror image.  Nearly all molecules
              synthesized by living organisms are chiral, often expressing their chirality by
              forming helical structures, as typified by the alpha-helix in proteins, DNA,
              and many polysaccharides.  Ironically, despite the vast number of examples of
              chirality in nature, important details of chiral interactions are still poorly
              understood.  In this integrated research and educational project the
              interactions between chiral biopolymers will be measured directly.  Knowledge
              of chiral forces will allow us to predict how chiral molecules assemble into
              more complex, higher level structures.  Biomolecular systems that will be
              studied include DNA, quadruple-helical DNA, and helical polypeptides.  Results
              from this project should lead to the development of new and efficient chiral
              separation techniques which are much needed in the pharmaceutical industry to
              produce enantiomerically pure drugs.  Such drugs are often safer and more
              potent.  The educational part of this project will initiate a collaborative
              biophysics effort in the Five College area.  Students participating in the
              project will receive excellent training in multidisciplinary techniques at the
              interface of physics  and biology.

