Title       : CAREER: Managing Product Variety in Production Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9984252

Award Number: 9984252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayashankar M. Swaminathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to study new practices in production, design and
              procurement aspects related to effectively managing product variety. Models
              related to three important aspects namely, (1) efficient delivery of variety to
              customers; (2) efficient procurement of equipment's and supplies; and (3)
              incorporating operational considerations in design of products and assembly
              systems will be analyzed.  These models will provide an ability to capture
              product lines as a whole (rather than individual products) and the underlying
              complexities related to demand characteristics (uncertainty and correlation),
              product characteristics (commonality and modularity), supply characteristics
              (uncertainty in supply quantity and lead-time) and production characteristics
              (build-to-order, make-to-stock, postponement, substitution).  Analytical models
              will be developed and effective solution methodologies will also be provided
              for large-scale (industry size) problems that can be implemented easily.  This
              research is motivated by real problems at a wide variety of firms including
              IBM, Perkin-Elmer Ford and US Filter. 

If successful the results of this
              research will provide new insights on the inter-relationships between demand,
              supply product and production characteristics in manufacturing systems that can
              be utilized by firms not only for operating their current product lines but
              also while adopting new strategies.  Further, the ability to model industry
              size problems will provide an opportunity to incorporate the results and
              insights in a decision support tool as well. It is expected that analytical and
              empirical insights obtained will answer several what if questions that managers
              of such production systems have today. In the teaching component new curriculum
              that integrates business and engineering aspects of the topic will be
              developed. In addition new teaching tools such as cases, short articles and
              interactive games will be developed to communicate the research of the
              investigator in a more effective manner to students and to a wider audience
              across the country.

