Title       : CAREER: Simulation-Based Planning and Optimization of Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2002   
File        : a9984214

Award Number: 9984214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Stori jastori@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports the development of process simulations and the
              application of these simulations to planning and optimization of CNC
              manufacturing processes. A new thrust area in process planning for
electrical
              discharge machining (EDM) is proposed, to compliment ongoing efforts in
              simulation and planning of traditional machining processes. A discrete
              graphical representation will be used at selective resolution
levels to
              provide efficient geometric querying ability. Image processing transformations
              will be exploited to aid in electrode selection and accessibility concerns. The
              geometric simulation is to be coupled with a
physical process simulation for
              optimization of instantaneous process parameters. The educational component of
              this project comprises efforts at both the undergraduate and graduate level to
              effectively integrate
fundamental process knowledge and analysis with the
              background necessary to develop and utilize computer-aided simulation tools to
              support planning decisions. These simulations will be made accessible to
              students in manufacturing coursework at all levels to facilitate
              discovery-oriented learning.

Numerical simulations are often the only viable
              means for dealing with the geometric complexities inherent in practical
              manufacturing problems.  Process planning stands to benefit greatly by
              capitalizing on the enhanced predictive capabilities afforded by numerical
              simulation. In the domain of EDM, it is anticipated that a systematic
              simulation-based approach to process planning is an important step towards
              fully exploiting the
flexibility and reducing the costs of this under utilized
              technology.   An educated ability to map design attributes and cost constraints
              into process selection decisions is as invaluable an asset to the designer as
              it
is to the manufacturing engineer. It is believed that an increased emphasis
              on process planning within the manufacturing coursework, and the accessibility
              of simulation tools to facilitate learning will contribute substantively to the
              educational curriculum in manufacturing.
