Title       : CAREER: Interacting Low-Dimensional Disordered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a9984002

Award Number: 9984002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton V. Andreev andreev@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9984002
Andreev

The CAREER award goes to a young physics faculty member at
              the University of Colorado.  In his career plans to integrate research and
              education, the PI plans to study properties of disorder and interaction in
              quantum dots, quantum wells and quantum wires with a special emphasis on the
              thermoelectric properties of open quantum dots.  At its core the research plan
              calls for further development of a non-linear s-model for disordered
              interacting systems in the time loop formulation.  The model will be used to
              study (a) non-perturbative effects of disorder and electron-electron
              interaction in metals.  Such effects correspond to topologically non-trivial
              field configurations and become important close to a metal-insulator
              transition.  (b) It will be extended to include spin effects, in particular, to
              calculate the spin susceptibility which gets very large near a metal-insulator
              transition.  Finally, (c) it will be used to calculate the photoemission
              spectra of colossal magnetoresistance materials and non-linear magneto-optic
              effects in disordered metals.   In education, the plans are to organize a
              special seminar series involving the University, NIST and JILA and an advanced
              graduate course sequence based on the physical ideas in disordered
              systems.
%%%
This CAREER award goes to a young member of the University of
              Colorado physics department.  The award recognizes his career plans for the
              integration of research and education.  In research, he plans to further pursue
              certain mathematical formalism, which he has developed.  The formalism will be
              applied to a number of outstanding problems in the study of disorder and
              interactions in metals and in particular to a transition between the two.   He
              also plans to study physical phenomena in quantum dots, quantum wells and
              quantum wires.  The effects of disorder and interaction, in these small size
              systems are occasionally profound.  There are plans to study the thermoelectric
              properties of open quantum dots.  In education, there are plans to organize a
              seminar with participants from neighboring institutions, NIST and JILA.  There
              are also plans to develop an advanced graduate course based on the physics of
              disordered systems.
*** 


