Title       : CAREER: Improving Convective Transport of Drugs and Genes in Solid Tumors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9984062

Award Number: 9984062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fan Yuan fyuan@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984062
Yuan
Delivery of therapeutic agents to solid tumors is a major problem
              in cancer treatment.  This is because therapeutic agents administered into the
              body will penetrate into both normal and tumor tissues, and most anticancer
              agents are toxic to nearly all cells in these tissues.  Therefore, the amount
              of agents, administered into the body of patients, is limited by the dose that
              can be tolerated by normal cells.  The delivery problem is multidisciplinary;
              it involves engineering and various fields in science and medicine.  Therefore,
              two efforts need to be made in order to solve this problem.  One is to
              establish collaborations among engineers, biologists, and physicians; and
              another is to develop special training programs for preparing future biomedical
              engineers to meet the challenge in the 21st century.  The overall objective of
              the proposed career development plan is to develop an integrated research and
              educational program of drug and gene delivery in solid tumors.  The goal of the
              research project is to improve drug and gene delivery in tumors through
              interstitial perfusion.  The proposed project will quantify the hydraulic
              conductivity in tumor tissues perfused under different conditions, and
              investigate how interstitial fluid space affects the hydraulic conductivity. 
              Furthermore, the project will investigate how infusion pressure and flow rate
              affect the distribution volume of different tracers both ex vivo and in vivo. 
              The ratio of distribution volume versus infusion volume will be optimized
              through control of infusion conditions.  The optimized infusion conditions will
              then be applied to gene delivery.  The goal of the study is to maximize the
              amount of transfected cells in solid tumors.  The objective of the educational
              plan is to establish a comprehensive training program of drug delivery at Duke
              University.  The program will include drug delivery-related courses with both
              experimental and computational projects, a virtual drug delivery laboratory,
              research training opportunities for undergraduate students, and summer research
              activities for high school students, minorities, women, and persons with
              disabilities. 


