Title       : CAREER: Learning Coherent Concepts: Theory and Applications to Natural Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9984168

Award Number: 9984168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Roth danr@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 4-year continuing award. This research
              investigates learning scenarios in which multiple learners co-exist and may
              learn different functions on the same input, but there are mutual compatibility
              constraints on their outcomes. The PI will develop a learning theory for these
              situations, and will study algorithmic ways to exploit them in natural language
              inference. The theoretical study will concentrate, on developing a semantics
              for the coherency conditions and study it from a learning theory point of view
              with a goal of understanding in what ways learning becomes easier and more
              robust in these situations. The algorithmic study will concentrate on
              developing ways to exploit coherency and will have a significant experimental
              component, using the problem of shallow parsing as a testbed for investigating
              chaining of coherent classifiers and inferences that rely on the outcomes of
              several classifiers This research will have a significant impact on theoretical
              research in learning and on our ability to perform higher level inference in
              natural language. It will help to resolve the contrast between the predicted
              hardness of learning and the apparent ease at which cognitive systems learn.
              Moreover, it will provide an understanding of how to exploit coherency in order
              to develop better learning and inference methods for these situations, and will
              result in an integrated learning approach to a variety of shallow parsing
              tasks, implemented and demonstrated in a large scale manner using the SNoW
              learning architecture. Incorporating the understanding of interacting
              classifiers, as well as methods to perform inferences that rely on several
              classifiers, into SNoW will be directly applicable to a variety of other tasks
              in this domain.

 http://L2R.cs.uiuc.edu/~danr/Grants/eareerOO.html

