Title       : CAREER: Air Sampling Characteristics of Insect Antennae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2000     
File        : a9984475

Award Number: 9984475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Loudon loudon@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9107,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The environment is a potpourri of different kinds of molecules that are released
              incidentally or deliberately from living and nonliving sources.  Animals detect
              these chemical signals with great sensitivity and specificity and use this
              information to locate and evaluate potential mates and food or avoid dangerous
              predators.  Specialized structures for chemical detection in animals, such as
              insect antennae, often rival or surpass human-built chemical sensors in many of
              their performance characteristics. The objective of the proposed research is to
              characterize how the chemical signal-laden air is sampled by insect antennae
              using two important and well-known insect species: the silkworm moth and the
              honey bee.  Air sampling by a chemical sensor is a crucial parameter to
              understand because it directly controls the rate and quality of chemical
              perception.  Engineering techniques such as flow visualization, hot-film
              anemometry, and high-speed videomicroscopy will allow us to characterize the
              path taken by air in the vicinity of the sensory structures.  The expected
              outcome of the research is a greater ability to estimate how insects perceive
              the chemicals in their environment, and how this perception is influenced by
              the geometry of their antennae and their behavior (such as flying or
              oscillating their antennae).  These results will increase our ability to make
              predictions about the behavior of both beneficial and pest insect species under
              natural or artificial conditions.  An additional application of this research
              is the development of functional design principles for sampling by microscale
              sensors, which will differ from large sensors.  There is increasing interest in
              the effective use of  tiny chemical sensors positioned on small robotic devices
              or inside chips.  The educational aspect of the proposed research is the
              development and dissemination of interdisciplinary instructional materials in
              biological fluid mechanics to both biologists and engineers.


