Title       : CAREER: The Role of Design Representation in the Synthesis Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9984484

Award Number: 9984484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Durward K. Sobek dsobek@ie.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The research proposed is a cross-disciplinary study of the design processes
              used by student design teams at Montana State University.  The study unit will
              cover senior design projects (or 'capstone' courses) in 5 engineering
              disciplines and 2 non-engineering disciplines.  The investigator proposes to
              study the role representation plays in designers' reasoning and creative
              processes based on an emerging theory of design representation. Data collection
              and analysis activities will test and further develop this theory, while
              controlling for other factors that impact the success of design
              projects.

Data collection will focus on characterizing the design process of
              each student team, and measuring project outcomes.  Design process data will
              include design representations used, time/effort expended designing with these
              representations, design progressions, and timing of key decisions.  Project
              attribute data will also be collected, such as team composition and diversity,
              motivation, technical skills, resources available, and so forth.  Qualitative
              thematic analysis will look for patterns that distinguish "good" projects from
              "poor" projects.  Statistical analysis will correlate design process attributes
              to project outcomes such as person-hours spent on the project, creativity and
              completeness of the final design, feasibility of final design, and whether
              design objectives have been met.

The proposed education activity will
              incorporate the research results into instructional materials and/or
              intervention strategies designed to enhance students' synthesis capability. 
              These will be implemented into one or more courses, and outcomes assessed to
              determine the impact of the intervention and/or new materials.  This will also
              serve as a test for the newly developed theory on the synthesis process.


