Title       : CAREER: Research and Education in Natural Disaster Risk Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9984338

Award Number: 9984338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel A. Davidson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Rachel Davidson
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9984338
CAREER:
              Research and Education in Natural Disaster Risk Assessment
This project
              includes integrated research and educational activities related to natural
              disaster risk assessment.  A structure's vulnerability to natural disasters can
              significantly affect the safety of its occupants and the security of the
              economic investment it represents.  Nevertheless, natural disaster
              vulnerability has little influence on decisions related to buying, financing,
              insuring, and occupying structures.  With the ultimate goal of
              institutionalizing natural hazards information in these structure-related
              decisions, the research activities involve (1) developing a model system for
              rating a structure's multihazard natural disaster risk, (2) applying the rating
              system to a sample of structures in three U.S. cities to validate it, and (3)
              developing an interactive Geographic Information Systems (GIS)-based
              application to disseminate the rating tool.

The educational activities aim
              to enhance engineering education's traditional emphasis on problem-solving
              skills and technical fundamentals by using the study of natural disaster
              vulnerability and risk to focus attention on contextual issues, communication
              skills, diversity, building the desire and capability for lifelong learning,
              and a new image of civil engineering as a field of public service.  These
              objectives are addressed by (1) developing a course on natural disaster risk,
              (2) including undergraduate students in natural disaster risk research, and (3)
              mentoring students from underrepresented populations, especially women.  In
              addition, public awareness of natural disaster risk is raised by including a
              technology transfer component in the research activities, and by participating
              in local disaster mitigation activities, such as the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
              Project Impact effort.  The research and educational plans of this CAREER
              proposal complement each other so that together they will be more effective
              than either would be alone.

