Title       : CAREER: Low Latency I/O and Ubiquitous Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9984790

Award Number: 9984790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph Y. Wang rywang@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The role played by magnetic storage systems is becoming increasingly important
              as computing systems accelerate their transformation from "number-crunching"
              devices to "information appliances".  However, the technology has advanced so
              far that the inadequacies of the state-of-art are becoming apparent.  The first
              of these is the lack of understanding of the science behind the architecture of
              a device that delivers optimal performance/cost ratio.  The second inadequacy
              is the lack of coordination of the various levels of hardware and software in a
              storage system.  The third is that the file system designers have not yet
              recognized the emergence of the ubiquitous consumer devices as one of the
              network storage research issues.  This research explores two critical
              questions: how to provide very low latency I/O and how to manage ubiquitous
              network storage.  Low latency is achieved by a combination of innovations in
              architecture of the devices themselves and exploiting the interactions between
              these devices, file systems, and applications.  Ubiquitous storage management
              is achieved by leveraging the emergence of ubiquitous connectivity and a
              peer-to-peer architecture.  By addressing the issues of performance and
              functionality of magnetic storage systems, the proposed research contributes to
              the science underlying a crucial backbone of the information
              infrastructure.



