Title       : CAREER: Dynamic Spatial Patterns: Quantitative Comparison of Equations and
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2000     
File        : a9984370

Award Number: 9984370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Gray rag@crml.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984370
Gray
The overall goal of this career plan is to educate individuals
              about the wide variety of dynamic spatial patterns that occur in chemical,
              physical, biological and physiological systems and the common mathematical
              equations that govern them. Similar patterns, such as rotating spiral waves,
              occur in many of these systems. "Universal" mathematical equations in the form
              of partial differential equations (PDEs) reproduce these dynamic spatial
              patterns. These PDEs represent generic reaction-diffusion systems and can be
              studied analytically. The objectives of the plan outlined in this proposal
              include developing a graduate-level course that incorporates interactive
              learning through hands-on laboratories and immediate student feedback during
              homework assignments via computer software. Another objective of this proposal
              is to create an educational outreach program to expose elementary and high
              school students to the exciting aspects of research such as the thrill of
              discovery and the importance of research in the design of new technologies and
              saving lives. This will be accomplished  through presentations and
              demonstrations and will take place within the Birmingham area public schools
              and local science museum to reach underprivileged populations. The research in
              this project incorporates high-speed video imaging technology to record the
              dynamic spatial patterns in a wide variety of chemical, physical, biological
              and physiological systems. These patterns will be analyzed with novel methods
              that allow a direct quantitative comparison of the experiments and the
              equations thought to govern their behavior. The research and education portions
              of the project are tightly integrated. The research will identify certain
              systems that are ideally suited for demonstrations and the laboratory that
              accompanies the graduate level course. In addition, homework assignment will be
              designed based on real examples identified in the research efforts.

The
              significance of this plan is three-fold. First, college students and graduates
              are not familiar with nonlinear phenomenon and the mathematical representation
              of the dynamics of spatial patterns. The ability to use nonlinear analysis and
              understand the basic equations that govern spatially extended systems through
              interactive learning provide students with tools to quantitatively address
              complex spatial behavior. The ability to analyze dynamic spatial patterns is
              becoming increasingly important as rapid advances in optics and electronics,
              including lasers, charge-coupled device (CCD) detectors, fluorescence dyes, and
              computerized control and image-processing systems are occurring. Furthermore,
              secondary students are not well-trained in science and mathematics. This lack
              of knowledge is due, in part, to an inadequate exposure to the exciting aspects
              of research and its importance. Presentations involving hands-on 
              demonstrations act to stimulate interest in science, mathematics and
              engineering through. Third, the study of biological phenomenon such as cardiac
              arrhythmias has traditionally been empirical, with investigators interpreting
              experimental results in terms of the physiology and the anatomy.  The research
              proposed in this application investigates quantitative comparisons between
              experimental results and the mathematical equations thought to represent them.
              A particular emphasis is placed on cardiac arrhythmias and defibrillation due
              to the PIs research interests and environment. An improved understanding of the
              mathematical models that represent wave propagation in the heart may lead to
              advances in clinical therapy. 


