Title       : CAREER: Poly(ethylene oxide) Star Molecules for Targeted Drug Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a9984840

Award Number: 9984840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie T. Lopina lopina@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984840
Lopina
The long-term objective of the proposed career plan is to build
              on the strengths of The University of Akron as a renowned polymer research
              facility to develop an internationally recognized biomaterials program. 
              Extending previous research experience on producing bioactive polymeric
              materials, the PI will establish a research program developing new materials
              for targeted and controlled drug release and for tissue engineering. The
              objective of the proposed research is to develop a targeted drug delivery
              system, which would transport bioactive compounds directly to the desired site
              of administration, thereby reducing side effects and increasing patient
              compliance. Adverse drug events and lack of patient compliance are responsible
              for up to 25% of hospital admissions, costing the health care system over $136
              billion annually.  The unique drug delivery system proposed will combine
              bioinert poly(ethylene oxide) stars with targeting ligands (OX26) and drugs
              (venlafaxine) to achieve site-directed drug delivery. The monoclonal antibody
              OX26 targets transferrin receptors in brain capillary endothelial cells, thus
              allowing the construct to cross the blood-brain barrier.  Venlafaxine, an
              antidepressant, will then be released in the brain.  Long PEO arms, either
              underivatized or with OX26 ligand, will shield the venlafaxine from metabolism
              prior to crossing the blood-brain barrier.

The proposed research is
              interdisciplinary, combining polymer design, synthesis, and characterization
              with biochemistry and biological testing.  A new method has been developed for
              the synthesis of star polymers, starting from symmetric homo-bifunctional
              groups and a dendrimer core, which allows selective addition of polymer arms
              containing either ligands or drugs.  An in vitro model of the blood-brain
              barrier involving cocultures of capillary endothelial cells with astrocytes
              will be employed to examine the efficacy of the targeted drug delivery system. 
              

The intent is to completely integrate research activities with educational
              activities by including graduate students, undergraduates, high school students
              and high school teachers in the research group. Bringing together graduate and
              undergraduate students from varied disciplines to work on the research project
              will give them teamwork experience in preparation for their careers, whether in
              academia or industry.  Communication skills are enhanced as students present
              their work both orally and in written reports.  Undergraduates working on
              research projects participate in inquiry-based learning and gain skills
              required for life-long learning.  Outreach to the local high schools will
              stimulate high school faculty with cutting edge research and provide mentoring
              opportunities for talented high school students, perhaps lighting the spark for
              a future scientist or engineer. 

The unique targeted drug delivery system
              proposed will open new therapeutic opportunities.  The combination of shielding
              drugs from metabolism while directing them to the desired site of
              administration creates a powerful new tool in the fight against disease. 
              Involving students in the research will provide mentoring opportunities,
              increasing student retention and serving as a forum for inquiry-based learning.
              

