Title       : CAREER: Multi-Level Multi-Material Problem Solver Environment with Semisolid
               Material Applications and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a9984404

Award Number: 9984404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus Sarkis msarkis@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There have been substantial developments in computational methods
and
              capabilities for material sciences applications. These include
the theory and
              practice of material point methods (MPM), multiple
temporal and spatial scale
              methods, domain decomposition  methods,
together with increases in memory
              capacities, processing rates, and
software capabilities for distributed
              computing. We will develop
and combine these methods and capabilities in a
              Multi-Level
Multi-Material Problem Solver Environment (MLMM PSE).  The MLMM
              PSE
will target applications such as crack propagation, granular
              materials,
impact problems, fragmentation, damages among others. We
              will
demonstrate the PSE for a novel and important engineering application
in
              semisolid materials.
The complexity inherent in this combination demands a
              computational
framework that provides broad-based infrastructure. As a
{\it
              computational aim} of this project we will construct this
infrastructure in
              the MLMM PSE for material sciences applications.
We will create effective
              computational modules  and interfaces that
will be necessary to build  the
              MLMM PSE. These modules will be
integrated with parallel AMR and nonlinear
              solvers libraries, which
will facilitate code development, efficiency, load
              balancing and
portability on a variety of parallel platforms and will
              support
visualization capabilities. As a {\it theoretical aim}, we will
              design,
analyze, and develop innovative numerical methods to enhance
              accuracy,
efficiency, scalability and robustness of the MLMM PSE. We
              will
investigate hierarchical simulation involving explicit and implicit
time
              dependent adaptive grid and particle refinement. This important
and novel area
              presents considerable mathematical and computational
challenges. As an {\it
              educational aim}, we will develop with
undergraduate students web-based MLMM
              PSE courseware that illustrates
the computational solution of problems that
              have arisen in our research.



