Title       : CAREER: Approximations and Bounds for Stationary and Transient Characteristics
               of a Class of Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9984352

Award Number: 9984352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hayriye Ayhan hayhan@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this CAREER research is to develop analytical models of queuing
              networks that are prevalent in manufacturing systems.  Specifically, develop
              approximations and bounds for certain characteristics of these queuing
              networks.  Some key performance measures to be considered are mean, variance,
              tail probability of transient and stationary sojourn times and covariance of
              transient and stationary waiting times. Unfortunately, it is very hard to get
              closed-form expressions for such performance measures unless the network has a
              very simple structure and it is operating under very restrictive assumptions. 
              To this end, expansion formulae will be provided that can be used to
              numerically approximate these characteristics.  The analytical models developed
              during this project can be eventually used to design new job release and
              scheduling strategies that will lead to improvements in manufacturing
              operations and ultimately increase the competitiveness of U.S.
              manufacturers.

This CAREER teaching plan aims to improve engineering
              education by focusing on new course development projects, development of case
              studies and other course materials and involving undergraduate and master's
              students in research.  In particular, the educational effort will focus on the
              development of course materials for the restructured undergraduate stochastic
              processes course and the design of a new graduate level course that will focus
              on the stochastic models in manufacturing. In addition, it will concentrate on
              enriching the students' educational experience by devising active learning
              techniques and involving undergraduate and masters students in research.

