Title       : CAREER: Distinct Functions of Cdk4 and Cdk6
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a9984454

Award Number: 9984454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Grossel mjgro@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER program is designed to integrate undergraduate molecular biology
              coursework with cell cycle research at Connecticut College.  The career
              objective is to establish a productive research program in cell cycle
              regulation and to integrate that research into teaching undergraduate courses
              and guiding undergraduate research. Cell cycle regulation is interesting to
              young scientists since it plays such an important role in so many biological
              processes, such as development, differentiation and cancer. Specific research
              objectives are to distinguish the functions of two highly homologous cyclin
              dependent kinases (cdks), cdk4 and cdk6, both of which are expressed in most
              cell types. While it is believed that cdk4 and cdk6 have redundant functions
              and that both regulate cellular proliferation, an increasing body of evidence
              suggests that cdk4 and cdk6 may also have distinct functions.  Data indicate
              that some cell types may specifically amplify only one of the two kinases,
              suggesting the hypothesis that cdk4 and cdk6 may be differently regulated or
              have different functions in specific cell types.  Aims addressing this
              hypothesis are based on preliminary data which demonstrate that cdk4 and cdk6
              functions can be distinguished in an astrocyte cell model. Experiments will
              investigate those properties of the kinases that may lead to observed
              differences in proliferation, morphology and localization of cdk4 and cdk6 in
              astrocytes expressing one or the other of these kinases. Biochemical
              experiments to investigate these differences are designed so that undergraduate
              researchers can successfully perform them. A library screen using a novel
              two-hybrid system will screen for interacting proteins specific for cdk6 and
              not cdk4. This screen will be incorporated into the molecular biology course at
              Connecticut College and will be carried out by undergraduate students as part
              of their laboratory coursework. The research proposed here and the scientific
              development of the students will be well served by the college's mission to
              incorporate research into the education of undergraduate students. An ongoing
              partnership between Connecticut College and Pfizer Pharmaceuticals will also
              provide a unique opportunity for academic and industrial collaboration as part
              of this project. 
