Title       : CAREER: Randomized Computations and Probabilistically Checkable Proofs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9984703

Award Number: 9984703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125947             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Trevisan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Summary:

The use of randomness affects computations in  dramatic and not yet
              fully understood ways: in algorithm design it yields simpler and more efficient
              ways to solve computational problems; in complexity theory it suggests new
              concepts and models that lead sometimes to unexpected (and far-reaching)
              results. This career development project involves a collection of research and
              educational activities related to computational randomness.

The research
              component of this project deals with two main themes. One goal is the
              development of general tools that can be used to make randomized algorithms
              more robust, so that they can work even if they are implemented using biased,
              and limited, sources of randomness. Such tools are randomness extractors,
              procedures that convert biased distributions into almost uniform ones, and
              pseudorandom generators, procedures that stretch a short random input into a
              much longer output that has the property of being indistinguishable (a term
              that is given a precise technical meaning) from the uniform
distribution.
              

The other theme of the research component is the study of probabilistically
              checkable proofs (PCP), a model of computation that gives a surprising
              characterization of NP in terms of efficient  randomized proof-checking. The
              PCP model is  the best known tool to prove results about the complexity of
              finding approximate solutions for NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems.
              The goal of this project is to look for stronger characterizations of NP in the
              PCP model, for  more applications to the study of the approximability of
              optimization problems and, with special emphasis, for a simplified proof of the
              PCP characterization of NP, a result that currently has  an exceedingly
              complicated proof.
The educational component of this project will integrate
              material on randomized algorithms, pseudorandomness, and probabilistic
              proof-systems into existing courses on algorithms and complexity and into a new
              course on cryptography that the principal investigator is developing. A main
              goal of the educational component is to give elementary presentations of some
              results that have so far been confined to research-oriented graduate courses. 
              This is unfortunate because they are relevant and entertaining, not
              particularly hard to explain, and can have a strong motivational influence.  An
              extensive set of lecture notes will be developed on this material.
