Title       : CAREER: Artificial Intelligence Planning with Realistic Preference Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9984827

Award Number: 9984827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sven Koenig skoenig@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 4-year continuing award. Preference
              models determine which one of several plans to prefer. It is important that
              planners use the same preference models as human decision makers because
              planners should make the same decisions as their human users, otherwise the
              planners are not of much use. The PI will investigate how to build planners
              that fit the preference models of human decision makers better than current
              planners, by combining constructive methods from artificial intelligence with
              more descriptive methods from utility theory in order to take advantage of the
              strengths of the two decision-making disciplines and to extend the
              applicability of Al planners. The PI will study optimal vs. good or
              near-optimal ("satisficing") planning with a variety of preference models. He
              win explore how to exploit the structure of complex sequential planning tasks
              to solve them efficiently for realistic preference models suggested by utility
              theory, with an emphasis on preference models in high-stakes decision
              situations. To this end, he will focus on representation changes that make use
              of existing planners from AI by transforming planning tasks with nonlinear
              utility functions into others that these planning methods can solve, and will
              study the errors that result for the original planning task when satisficing
              planning methods are used instead. The research will be performed in the
              context of managing environmental crisis situations, such as cleaning-up marine
              oil-spills.
