Title       : Further Study of the Old Evidence Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9984005

Award Number: 9984005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl G. Wagner cwagner@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-84005 - Carl G. Wagner (University of Tennessee) 
"Further Study of the
              Old Evidence Problem"

Several years ago Richard Jeffrey devised a
              probability revision method, called reparation, that increases the probability
              of hypothesis H when it is discovered that H implies previously known evidence
              E. The P.I. subsequently generalized this method to apply to uncertain old
              evidence and probabilistic new explanation, identifying several conditions
              sufficient to guarantee the confirmation of H in this more general context.
              This generalization was based on the principle that explanation-based revisions
              should preserve certain Bayes factors.

A plausible alternative principle
              dictates that explanation- and observation-based revisions should commute. One
              formulation of this principle is equivalent to the uniformity of Bayes factors,
              but another is not. In this project the P.I. will investigate these competing
              revision principles to determine if one has a superior claim to ground a
              generalization of reparation (and thus to capture the essence of Jeffrey's
              method), or if each might be appropriate to a separate class of uncertain old
              evidence problems.

Comparison of these principles will be based both on
              further mathematical analysis of their properties, and on the development of
              certain benchmark problems sufficiently concrete to enable one to determine
              decisively the principle applicable to their solution. Problems of
              classification and diagnosis having a formal old evidence/new explanation
              structure, but a closer connection to relative frequencies than the typical
              judgmental probabilities of scientific explanation, appear to be promising
              candidates. To the extent that old evidence problems in the realm of scientific
              explanation can then be assimilated to one or more of these benchmarks, insight
              into their solution may be expected.

