Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopy to Study Structure and Dynamics at
               Polymeric Surfaces and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a9984996

Award Number: 9984996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Dhinojwala alid@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9984996	
Dhinojwala

The educational goal of this CAREER proposal is to
              develop a polymer lecture series, organize science fairs, and encourage high
              school summer research projects to stimulate an interest in science in our high
              school programs exist that include any formal training in the area of materials
              or polymers.  This proposal is targeted toward increasing the awareness of
              polymer research programs in secondary schools and encouraging high school
              students to pursue higher education in the area of polymer science and its
              related fields.  The research goal of this proposal is to develop a fundamental
              understanding on surfaces and interfaces of functionalized polymers containing
              hydrophobic side chains.  At present, it is unclear how molecular alignment and
              mobility of molecules at polymer surfaces influence properties such as surface
              tension, adhesion, friction, and contact angle hysteresis.  This research
              employs a nonlinear optical technique that shows excellent sensitivity to
              non-destructively probe chemical and local orientational information at
              polymeric surfaces and interfaces.  The influence of the length of alkyl side
              chains (polyvinyl N-alkyl carbamates) on molecular packing at surfaces, surface
              transition temperatures, surface restructuring, and the mobility of the surface
              layer will be studied.  This will enable the researchers to understand the
              complex interplay between thermodynamic surface energy, mobility at the
              interface, and the mechanism of adhesion and friction at a molecular
              level.

Functionalized polymers are used to make better adhesives,
              semi-permeable membranes, bio-materials, and liquid crystal displays.  The
              proposed research will provide fundamental information in these areas and will
              allow US industries to maintain their technological edge in the world market. 
              Furthermore, the development of interest in high school students and training
              of graduate students will provide the skilled  work force necessary for this
              competitive global market.

