Title       : Career:The Adaptive Silicon Cochlea: Biology, VLSI, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9984451

Award Number: 9984451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rahul Sarpeshkar rahuls@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

We described a 117-stage 100Hz-to-10kHz silicon cochlea that attained a
              dynamic range
of 61dB while dissipating 0.5mW of power. This cochlea has the
              widest dynamic range
of any artificial cochlea built to date. The wide dynamic
              range was attained in a low-noise traveling-wave architecture with distributed
              gain control. The analysis of our
electronic cochlea suggested why nature
              preferred a traveling-wave mechanism over a
bank-of bandpass filters to
              decompose sounds.

We propose to use the silicon cochlea in 3 projects that
              will range over a span of 4-5
years. The first project, Fundamental Issues in
              Cochlear Gain Control will extend and
expand our previous work on gain control
              in the cochlea to improve its performance
further, will help understand the
              functional role of gain control in the biological cochlea
better, and will
              yield computational primitives and circuits that are useful for
              cochlear-implant speech processors, and for robust-and-adaptive speech and
              auditory-pattern
recognition. We expect this project to be funded soley
              through the CAREER proposal.
The second project, Cochlear-Implant Speech
              Processors for the Deaf will focuss on
using the silicon cochlea as a
              low-power front end in cochlear-implant speech processors.
We expect the
              performance of these processors to significantly improve because the
silicon
              cochlea models several important effects that are exhibited by the
              biological
cochlea that current implants do not, and also because it can
              implement these
computationally-intensive biological algorithms in real time
              and with low power. The
cochlear-implant project will be done in collaboration
              with Dr. Donald Eddington at the
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, who is a
              pioneer in the field of cochlear implants
and who is very happy to collaborate
              with us. We expect to use CAREER funding to help
us get started on this
              project, but fund it primarily via other grants from the NIH or NSF.
The third
              project, Adaptive Front Ends for Speech and Pattern Recognition will focuss
              on
using spike-based hybrid (analog-digital) computation techniques that were
              invented by
the author at Bell Labs to construct an energy-efficient and
              adaptive trellis vector
quantizer, an important component of speech
              preprocessors. The trellis vector quantizer
is useful in quantizing sequences
              of analog vectors with certain temporal dependencies
between them, such as
              those that emerge from a cochlea; we plan to implement onchip
learning to
              adapt the parameters of this quantizer; the architecture of such a
              quantizer
maps naturally to the architecture of a hybrid state machine (HSM),
              a machine that
extends and expands the concept of a finite state machine to
              the hybrid domain. We
expect to supplement the beginning funding for this
              project from the CAREER proposal
with funding from Lucent Technologies or
              other funding agencies. We will collaborate
with speech researchers at Bell
              Labs and at MIT on this project.

We propose to develop two courses at MIT,
              entitled Feedback in Electronics and
Biology, and Hybrid Computation over a
              span of 3-4 years that will introduce into
electronics, neural examples and
              concepts in adaptive-and-hybrid computing.

