Title       : CAREER: Plenoptic Scene Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9984672

Award Number: 9984672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Seitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four year continuing award.  The objective
              of this project is to develop a research and educational program for modeling
              complex real?world environments from photographs. We are motivated by the
              following questions: suppose one could photograph a scene from every possible
              viewing position and orientation. What could be inferred about the structure of
              the scene and via which algorithms? To answer these questions, we propose a
              formal study of the scene reconstruction problem from the standpoint of the
              plenopticfunction, a 5D function that encodes the space of all possible images
              of a scene.
The project will focus on two primary issues: (1) acquiring
              plenoptic representations of real scenes, and (2) reconstructing scene geo
              metry and radiance from such representations. To address the first problem, we
              propose a principled approach to the problem of image acquisition, i.e., along
              which directions should scene radiance be sampled in order to obtain the best
              possible scene reconstructions. Based on this analysis, we propose novel
              plenoptic cameras that are optimized for reconstruction tasks. The second
              problem is to devise algorithms for computing scene geometry and radiance from
              plenoptic representations. In contrast to traditional approaches which are
              based on perspective images, the proposed algorithms will operate directly on
              the plenoptic function and integrate information from a continuum of
              viewpoints. This formulation introduces unique challenges due to
              correspondence, visibility, and scale that will be addressed in the proposed
              work.
A key outcome of the proposed work will be practical techniques for
              constructing 3D models of complex realworld environments. This capability is
              central for a variety of robotics tasks such as visual servoing, robot
              navigation, and motion planning. Environment modeling will also facilitate
              numerous applications in computer?aided design and computer graphics, including
              visualization of remote objects and environments over the Internet, virtual
              studios for television and film, and 3D virtual teleconferencing.
An integral
              part of the project is a long term educational program for scene modeling in
              computer vision and graphics, emphasizing curriculum development, research
              opportunity for students, and outreach activities. An important component will
              be to integrate concepts from vision, graphics, and image processing within the
              undergraduate curriculum at CMU, and to design new interdisciplinary courses on
              environment capture and synthesis. The involvement of both undergraduate and
              graduate students is integral to the proposed research plan, and students will
              be encouraged to contributed to ongoing research activities. Outreach
              activities will include organizing tutorials and courses to disseminate
              research results to the larger community.

 

