Title       : CAREER: Interfacial Processes Impacting the Chemical Fate of Organic
               Contaminants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9984489

Award Number: 9984489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dharni Vasudevan dharni@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9984489  Vasudevan  The overall objective of this grant is the development of an
              integrated approach to teaching and understanding the role of abiotic
              interfacial processes in contaminant attenuation and mobilization.  This
              fundamental knowledge will be directed toward prediction of contaminant fate,
              site remediation, and design criteria for "green" chemicals.  The objectives of
              this project designed to achieve these long-term goals are: (1) to characterize
              attenuation and mobilization of polar/ionogenic organic compounds (P/IOCs) as a
              function of subsurface variability/complexity and contaminant structure and
              physico-chemical properties, (2) to develop laboratory components,
              demonstrations, design projects, interactive visualization techniques, case
              studies and assignments that utilize results from the research and to implement
              these tools using appropriate instructional, learning and evaluation methods
              and (3) to initiate an effort to recruit young women into science and
              engineering by providing opportunities for female high school students to
              discover the excitement and challenges of environmental engineering.  The
              interrelationships between the chemical structure of a contaminant and its
              attenuation and mobilization in the subsurface are relatively well established
              for hydrophobic organic compounds, while similar relationships for P/IOCs are
              under development.  Such relationships provide valuable information about
              chemical behavior; however, their use in describing contaminant fate and
              transport at the field scale becomes limited by spatial variation in subsurface
              composition and physico-chemical properties.  P/IOCs may not be intentionally
              released for field studies, hence, structurally related innocuous tracers such
              as Rhodamine WT (RWT) may serve as valuable tools to scale laboratory based
              P/IOC research to the field scale.  At this time, RWT-subsurface interactions
              have not been sufficiently characterized to allow for quantitative prediction
              of RWT fate.  Solute (RWT and test P/IOCs) and subsurface variables that are
              likely to influence abiotic interfacial processes will be identified and
              quantified.  Batch tests, continuous flow stirred reactor tests and column
              experiments will be conducted and results analyzed to identify operative
              interfacial processes and measure related equilibrium and kinetic parameters as
              a function of contaminant and solid-matrix properties.  Experimental data will
              be analyzed using chemometric techniques to identify key solute and subsurface
              variables impacting interfacial processes, characterize interaction between
              variables, and develop relationships between the variables and the derived
              kinetic and equilibrium parameters.  Extension of these relationships to fate
              and transport modeling will be explored.  With respect to education, the
              research results will be used as a platform for laboratory exercises and
              demonstrations that illustrate fundamentals of fate, remediation and design
              criteria.  Concept maps, a spatial learning strategy that emphasizes
              visualization of hierarchical relationships and cross-links between concepts,
              will be introduced as a learning tool.  Topical assignments and related
              discussion sections will guide students with problem-solving; case studies and
              design projects will be used to interface the fundamental knowledge with
              applications to fate predictions and remediation of contaminants.  Female high
              school students will be invited to participate in hands-on activities and
              research projects in the PI's laboratory. ***
