Title       : CAREER: Engineering Structural Adaptability into Biological Tissue Replacements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9984276

Award Number: 9984276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Barbee barbee@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984276
Barbee
The promise of tissue engineering lies in the prospect of
              replacing tissue that has become dysfunctional due to trauma or disease with
              new tissue capable of responding and adapting to environmental stimuli. Of
              primary importance in tissues that serve a mechanical or structural function is
              the ability to sense and respond to mechanical forces in order to adapt to the
              changing physical demands on the tissue. Previous in vivo and in vitro studies
              suggest that the structure and mechanical properties of blood vessel walls
              develop in response to the stress history of the tissue. The endothelium
              mediates vascular tone and structural remodeling in response to changes in
              blood flow while the vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cells sense and respond to
              changes in stress within the vessel wall. These responses are essential to the
              maintenance of structural integrity and the regulation of blood flow.

The
              central hypothesis of this research is that in normal development, structural
              relationships in vascular tissue are optimized for efficient sensing and
              transduction of the mechanical environment by the cells of the vessel wall. To
              engineer a tissue structure intended to acquire the property of adaptability
              present in normal tissues, we must first understand the salient features of the
              cells' interaction with their surrounding structures that allow appropriate
              mechanotransduction to occur. The structure and biochemistry of engineered
              matrices as well as pre-conditioning with physiological loading regimes will be
              analyzed and optimized based on initial functional properties and the
              acquisition of adaptive behaviors that will allow long-term replacement of
              tissue.

The objective of this career plan is to develop a program of
              research and education in the area of cellular and molecular mechanics. The
              research focus will be on the cellular response to mechanical stimuli with a
              special emphasis on the altered stress environments created by tissue-implant
              interfaces and engineered tissue constructs. The educational emphasis will be
              on the integration of engineering mechanics with current developments in the
              biological sciences. This will require not only a merging of course content but
              also a blending of the disparate course formats and teaching styles from the
              physical and biological sciences. Graduate courses that integrate theoretical
              and experimental foundations of cell mechanics with current concepts in the
              biological literature will be developed. In addition, the introduction of
              clinical rotations into the graduate curriculum will expose students to the
              state of the art in medical practice and patient care. This experience is
              intended to broaden their perspective and to focus their research objectives.
              At the undergraduate level, emphasis will be placed on providing research
              opportunities to stimulate students' interest in research-oriented careers
              either in industrial R&D or in further academic training.

