Title       : Structural and Functional Analysis of the Hemocyanin Gene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9984202

Award Number: 9984202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora B. Terwilliger nterwill@oimb.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hemocyanins are giant copper-containing proteins found only in arthropods and
              molluscs.  Like hemoglobins, they function to transport oxygen.  Recent
              discoveries have shown that hemocyanins are part of a larger gene family of
              proteins having similar shapes but diverse functions.  Identification of four
              of these proteins in one crustacean makes it possible to carry out integrated
              studies in one species of animal.  This research is directed at understanding
              how the genes are expressed and how production of the proteins is coordinated
              during development and molting, the similarities and differences among the
              proteins as they have changed through time, and how the proteins are related to
              one another.  Neurocyanin is uniquely located in nerve cells, cryptocyanin
              participates in forming a new exoskeleton, phenoloxidase helps to harden the
              new exoskeleton after the molt, and hemocyanin provides oxygen to the respiring
              tissues and changes its oxygen transporting properties as the crab matures. 
              Dr. Terwilliger will monitor expression of these proteins through development
              and molting, using techniques of protein purification, messenger RNA
              localization, polymerase chain reaction, nucleic acid sequencing, and oxygen
              binding.

Results of this study will provide deeper insight into how
              organisms regulate expression of related proteins with diverse functional
              roles.  The experiments will enhance understanding of how these proteins in the
              hemocyanin gene family participate in molting.  Basic knowledge about the
              effects of these proteins on molting and growth of these economically important
              crustaceans will have important implications to the fishery as well.

