Title       : CAREER: Exploring Authentic Inquiry: Factors that Influence Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9984612

Award Number: 9984612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian T. White brian.white@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is a five-year plan of research and instructional development
              investigating undergraduate biology students' learning of the process of
              science through an inquiry-based lab exercise.  Understanding the process by
              which scientific knowledge is generated is an essential part of many science
              curriculum standards and frameworks.  Most standards and frameworks for science
              education emphasize that students need to engage in scientific inquiry
              themselves in order to understand the process of science.  In order to apply
              these standards in the classroom, it is necessary to have answers to the
              following questions:

1)  Process:  Can undergraduate students perform
              scientific inquiry in a teaching laboratory?
2)  Outcome:  To what extent does
              perfroming a scientific inquiry exercise help students to understand the
              process of science?
3)  Important Features:  How do variations in the activity
              affect  the students's learning of the process science?
This project will
              build on previous work to explore answers to these questions in the context of 
              a technically simple but educationally rich lab exercise, the Red and White
              Yeast Lab.
    The Red and White Lab is based on an engineered strain of
              baker's yeast.  When this strain is spread on a petri plate, it produces a
              patch with a red  center and a white edge.  Students are given fresh plates and
              sterile toothpicks; their assisgnment is to use these tools to account for why
              the center is red and the edge  white.  During this lab, the students make
              their own hypotheses and models, design their own experiements based on
              variables that they define, and interpret their own date.  They argue about
              date and the interpretation of data and use these arguments to refine their
              experiments.  In this experimental environment, the students are be free to
              contruct knowledge in a manner that shares many epistemological features with
              authentic scientific investigation.  The PI has used and developed this lab for
              the past 5 years with introductory-level biology students.  A description of
              this lab will be published this fall and this lab will be disseminated as part
              of the NSF-Funded ResearchLink 2000 project.
     The PI's teaching
              responsibilities in the Biology department include teaching the two semester
              General Biology series, TA training, and acting as an education resource in the
              Biology department.  The Red and White Yeast Lab is the first lab in the first
              semester course in this series.  The findings of this study will inform the
              development of the lecture, lab, and TA training as taught by the PI and will
              be distributed internationally.
     The project will analyze classroom
              videotape and interviews to analyze the process and outcome of the lab in terms
              of these four issues:
(a)  What is the nature of scientific 'proof'?
(b)  How
              do hypotheses and experimental data interact?
(c)  How do scientists respond
              to anomalous data?
(d)  How are conflicts of ideas resolved in the scientific
              community?
     The five studies that compose this project are based on the
              three above; all three questions will be addressed in different contexts in
              each of the five studies.  The studies will begin by developing measures of
              process and outcome.  They will also examine the coupling between process (what
              the students do) and outcome (what they learn from what they did).  The
              remaining studies will focus on the effects of manipulations of the lab
              exercise on students' process and outcome.  These manipulations will involve
              key features of authentic experimentation:  choosing experiemental questions
              and variables; designing experiments;
revising techniques; and using multiple
              experiemtal methods.  The findings of the studies presented in this proposal
              will contribute to the understanding of scientific reasoning in undergraduate
              students as well as and to an understanding of the design and evaluation of
              inquiry-based laboratory exercises.  As an exemplar of these principles and
              practices, this project will produce a throughly-tested laboratory exercise and
              accompanying teacher training materials designed to communicate an
              understanding of the process of science.

