Title       : CAREER: Globalization and the Transnational Development of Civil Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9984250

Award Number: 9984250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew B. Sparke sparke@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project brings together three research components and three
              education initiatives in a comprehensive, integrated, five year, career plan
              focused on the transnational development of civil society.  The project is
              founded on the premise that the way in which social actors network
              transnationally in the context of economic globalization has a multi-layered
              geography and that by researching and explaining the various scales of spatial
              reorganization comprising this geography we can also enable students to better
              come to terms with their own geographical positioning in a more globally
              integrated world.  The links between the teaching and research are thus
              reciprocal and mutually reinforcing.  The three research components explore the
              question of how emerging economic interdependencies are leading towards
              transnational civil society at three different scales: cross-border,
              continental, and global.  Using ethnographic methods and institutional surveys
              of a variety of case-studies (ranging from the Singapore growth triangle to
              transnational labor networks to business school curricula), the research will
              examine how economic links across borders are related to the emergence of
              transnational civil society networks and knowledges.

The intrinsic
              importance of this research lies in the development of a more sophisticated and
              multi-faceted understanding of globalization.  In addition, by virtue of being
              ombined with a series of educational initiatives at the University of
              Washington, the research also promises to enrich undergraduate and graduate
              training with a more community outreach oriented approach to teaching about the
              spaces of  civil society and their transformation in the context of global
              economic integration.  The three main education components are: 1) a new
              introductory level course on globalization aimed to introduce more students to
              both Geography and International Studies at the same time; 2) a new
              Globalization Freshman Interest Group and ambassador outreach program to
              high-schools in minority neighborhoods in Seattle; and 3) the development of a
              service learning option for graduate students in Geography so that they can
              conduct internships in local non-governmental organizations and schools.  The
              synergies linking these education initiatives with the research on the changing
              scales of civil society networking are many, but centrally the project will
              contribute to university-wide attempts to integrate primary research with
              teaching aimed at preparing students to be citizens of an evermore integrated
              world.

