Title       : CAREER: Mitigation of Pollution Hazards in Ephemeral Streams and Estuaries; A
               Plan for Research and Education in Environmental Hydraulics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9984579

Award Number: 9984579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett F. Sanders bsanders@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1576,9196,9197,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9984579- Sanders

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and
              education project considers a promising approach for identifying key components
              affecting pollution hazards in surface water systems.  A central challenge in
              developing strategies for hazard mitigation is identifying the key components
              that contribute disproportionately to outcomes.  When these components are
              known in advance, engineering approaches for hazard mitigation can then readily
              follow.  The approach utilizes an adjoint sensitivity formalism applied to a
              time-dependent and depth-integrated formulation describing flow and pollutant
              transport in streams and estuaries.

The adjoint formulation yields a
              quantitative description of how system outcomes are related to system
              components and control actions -- information that can be used to determine the
              key components.  This approach is particularly useful for examining pollution
              hazards in streams and estuaries, because the unsteady and nonlinear flow
              obfuscates the relationship between field observations, system characteristics,
              and source controls.

The approach used is applicable to a wide range of
              pollution problems in streams and estuaries such as eutrophication, toxicity,
              and pathogen issues.  It is particularly attractive in arid coastal regions in
              central and southern California, where the ephemeral hydrology presents
              challenges to the implementation of the TMDL (Total Maximum Daily Load) process
              set forth by the Clean Water Act.  As a result, the TMDL process for a wide
              range of pollutants, including organics, metals, and pathogens, has not
              proceeded in a straight forward manner.  This new methodology is used to
              identify the key components affecting microbial pollution in the Santa Ana
              River Watershed.  It is expected that this will lead to insight into the
              equitable assignment of TMDLs for microbial pollution in a coastal watershed,
              as well as a better understanding of the true utility of the methodology, and
              strategies to manage pollution via control of the key components.

With
              regard to education, the Problem-Based Learning method (PBL) is implemented in
              undergraduate and graduate courses in environmental hydraulics, that is,
              hydrology, hydraulics, and pollutant transport.  PBL was first developed in the
              field of medicine, and results indicate that it better prepares students for
              life-long learning than the didactic method commonly used in engineering.  A
              hybrid version of PBL that combines the PBL and didactic format is being
              tested, the goal being to foster critical thinking, self-direction, and
              self-motivation skills, while ensuring that the essentials of each course are
              covered.  The objective is to prepare students for the
              Engineer-in-Training(EIT) exam--an important step towards professional
              practice.  Watershed characterization and design problems from the field site
              are employed as the basis for PBL.  Students are required to not only seek out
              and understand engineering methods of design and analysis, but to assess what
              site-specific data are necessary for analysis, and how these data can be
              obtained using rapidly evolving information technologies.


