Title       : CAREER: Phenotypic Plasticity in Physiological Traits and Environmental Change:
               Mentored Research Experiences and Service Learning Projects in Undergraduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9984920

Award Number: 9984920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. McWilliams srmcwilliams@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A common theme used throughout this program is the involvement of undergraduate
              students in research that creates new knowledge and in the communication of
              this new knowledge. However, a basic premise of the work is that involving all
              undergraduates at research universities in such research experiences will not
              by itself produce inquiring students who can synthesize and analyze, who have
              leadership and problem-solving skills, and who can make meaningful connections
              between their academic coursework and the community in which they live. To
              achieve such a goal requires many pedagogical strategies and approaches
              including research projects conducted by vertically-integrated teams of
              scientists, classroom projects that use inquiry-based approaches,
              interdisciplinary creative projects, and mentored internships with business,
              industry, non-profit organizations, and government. As part of a new curriculum
              being developed and implemented in natural resource sciences at University of
              Rhode Island, the PI will revise two existing undergraduate courses, develop a
              new "capstone" course in physiological ecology, help develop a new freshman
              field course, develop ways that my research projects can involve undergraduates
              in new special programs, and utilize innovative methods for evaluation and
              assessment of the proposed education activities. The research is on phenotypic
              plasticity of body composition and digestive organs in migrating birds and its
              ecological implications. Goals of the research include (a) evaluate new
              nondestructive methods for measuring body composition dynamics in songbirds,
              (b) test contemporary hypotheses about the effect of diet quality and fasting
              on the metabolic routing of dietary nutrients in songbirds, (c) test key
              assumptions about the effect of certain physiological processes on stable
              isotope ratios in animal tissues, and (d) develop research projects that
              involve undergraduates in key educational activities. The PIs propose to test
              the hypotheses using stable isotopes to trace use and synthesis of body
              components. This will be the first study to manipulate body composition of
              migratory songbirds while using stable isotopes to measure metabolism of
              exogenous and endogenous nutrients. The proposed research and teaching program
              will establish a foundation for an academic career devoted to the development
              of novel integrative and inquiry-based approaches to research and education in
              animal biology, in general, and physiological ecology, in particular.


