Title       : CAREER: Nanocomposite Electrodeposition of Thin Films and High Aspect Ratio
               Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9984775

Award Number: 9984775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Podlaha podlaha@che.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this study is to integrate fundamental research with education in
              order to explore, understand and control the development of electrodeposited
              nanocomposite materials. The knowledge gained will be used to create a new
              class of composite materials and provide novel processing methods for
              electrodeposited metals. Inert, ultrafine particles are suspended in an
              electroplating solution and are embedded into the growing metal. The research
              aspect is divided into three parts: 1) experimental parameter exploration of
              thin nanocomposite films, 2) mathematical modeling and 3) experimental
              investigation of high aspect ratio nanocomposite deposits. Nanocomposite
              materials that are highlighted will offer improved strength and wear resistant
              properties. Nanometric size particles codeposited with metals may also be of
              interest for the control of the metal deposit structure and the local, metal
              deposition rate. 
The research effort will be merged with an educational
              component. A newly created course at Louisiana State University (LSU),
              Electrochemical Engineering, will adopt a nanocomposite "class-system" that
              will be examined as a group using the techniques learned during lectures.
              Teaching methods will take advantage of computer generated partial notes that
              are to be completed with the student interactively. In addition, graduate and
              undergraduate students will participate in a research effort through graduate
              research and semester projects, respectively. Students will have the unique
              opportunity to take advantage of a university run synchrotron at the Center for
              Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) to fabricate microstructured
              nanocomposites and to examine them. In addition, students at all levels can
              participate in a monthly informal seminar series for microsystems at LSU, which
              encompasses several interdisciplinary departments. 


