Title       : CAREER: The First Stellar Abundances in Local Group Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9984073

Award Number: 9984073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberley A. Venn venn@clare.physics.macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9984073	
VENN
A five-year research program to determine the chemical
              composition of a variety of Local Group galaxies from young stars will be
              carried out.  In addition, there will be an educational initiative to bring the
              goals and results of this scientific project to the Macalester College
              community and the general public. The timing of this research project is
              excellent, since this is an exciting time for stellar spectroscopy as several
              8- to 10-m telescopes are becoming available to astronomers.   The use of these
              new telescopes will make the observations and analyses of stars in nearby
              galaxies a new possibility. The main goal of this project is to determine
              chemical abundances and critical abundance ratios in Local Group dwarf
              irregular and spiral galaxies. These new results, such as Oxygen/Iron (O/Fe)
              and Barium/Iron (Ba/Fe) abundance ratios, available only now from new stellar
              analyses, will constrain the star formation histories and galaxy evolution
              models of these Local Group galaxies.  The results obtained may be applied more
              generally to our understanding of galaxy formation and evolution throughout the
              Universe. These known abundances of the elements in the stars themselves will
              also constrain massive star evolution models at very low metallicities, and the
              results will be applicable to population studies of high redshift galaxies. 
              

The goals and results of this scientific program will be used in a number
              of educational and outreach initiatives at Macalester College that will impact
              a variety of students and the general public.  Firstly, the scientific program
              will generate approximately six to nine senior thesis projects by physics
              majors, and up to twelve independent research projects for non-physics majors. 
              Secondly, a new seminar series for non-science majors will make it possible to
              introduce knowledge about the Local Universe.  The information will be
              available to make it possible to expand on the goals, scientific methods used,
              and discuss results from the scientific project.  Thirdly, this will provide
              new background information on the Universe for Macalester College science and
              mathematics majors. Fourthly, a colloquium series on astrophysics in the Local
              Universe will be geared towards the Macalester College community and general
              public.  Expert astronomers will be invited to the College to deliver the
              public lectures and interact with students and faculty. In addition, both the
              seminar series and the colloquium series will be tied to the Macalester College
              program for public nights at the observatory, so that
participants can learn
              about a topic in a lecture and then actually observe related celestial objects
              for a more enriching experience. Finally, the data from the science program
              will be used to develop new
exercises and laboratory demonstrations in both
              the introductory and advanced astronomy laboratory courses. The integration of
              scientific and educational programs is an excellent reflection of the mission
              of Macalester College.

The Division of Astronomical Sciences provides
              support for this project.

***

