Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Micromechanics and Materials Dynamics of Thermal Barrier
               Coating Systems Containing Multiple Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9984899

Award Number: 9984899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Weaver mweaver@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9984899
Weaver

This research focuses on understanding the fundamental
              concepts controlling the mechanical properties of microconstituents in thermal
              barrier coatings (TBC) as a function of thermal exposure, both time and
              temperature. The specific goals of the proposed program are: (1) Characterize
              the properties of the macro- and micro-constituents of the TBC system as a
              function of thermal exposure using four model TBC systems;  (2) Monitor and
              analyze the displacements of the TBC constituents during thermal cycling and
              isothermal oxidation coupled with mechanical strain; and (3) Develop physical
              and finite element models of TBC durability based on microstructural and
              mechanical evaluations of degradation mechanisms and processes. The specific
              objectives of the educational plan are: (1) Enhance the undergraduate
              curriculum by providing students with "hands on" training in the study of
              commercially viable thick films and coating materials; (2) Encourage
              undergraduate students from UA, Stillman, and FAMU to pursue graduate studies
              in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering; and (3) Increase diversity by
              attracting underrepresented minority students to undergraduate and graduate
              study at The University of Alabama. 
%%%
The research results should provide
              fundamental understanding of the mechanisms contributing towards TBC failure
              and lead to the development of more accurate life prediction models. Thermal
              barrier coatings (TBC's) have been used for nearly three decades to extend the
              performance of aircraft turbines operating in hostile environments. Current
              TBC's are typically multilayer systems incorporating an insulating ceramic
              topcoat applied over a metallic bond coat; the latter is deposited directly on
              the surface of the component. While TBC's exhibit the desired insulating
              capability, it is the durability and reliability issues that have limited their
              application. A lack of fundamental data concerning the influence of
              microstructural degradation on the mechanical response of TBC's has impeded the
              development of accurate life prediction models. 
***

