Title       : CAREER: New Research Directions for Parallel Manipulators -- Investigation of
               Redundant Actuation, Redundant Sensing and Static Balancing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9984279

Award Number: 9984279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imme R. Ebert-Uphoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Georgia Institute of Technology, 9984279
CAREER: New
              Research Directions for Parallel Manipulators -
Investigation of Redundant
              Actuation, Redundant Sensing and
Static Balancing
Today's manufacturing
              industry faces many challenges in terms of accuracy, throughput and flexibility
              of the production line.  While robots in a manufacturing environment are
              traditionally of a serial structure, parallel manipulators are emerging in many
              applications because they excel in the areas of accuracy, speed, rigidity and
              payload capacity.
This CAREER proposal adopts an integrated research and
              education strategy centered on the advancement of parallel manipulators in the
              areas of accuracy, size of usable workspace, ease of use and energy efficiency.
              The research component investigates (1) the use of redundant actuation and
              compliant control schemes to eliminate singular configurations and thus to
              enlarge the usable region of the workspace, (2) the use of redundant sensing to
              simplify the real-time computations in the control algorithms and to increase
              the machine intelligence through continuous re-calibration, (3) the use of
              static balancing to make parallel manipulators more efficient.  The educational
              component concentrates on (A) the development of web-based course-ware in form
              of "Virtual Parallel Manipulators", i.e. interactive graphical simulations of
              parallel manipulators;
(B) the integration of parallel manipulators in the
              robotics curriculum at the undergraduate and graduate level through development
              of two new courses.
The significance and impact of the proposed research and
              education strategy is three-fold: (1) The educational program is expected to
              facilitate a higher acceptance of parallel manipulators in industry, leading to
              better utilization of the high potential of parallel manipulators.  (2)
              Immediate benefits for the manufacturing industry are expected through creation
              of robotic manipulators with higher performance characteristics than existing
              ones. (3) The research contributes to the long-term development of parallel
              manipulators by advancing the understanding of and theoretical framework for
              parallel manipulators.


