Title       : CAREER: Integrated Study and Research in Virology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9984310

Award Number: 9984310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Gottlieb pgottl@med.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              GOTTLIEB: 

This research will emphasize two scientific projects that
              demonstrate the fundamentals of virological research for a wide range of
              students, including those scientifically advanced in High School,
              undergraduates, and graduate students.  "Hands-on" laboratory experience that
              provides students with the opportunity to develop and test hypotheses and to
              acquire rigorous scientific methodologies will best reinforce the lessons of
              the classroom.  In this regard, the research includes the following two
              projects.  The three-segmented dsRNA containing Cystoviridae is a
              non-pathogenic model for the Reoviridae.  The goal of the Cystoviridae research
              is to establish an in vitro RNA replication and packaging system for phi12, one
              of the newly discovered cystoviruses.  Embarking upon a comparative study of
              these viruses will result in understanding the role of genetic and structural
              variation on their replicative mechanisms and evolution and answer extant
              questions in reovirus biology.  The aim of the second portion of the project is
              to test the hypothesis that the alteration of a self antigen by interaction
              with a viral antigen can render the self antigen immunogenic.  The self-antigen
              to be studied in this case is dsDNA which is proposed to be rendered
              immunogenic by binding with the EBNA-1 protein of the Epstein-Barr Virus. 
              Integrating teaching with active student research in the molecular biology of
              viruses, this project centers on developing a virology program for
              undergraduate, graduate, and advanced high school students.

