Title       : CAREER: Motion Transformations for Animation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a9984506

Award Number: 9984506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Gleicher gleicher@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Computer Animation is a powerful medium for communication, with potential to
              explain, educate, or
entertain. However, the potential of animation beyond
              entertainment is largely untapped because of the
difficulty and cost in
              producing it. While the state of the art provides tools for expert animators to
              craft
works of art, it offers little help for those without considerable time
              and talent.
Our vision is that computer animation will be a widely used medium
              for communication, that a wide range
of users will choose to share their
              messages in this medium, and that the availability of this medium will
impact
              how we educate students. The widespread availability of internet bandwidth
              offers the mechanism
for creators to share animation: what is missing are the
              tools to create it.
Our premise is that:
1. The power of animation can be
              more broadly used, with particular impact in education, if we can lower
the
              barriers to its production with tools that democratize the medium.
2.
              Techniques for transforming motions can enable such tools by allowing users to
              leverage the work of
others if we can devise technologies that retain the
              desirable properties of the original during
transformation.
3. The spacetime
              constraints approach to motion transformation can provide this technology if it
              is more
fully developed.
This proposal presents a faculty career development
              plan committed to the vision of ubiquitous animation.
The research component
              will develop technologies that enable a wider range of uses of animation, and
              the
education component will use animation for education and better prepare
              computer scientists to work with
visual media.
The overall goal of the
              research effort is to create enabling technologies for new animation tools that
              are
more accessible to those who are not skilled animators. We propose
              techniques for transforming motions to
new uses, for example applying an
              action to a new character or new environment. The challenge is to
              create
transformations that both meet the new needs, yet preserve the
              desirable properties of the original. Our prior work introduced the spacetime
              constraints approach to motion transformations. Mathematically, the
approach
              poses motion transformation as a constrained optimization problem: what motion
              meets the
specified needs yet best preserves the original motion? Unlike most
              animation techniques, spacetime
constraints consider entire motions
              simultaneously, rather than computing instants in time individually. This
              requires solving a single, large numerical problem for each motion computation.
              Our work to date shows the spacetime constraints approach is a viable approach
              for tackling important problems in computer animation. The research component
              of the development plan is to leverage our initial results with the spacetime
              constraints approach towards the broader goal of democratizing animation.
              Specifically, work is proposed to improve the mathematical foundations of the
              approach to enhance its reliability and applicability, to develop new types of
              motion transformations, to implement systems that provide motion
              transformations to our target users, and to demonstrate how these new types of
              tools can be used for the production of effective
visual messages.
The
              education component of the development plan consists of three parts. First, the
              plan addresses the need
to train students at the University of Wisconsin in
              graphics and animation by developing new courses and
providing research and
              project opportunities for students at all levels. Second, the plan proposes to
              use
animation to improve pedagogy: by creating materials for classes as well
              as for outreach. Third, the plan
proposes to help foster the development of
              animation technology through outreach to the technical
community.

