Title       : PECASE: Visualization of Constitutive Models in Geomechanics: A New Generalized
               Development and Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9984125

Award Number: 9984125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Youssef Hashash hashash@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9984125


This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and
              education project addresses a novel interactive visualization development and
              learning environment for material constitutive relations, referred to as
              VizCoRe.

Advances in computer and information technology permit engineers to
              use numerical simulations on a routine basis to support their design work.  In
              geotechnical engineering, numerical simulations are used to study the complex
              response of soil and rock in urban areas to construction activities.  These
              simulations depend upon the accurate representation of the load-deformation
              material response of the ground in the form of constitutive equations; concepts
              that traditionally have been difficult to understand, develop and use, except
              by a few specialists.

This project initiates a fundamental shift in the
              current approach by taking advantage of rapid advancements in information
              technology and computer graphics.  It transforms the representation of
              constitutive relations, as well as stress and strain quantities, from a series
              of mathematical equations and matrix quantities into multidimensional
              geometric/visual objects in a dynamic interactive color-rich display
              environment.  Complex mathematical formulations are transformed into visual
              renderings that are easily understood and manipulated.  This environment is
              being developed as a software workbench that is Internet based, computer
              platform independent, and easily used on a desktop computer system.  It allows
              multiple users to view and study models in a collaborative environment.

It
              is an inherently educational project, as it will greatly simplify the use of
              constitutive relations for both the expert and non-expert user.  It can be used
              to teach a wide audience of students and practicing engineers about
              constitutive relations and their significance in numerical simulations, using a
              simple intuitive approach.  Its availability on the World Wide Web, and its
              multi-user features, fosters a collaborative learning environment amongst
              students and engineers.  The project involves collaboration with the National
              Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign.



