Title       : CAREER: Decomposition-Based Assembly Synthesis of Bistructural Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a9984606

Award Number: 9984606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazuhiro Saitou kazu@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER grant provides funding for the development of an integrated research
              and education program on discrete modeling and optimization in design and
              manufacturing.  The research objective is the development of a systematic
              method for synthesizing feasible assemblies of bistructural products ---
              products with external enclosure reinforced by internal structural supports
              such as automotive bodies --- before conducting the detailed component design. 
              Top-down synthesis of a multi-component assembly will be achieved based on the
              graph-based decomposition of the internal structural supports and external
              enclosure geometry, via the transformation and decomposition of a structural
              topology optimization output.  The educational objective is to provide
              mechanical engineering students with a unified view of various concurrent
              engineering problems as decisions among discrete choices and a solid foundation
              to understand, design, and utilize discrete modeling and optimization methods
              as applied to these problems.

If successful, the proposed research will
              provide a theoretical base for the assembly synthesis of bistructural products
              via decomposition, which influences the overall structural stiffness and
              dimensional errors of the assembled products and the manufacturability and
              assembleability of the components.  It will positively impact industries where
              bistructural design is prevalent, such as automotive, aerospace, and ship
              building.  The educational plan will impact a broad mechanical engineering
              community by advocating the relevance of discrete modeling and optimization to
              design and manufacturing.  It will achieve integration with the research plan
              by the introduction of research results to a graduate course as case studies
              and by the use of the developed software in a undergraduate course.


