Title       : CAREER: The Role of Drosophila SLBP in Histone Gene Expression and Cell Cycle
               Progression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9984068

Award Number: 9984068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Duronio duronio@med.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fundamental aspects of eukaryotic cell biology is the control of
              the cell division cycle. The canonical eukaryotic cell division cycle is
              usually described as having four phases that occur in a precise order:
              G1-S-G2-M. Most cells typically make a decision whether or not to enter into a
              new cell cycle during G1 phase. Cyclins, members of a family of
              serine/threonine protein kinases consisting of a catalytic subunit (cdk) bound
              to a regulatory subunit, have been shown to be the principle regulators of the
              cell cycle. Cyclin/cdk-mediated phosphorylation of key target molecules during
              G1 is thought to trigger a series of downstream events leading to the
              initiation of DNA replication and cell cycle progression. However, nothing is
              known about the mechanisms involved. Histone genes are a unique class of genes
              that encode the only mRNAs that lack poly-adenylated tails. They are
              synthesized and accumulated in the S phase prior to DNA replication although
              the mechanisms that couple histone synthesis to other events in the cell cycle
              are largely unknown. Most of the cell cycle regulation of histone mRNA is
              post-transcriptional and mediated by the 3' end of histone mRNA, which contains
              a conserved 26 nucleotide sequence that forms a stem-loop. cDNAs encoding a
              protein that binds the 3'end of histone mRNA (called the stem-loop binding
              protein or SLBP) has recently been identified from a variety of animal species.
              SLBP is a novel RNA binding protein that is thought to participate in all
              aspects of histone mRNA metabolism. Moreover, SLBP may provide the molecular
              link between cell cycle progression and histone biosynthesis. To test these
              hypotheses using genetic tools, SLBP will be studied in Drosophila
              melanogaster. The specific aims are:1)To characterize dSLBP and histone mRNA
              accumulation during development 2) To analyze and characterize the phenotype of
              the dSLBP mutants 3) To study the regulation of dSLBP during the cell cycle and
              development. 
Working with undergraduate students as well as graduate students
              both in the laboratory and in the classroom will be a significant aspect of
              this project. Although students often express a desire to enter the battle
              against human diseases such as cancer, they have little understanding of the
              importance of model systems in the quest for an understanding of the underlying
              mechanisms causing the disease. A course will be developed with a specific
              emphasis on the importance of the genetics of invertebrate experimental systems
              like Drosophila, C. elegans, and yeast in shedding light on the function of
              genes known to play a role in human disease.

