Title       : CAREER: Development of an Eye Tracking Education and Research Program at Clemson
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9984278

Award Number: 9984278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Duchowski andrewd@cs.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A career development plan is presented with the objective of developing an
              interdisciplinary eye tracking education and research program at Clemson
              University. The four development areas forming the program are described:
              (1)pedagogical innovation, (2) laboratory infrastructure, (3) interdisciplinary
              eye movement research, and (4) independent computer science research. Work in
              areas (1) and (2) has already begun. The long-term research directions outlined
              in areas (3) and (4) specify a research agenda designed to sustain and nurture
              the program's growth. This proposal defines two virtual reality eye tracking
              research projects, the results of which will serve as part of the foundation
              for future research and career development.

Pedagogical Innovation: A newly
              approved interdisciplinary course, commencing in Fall 1999, is described. This
              class features applied instruction in eye tracking methodology and thus
              presents a nationally distinctive course offering. The course content provides
              a context for ongoing and proposed eye tracking research. This proposal also
              discusses the strategies for the formative and surnmative evaluation of this
              curricular development.

Laboratory Infrastructure: Hands-on course
              instruction and related research is conducted within the newly installed eye
              tracking facility housed in Clemson's Virtual Reality Laboratory. The
              laboratory includes two top-of-the-line Head Mounted Displays (HMDs) from
              Virtual Research, one of which is outfitted with a binocular eye tracker from
              ISCAN. The HMI)s are driven by an SGI Onyx2 InfiniteReality graphics engine,
              which generates a myriad of complex stimuli, including graphics, virtual
              environments, digital images, and video. The binocular HMD-fitted eye tracker,
              the principal component currently used in virtual reality eye 
tracking
              research, appears to be the first of its kind to be assembled in the United
              States.

Interdisciplinary Research: Related collaborative research
              directions are 
outlined, with the support of faculty from Psychology,
              Marketing, and Industrial Engineering. Students from these departments can
              enroll in the eye tracking course and are expected to participate in ongoing
              research, 
Supporting the burgeoning education program, the objective of the
              proposed collaborative efforts is to explore fundamental questions regarding
              dynamic vision and perceptual processes. Results from completed projects will
              be featured in the course as it evolves over time.

Independent Research: The
              underlying theme of this proposed research is display generation and
              processing, matching the dynamic nature of human vision as revealed by eye
              movements. 
Although long-range computer science directions are specified
              within the areas of computer graphics, 
human-computer interaction, and
              digital imaging, this
proposal focuses on two related projects pertinent to
              virtual reality 
research. These projects constitute the primary
reason for
              requested funding. The aim of both projects is to develop 
strategies to
              increase the display rate of com-
plex virtual environments through
              gaze-contingent object and scene 
modeling. The proposed evaluation of the
              two
virtual environments is based on measurements of system and human
              
performance. Expected deliverables include
multivariate acuity-matching
              degradation functions suitable for either 
model- or frame-based scene
              generation result-
ing in display-time compression. The development of the two
              proposed 
projects is slated over a four-year period. The
schedule is
              summarized as follows:

1. First year: completion of software development for
              initial 
gaze-contingent virtual environment construction;
completion of
              pilot studies; dissemination of preliminary results and 
experiences.
2.
              Second year: implementation of gaze-contingent modeling strategies;
              
initiation of human subject experiments.
3. Third year: implementation of
              gaze-contingent visuotopic strategies; 
initiation of human subject
              experiments,
4. Fourth year: completion of experiments and data analysis;
              dissemination 
of project results.

The four-year duration of the two
              proposed projects presents an opportunity 
to lay the groundwork for future
              career
development. Although this career development proposal is broad in
              scope, 
it is tacitly assumed that the work outlined
herein forms the
              foundation for a lifetime of research and teaching 
activities.


