Title       : CAREER: Developing the Chemistry of Metallobisbenzimidazoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a9984071

Award Number: 9984071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Chan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research on the synthesis, characterization and examination of
              metallobisbenzimidazole (BBZ) complexes which are functional analogs of
              traditional tetrapyrrole systems, by Professor Michael Chan of the Department
              of Chemistry at Ohio State University. Metalloporphyrins and other
              metallotetrapyrroles are important cofactors in biology, and synthetic
              porphyrins and related phthalocyanines have found use for a variety of
              applications. The BBZ ligands are similar but possess differences which will be
              exploited for the design of new compounds. In particular, control of the degree
              of non-planarity of the benzimidazole ring will be used to enhance chiral
              recognition and catalysis. A number of complexes will be synthesized employing
              BBZ ligands in which the framework has been substituted with electron donating
              and withdrawing groups and a controlled degree of "ruffling" of the ring.
              Following synthesis and characterization, the chiral properties and selected
              catalytic activities of these compounds will be examined.

The goal of this
              research is to prepare metal complexes of bisbenzimidazoles, which are related
              to substances that have a number of biological functions. These compounds will
              be designed to emulate but alter the biological properties in order to be
              useful for a number of applications, including optical sensors and catalysts
              for the production of pharmaceuticals, commercial epoxides and related
              materials. An integrated graduate-upper division undergraduate course and an
              associated laboratory course on the structure and properties of macromolecules
              will be developed, and available computational facilities enhanced. This
              component of the educational plan will introduce the students to current
              concepts and methods in the structural study of proteins, including protein
              crystallography.
