Title       : Nanostructures and Activity of Polyelectrolyte/Surfactant Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a9984102

Award Number: 9984102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Chu bchu@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9984102
Chu

The complex formation of polyelectrolyte gels with oppositely
              charge surfactants is driven mainly by electrostatic and hydrophobic
              interactions.  Very rich nanostructures of the polyelectrolyte gel/surfactant
              complexes (PSCs) have been determined.  These include Pm3n space group cubic,
              face-centered cubic (FCC), Ia3d space group cubic, hexagonal close packing of
              cylinders (HCPC) and hexagonal close packing of spheres (HCPS) as well as
              lamella nanostructures, with several of them being reported by us for the first
              time.  The subtle details on the self-assembly behavior are, however, lacking. 
              We propose to make selected studies on the effects of pH, ionic strength,
              nature of co-ion and of counter ion, and the polyelectrolyte chain length on
              complex formation.  More importantly, the kinetics of PSC formation could
              permit us to create semi-frozen structures.  It is proposed to undertake a more
              quantitative investigation on the kinetics of PSC formation by controlling the
              mixing process.

Cationic surfactants will be used to interact with
              single-stranded (and double-stranded) DNAs.  Complexes formed between ssDNA (or
              RNA) and oppositely charged biological surfactants, such as liposomes, lipids
              or lipitoids, represent a highly efficient vehicle for deliver of DNAS (or
              RNAs) to cells.  The idea is how the genetic material can be "packaged" into a
              very compact form for transport across cell membranes.  The complex formation
              can reduce the DNA volume by about a thousand fold and thereby overcome the
              barrier for a transfer of the material across membranes.  We know that the
              biological activity of the complex and the nanostructures formed by the
              complexes can be correlated.  Therefore, our objective is to determine the
              factors that can control the size and the nanostructures of DNA/surfactant
              complexes and then to correlate this information wit biological activity for
              gene delivery purposes.

