Title       : CAREER: Nucleic Acid Mutation Detection by 2'-Amine Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a9984289

Award Number: 9984289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Weeks weeks@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this research, the PI will use a new chemical method that has been developed
              to detect point mutations and other defects in nucleic acid sequences.  The
              method employs oligonucleotide probes in which one 2'-ribose position (-H or
              -OH in DNA or RNA, respectively) is substituted with an amine (-NH2) group. 
              2'-amine substituted nucleotides are specifically acylated by succinimidyl
              esters to form a 2'-amide product.  The mutation detection method exploits an
              unanticipated observation by the PI that 2'-amine groups at the site of a
              mismatch are acylated more rapidly than amine substitutions at base paired
              nucleotides.  Acylation is specific for mismatched 2'-amine groups due to
              increased local flexibility.  Both the 2'-amine substituted probe
              oligonucleotide and the target sequence may be either DNA or RNA.  The method
              has wide potential usefulness to query mismatches and quantify hybridization
              with single base specificity in nucleic acid populations.  Moreover, the
              activated reagent is a bi-functional molecule in which the mutation-sensitive
              acylation chemistry is linked to an independent visualization moiety. 
              Objectives of this Career Award are, first, to explore in a fundamental way the
              applications, mechanism, and limitations of this chemical sensor technology,
              and, thereafter, to develop a practical approach for visualizing mutations in
              human genes.   The PI has proposed new experiments for an Advanced Biochemical
              Laboaratory including research based experiments and a bioinformatics  module, 
              and has established a literature based course on enzyme
              mechanisms.


9984289
Weeks
In this proposal, the PI will use a new
              chemical method that has been developed to detect point mutations and other
              defects in nucleic acid sequences.  The method employs oligonucleotide probes
              in which one 2'-ribose position (-H or -OH in DNA or RNA, respectively) is
              substituted with an amine (-NH2) group.  2'-amine substituted nucleotides are
              specifically acylated by succinimidyl esters to form a 2'-amide product.  The
              mutation detection method exploits an unanticipated observation by the PI that
              2'-amine groups at the site of a mismatch are acylated more rapidly than amine
              substitutions at base paired nucleotides.  Acylation is specific for mismatched
              2'-amine groups due to increased local flexibility.  Both the 2'-amine
              substituted probe oligonucleotide and the target sequence may be either DNA or
              RNA.  The method has wide potential usefulness to query mismatches and quantify
              hybridization with single base specificity in nucleic acid populations. 
              Moreover, the activated reagent is a bi-functional molecule in which the
              mutation-sensitive acylation chemistry is linked to an independent
              visualization moiety.  Objectives of this Career Award are, first, to explore
              in a fundamental way the applications, mechanism, and limitations of this
              chemical sensor technology, and, thereafter, to develop a practical approach
              for visualizing mutations in human genes. Detailed plans are provided for new
              courses, and creative ideas are proposed to stimulate and challenge
              students.



