Title       : CAREER: A Program of Research and Education for Inverse Problems in Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9984246

Award Number: 9984246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peyman Milanfar milanfar@ee.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In step with each technological breakthrough, increasingly more of what
              we
learn about the world is measured indirectly. Extending and
              complementing
our sensory faculties, we rely on technology to probe across
              long distances
and through natural barriers. Astronomy, nondestructive
              testing, medical
imaging, and geophysical prospecting are all important
              examples of our
ability to make indirect measurements of a physical effect and
              from these
learn about the causes of such effects. At the heart of this
              ability are
inverse methods: practical computational techniques for processing
              the
measured data and distilling the information of interest from the
              data.
These techniques bring together tools from multidimensional
              signal
processing, statistics, and applied mathematics. 

The purpose of
              this CAREER grant proposal is the development of a long term
research and
              educational program in multidimensional signal processing that
will integrate
              engineering, statistical, and numerical techniques for the
solution of inverse
              problems in imaging. The educational component of the
proposed program will
              design, from the ground level, a comprehensive
graduate and undergraduate
              curriculum in statistical signal and image
processing at the newly established
              department of Electrical Engineering at
the University of California, Santa
              Cruz. In addition, an introductory
undergraduate seminar course, and an
              in-depth graduate course on the
subject of in- verse problems in imaging will
              be developed. The research
component of the proposed program will address
              problems in image
reconstruction from indirectly measured information that may
              be in-
complete and noisy. These data can convey information that, depending
              upon
the application, may be geometric in nature (2-D silhouettes of a
              3-D
object), tomographic (projections of a function), local (blurred
              and
downsampled images of a detailed scene), or global (moments of an
              object.)
Our program of research will entail the development of statistical
              and
numerical methods for solving problems in each of the said categories. 
