Title       : CAREER: Membrane Processes for DBP Precursor Control: Effects of Colloid
               Stability and Membrane Surface Chemistry on Flux and Rejection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9984709

Award Number: 9984709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Kilduff kilduff@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9984709  Kilduff  The use of synthetic polymer membranes in water treatment is
              increasing worldwide,  especially for the removal of disinfection by-product
              (DBP) precursors and of pathogenic organisms and viruses.  The microporous
              materials are vulnerable to fouling by organic macromolecules and other
              colloids and this fouling often contols the efficiency, reliability and costs
              of membrane processes in municipal and industrial applications.  The goals of
              this research are to: (1) understand the interactions between organic
              macromolecules and other natural organic and inorganic colloids in membrane
              filtration systems and how colloid stability influences the performance of
              membrane processes and (2) understand how membrane flux and rejection are
              related to membrane surface chemistry and identify the efficacy of UV
              photomodification to produce filtration membranes more resistant to fouling. 
              Fractionation and characterization will be required to identify the composition
              and reactivity of components of heterogeneous environmental colloid mixtures. 
              Separation of mixtures will be done on the basis of size, using filtration, and
              chemical functionality, using adsorption chromatography and solvent
              precipitation.  The effects of individual organic matter isolates and of
              colloid mixtures on membrane performance (fouling, rejection and cleaning) will
              be evaluated.  Mixtures will include organic matter fractions and sub-micron
              inorganic colloids (clays, silica and iron oxides).  Fouling will be related to
              colloid stability and fouling layer morphology using atomic force and confocal
              microscopy.  Strategies to mitigate fouling effects will focus on tailoring
              surface chemistry to reduce the binding of organic molecules and colloids.  The
              surfaces of polymeric membranes will be modified (made more hydrophilic) by UV
              radiation followed by monomer grafting and subsequent polymerization. Effects
              of monomer type, reaction time and UV radiation intensity will be evaluated. 
              As-received and fouled membranes will be characterized by scanning electron
              microscopy, electron spectroscopy, contact angle, attenuated total reflection
              infrared spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy and fouling potential in
              bench-scale test cells.
The education plan centers around the development of a
              new Membrane Processes course from which students will learn not only process
              fundamentals but also how fouling can cause treatment systems to exhibit
              time-dependent performance, and how to incorporate accurate parameter
              estimation into the design process to improve process reliability. *** 

