Title       : CAREER: Multidimensional THz Imaging and Collaborative Research Oriented
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9984896

Award Number: 9984896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Cheville kridnix@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984896
Cheville

A research program using optoelectronically generated
              pulses for imaging
and characterization in the far infrared (FIR) spectral
              region will be
integrated into a curriculum providing research opportunities
              for
undergraduate students.  

Research Career Goals:   A technique for
              broad bandwidth imaging in the far
infrared spectral region will be developed
              based on phase coherent
detection of scattered radiation.   Applications
              include biomedical
imaging, nondestructive evaluation, and noncontact
              semiconductor
characterization.  This new approach will address spatial
              resolution,
sample limitations, and chemical content mapping.  The proposed
              technique
is based on the existing ability to generate well characterized
              pulses of
THz radiation.??  Specifically the research program
              will:

Increase the power available in a compact, reliable THz source by
              at
least two orders of magnitude through enhancement of existing
              technologies,
and collaborative work on magnetically enhanced THz
              sources.

Develop new sources including dipole antenna arrays to be
              integrated with
a programmable phase modulator to generate optically steerable
              far infrared
radiation. These array sources combined with electro-optic
              imaging systems
will generate free space electromagnetic waves with
              soliton-like properties
and applied to applications inTHz tomographic
              imaging.

Existing work utilizing a THz impulse range for direct
              scattering
measurements will be extended to measure inverse scattering using
              multiple
sources and detectors.

This proposal seeks to open an
              underutilized region of the electromagnetic
spectrum to practical engineering
              applications with profound impact across
a wide spectrum of
              disciplines.
	
Educational Career Goals:  The thesis of the educational
              component of this
proposal is that most students lack practical preparation
              for the demanding
and cross-disciplinary tasks required in research.  A unique
              photonics
curriculum, based on a model implemented by the PI on a small scale
              for
three years, will be developed in which students will be given
              practical
technical skills during the freshman or sophomore years.  This
              curriculum
will provide training in the  cross-disciplinary area of photonics
              and
specifically:

Make use of practical, hands-on research training in an
              apprenticeship
model, similar to the teaching hospital of medicine at the
              freshman and
sophomore level.  
  
Introduce students at the junior level to
              photonics research through a
problem based learning laboratory course. 
 
              
Provide independent research opportunities for senior students. 
  
Use
              effective pedagogies for education including scaffolding,
collaborative
              learning, and communities of research practice to target
under-represented
              students in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and
Technology (SMET) to
              improve retention. Particular efforts will be made to
recruit women for the
              program.
  
Be based on a structure that is easily exportable to other
              programs or
subject areas, involve the use of representatives from industry
              and
educational consultants for assessment, and provide for the
              dissemination
of the developed educational materials.
***


