Title       : CAREER: Conformational Changes in Voltage-Controlled Ion Channels Measured by
               Advanced Fluorescence Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a9984841

Award Number: 9984841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Selvin selvin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1136,1164,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project describes an interdisciplinary five-year career development plan
              involving physics, chemistry, and biology in both research and teaching.
In
              research, two complementary fluorescence techniques will be used to study
              conformational changes in ion channels-channels that are responsible for nerve
              conduction. These techniques, one of which measures distance and the other of
              which measures rotation, can be applied to many other kinds of proteins and
              channels. The first technique, lanthanide-based resonance energy transfer
              (LRET), is an improved version of an established technique called fluorescence
              resonance energy transfer. This improved resolution is achieved because the
              lanthanide can transfer energy to an organic dye by a mechanism that is
              sensitive to angstrom changes in distance between the two labels. The second
              method is a version of phosphorescence anisotropy utilizing either
              phosphorescent probes or our recently discovered polarized luminescent
              lanthanide probes. In this technique, a polarized excitation pulse selectively
              excites those probes aligned with the pulse polarization and
              polarization-sensitive detection monitors the reorientation of probes. The
              technique has the advantage that it can measure rotational motion on the
              millisecond time scale, the time-scale associated with protein rearrangements
              in ion channels. LRET will be used to measure distances between
              site-specifically placed lanthanide atoms and organic dyes as a function of
              voltage across the cell membrane and relate them to motion within the channel
              during simultaneous electrical measurements. Measuring rotation of
              appropriately placed probes by phosphorescence anisotropy can further
              characterize protein movement. Initial studies with LRET have achieved a
              milestone in the field of voltage-controlled ion channels, the first
              measurements of actual distance changes as ion channel proteins move in
              response to voltage changes. These results suggest that part of the channel
              rotates, a hypothesis that will be tested further. 
In teaching, an
              undergraduate course intended primarily for non-scientists, entitled "Science
              and the Citizen: Current controversies in science, technology and society" will
              be developed. The course will be taught in a "pro-con" format with introductory
              lectures giving students background in contemporary science issues, followed by
              readings from advocates of both sides and extensive student-centered debate and
              writing to enhance students' critical, analytical, and communication skills.
              Topics will include: the feasibility and desirability of a ballistic missile
              defense system, environmental issues such as the ozone hole and global warming,
              health issues such as pesticides in food, chemicals in the environment, genetic
              engineering, and cloning animals. 

