Title       : CAREER: Probing the High-Redshift Universe with Quasar Element Abundances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9984040

Award Number: 9984040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Hamann hamann@astro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9984040
HAMANN

Quasars (or QSOs) are bright beacons at the fringes of
              the observable universe.  The light we measure today from the most distant of
              these objects was emitted when the universe was about 17% of its present age -
              roughly 1-2 billion years old.  Spectroscopic studies show that even at these
              early times quasars contain heavy elements (or "metals"'), presumably a
              synthesized by local stars. This project is a five-year program to use quasar
              elemental abundances as tracers of star formation and galaxy evolution at early
              cosmological epochs. The enrichment time scales and physical conditions
              inferred from the abundances (such as the ages, gravitational binding energies,
              and perhaps total masses of the star-forming environments) should also help
              constrain models of the cosmology itself. Early-epoch star formation and galaxy
              evolution are among the most active research topics in astronomy today. This
              program's emphasis on the abundances near QSOs will provide a vital complement
              to other studies that probe more extended structures or use very different data
              and analysis techniques. The results will be particularly valuable for their
              unique constraints on galactic nuclear evolution. It has been shown that
              reliable abundances and important star-formation properties can be derived from
              the intrinsic emission and absorption lines in quasar spectra. This program
              will test and expand upon those results by 1) including larger QSO data samples
              - with an emphasis on the earliest epochs, 2) developing and comparing more
              independent abundance diagnostics, 3) targeting specifically the relative iron
              abundances to constrain the enrichment time scales, and 4) comparing the QSO
              results directly to other studies of high-redshift star formation and galaxy
              evolution. The same data and analyses will also necessarily address a variety
              of problems concerning the QSOs themselves.  The results of the investigations
              will allow one to address fundamental issues, such as the formation and
              evolution of QSOs, and the origin, location, dynamics and physical nature of
              their environments.

An integral part of the program is a long-range plan for
              education and public outreach. This plan includes 1) strategies for bringing
              science to K-12 students and the general public, 2) new interactive and
              "hands-on"' programs for undergraduates, and 3) a mentoring plan for graduate
              students that will prepare them for a range of career options, including
              education, industry and academic research.  The goal is to design projects for
              graduate student classes that will enhance their skills in "practical"
              applications, team management, communication and organization. Meetings with
              industry representatives will be arranged and the students will be sent out to
              local industry centers and industry representatives will be invited to visit
              the astronomy department.  A weekly series of journal club talks (for students
              and faculty) will be organized and the graduate students will go out into local
              K--12 schools to participate in a program of public outreach. This outreach
              program will benefit the K-12 students by stirring their enthusiasm for science
              and by having the graduate students be examples of positive role models. The
              undergraduate education plan includes innovative classroom techniques such as
              "concept testing," exposure to current research as part of the normal
              curriculum, and summer research projects for motivated juniors and
              seniors.

The Division of Astronomical Sciences provides support for this
              project.

***



