Title       : CAREER: Novel Wormhole Switch Architectures for High Performance with Fairness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9984161

Award Number: 9984161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harish Sethu sethu@ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Switch architectures for parallel systems have traditionally been designed for
              performance, eliminating only the worst kinds of unfairness such as starvation
              scenarios. With the increasing use of parallel systems in multi-user
              environments, however, stricter fairness is essential for reliable
              benchmarking, 
performance guarantees and protection from other users. This
              research investigates novel approaches to achieving fairness in
              high-performance wormhole 
switch architectures popular in interconnection
              networks of parallel systems. This project seeks to also have an impact on
              research in switch and router architectures for local area and wide area
              networks. The increasing use of the Internet as a commercial infrastructure
              with rising demands for differentiated services for users with widely varying
              requirements provides an additional motivation for this research.

This
              research focuses on developing novel scheduling disciplines, buffering
              strategies and routing algorithms for high performance with fairness. In
              addition, the research addresses the requirements of global fairness and
              investigates novel system-level solutions. The methodology used is based both
              on the development of analytical proofs of new hypotheses and on
              simulation-driven verification. The simulation code libraries developed as part
              of this project will serve as instructional tools in graduate and undergraduate
              courses.


