Title       : CAREER: Novel Growth of Advanced Dielectric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9984442

Award Number: 9984442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Lyman plyman@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The emphasis of this CAREER project is on improved insulating materials suitable
              for replacing silicon dioxide in conventional devices/circuits. The structure
              and electrical characteristics of new insulating films deposited by both
              conventional and the newly developed methods will be determined.  New real-time
              interrogation tools will also be developed for monitoring oxide layer growth.
              These methods stem from extracting information from the inelastically scattered
              portion of a reflected/diffracted high-energy electron beam; the inelastic
              portion of the reflected beam carries important information on the chemical
              composition and short-range order of a growing surface. Real-time access to
              that information is expected to significantly enhance control over the growth
              of complex materials like oxides, which can form with a range of
              stoichiometries and crystal structures. Combining the diffractive and
              spectroscopic information is expected to lead to a probe that is sensitive to
              the short-range order of the subset of surface atoms participating in a
              reconstruction. Interwoven with these efforts in electronic materials, the PI
              will develop a new laboratory course in Modern Electronics in which students
              will replicate a Nobel-prize-winning experiment. In addition to assimilating
              the behavior and uses of discrete electronic components, digital circuits, and
              computer interface and control techniques,  students will actively explore
              electronic materials as they re-create the first transistor. Additionally, a
              laboratory will be revitalized by the PI under the aegis of the present
              proposal. The experiments and pedagogical style of the lab accompanying
              calculus-based Electricity and Magnetism will be revised to better serve the
              educational needs of its students. Undergraduate and graduate students will
              participate in original. Non-science students will also be touched by these
              activities.  The PI will develop a seminar course to bolster positive
              representation of scientific inquiry early in students' careers. Students who
              may become future teachers will be exposed to an in-depth look at the process
              and results of science, beyond introductory physics courses.
%%%
The project
              addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
              materials science, physics, and engineering knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important aspects of electronic/photonic materials and advanced
              devices/circuits. The scope of the project will expose students to challenges
              in materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature
              of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and on the integration of
              research and education.
***

