Title       : CAREER: An Adaptive, High-Performance Software Infrastructure for Hierarchical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9984492

Award Number: 9984492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven S. Lumetta lumetta@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data hierarchies - that is, different access speeds for different areas of
              computer memory - in parallel computer architectures are becoming increasingly
              complex. Machines with several levels of memory, including cache-coherent
              non-uniform memory architectures (CC-NUMA) and clusters of workstations, now
              dominate supercomputing. In the near future, all high-performance parallel
              architectures in both science and industry will be hierarchical systems, and
              the successful development of a general-purpose approach to programming these
              machines is imperative. Unfortunately, although hierarchical systems are not
              new, the research community has not yet developed a general and comprehensive
              approach to them. Fortunately, rapidly decreasing cost of processing power and
              recent developments in dynamic compilation and runtime support may allow
              solutions to this problem that were not possible before. This project will
              build a software infrastructure that exploits those factors to deliver high
              levels of application performance on hierarchical systems. The infrastructure
              will support the advance of computational science, serve as a model for future
              commercial systems, and serve as a tool to educate and expose students to
              explicit management of parallelism and memory hierarchies. Through
              collaborations with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications it will
              also produce a wide range of high-performance scientific and non-scientific
              codes developed for hierarchical systems.

Technically, the project
              approaches the hierarchy problem with a 4-pronged attack:
-A hierarchical
              virtual machine that abstracts resource allocation and management issues
 -A
              hierarchy-aware runtime system that offers the illusion of a non-hierarchical
              system by adapting an application's communication and synchronization
              operations
-Language constructs and dynamic compiler support to tune
              application behavior to the hierarchy
-Applications that demonstrate the value
              of the framework
Parts of this approach will receive support from other
              sources as well as this award.

