Title       : CAREER: Kinematics of Stage II Fatigue Crack Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a9984633

Award Number: 9984633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298907             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro D. Peralta pperalta@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9984633
Peralta

The main research goal of this experimental program is to
              find an alternative approach to predict the kinetics of fatigue crack growth in
              one-phase metallic materials. The plastic blunting process of fatigue crack
              growth is quantified to relate the kinematics of plastic deformation at the
              crack tip to the creation of new fracture surface. The evolution of the
              displacement fields around fatigue crack tips in samples with standard
              geometries is measured by a combination of techniques: Moire Interferometry for
              the overall fields and in-situ testing in an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) for
              the near-tip behavior. The components of the strain field responsible for crack
              advance are identified and quantified as functions of the applied loads. Single
              crystals and polycrystals of one-phase metallic materials are used initially to
              avoid additional damage mechanisms that could mask the effects of plastic
              deformation on the crack growth kinetics. The effect of slip mode (wavy or
              planar) is studied by selecting materials with high, medium and low stacking
              fault energy (Al, Ni and brass). The possible effect of anisotropy produced by
              local crystallographic texture in polycrystals is studied by Orientation
              Imaging Microscopy (OIM) in collaboration with Los Alamos National Laboratory.
              The investigator has established projects with undergraduate students to
              assemble the laser interferometer, image acquisition, in-situ testing and other
              data gathering systems during his first year at ASU. The involvement of
              undergraduates in the research is a fundamental part of the educational aspect
              of this program. They will be directed to create tools that can be used to
              perform research and to demonstrate the principles of fatigue in undergraduate
              laboratories. In addition, current undergraduate labs and courses in mechanics
              of materials will be modified and new technical electives created to increase
              the exposure of the students to fatigue and fracture phenomena as well as to
              non-destructive techniques for deformation and fracture evaluation. These
              electives at the undergraduate and graduate levels will offer material derived
              from the research program as well as practical engineering applications.
              
%%%
This information is not yet available in the open literature for ductile
              materials, despite the acceptance of plastic blunting process as a fundamental
              mechanism of fatigue crack growth. The data collected will be used to find a
              connection between the crack advance and the applied loads and correlations
              with Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) will be sought.
***

