Title       : CAREER: Innovative Materials for Civil Systems Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9984127

Award Number: 9984127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Billington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award focuses on research and education integrating material
              characterization and systems analyses for Civil Systems Design. An innovative,
              polymeric fiber cement-based material, which exhibits pseudo strain hardening
              in tension, is studied for use in seismic-resistant structures. Energy
              dissipation in this engineered material is examined in its combination with
              traditional materials of concrete and post-tensioned steel.  This combination
              of materials is applied to an innovative bridge substructure system, providing
              energy dissipation and reduced residual deflections for seismic loading.
              Material characterization is conducted using advanced experimental techniques
              and nonlinear finite element simulation.  Systems analyses are performed to
              study the potential of using this advanced material in new seismic-resistant
              structures. 
Courses are developed to enhance knowledge and skills for
              material characterization and systems analysis. This coursework facilitates and
              motivates creativity in the invention and implementation of innovative
              materials for civil infrastructure needs. Students are exposed to advanced
              experimental and computer simulation tools.  Real-world projects in civil
              systems courses give exposure to complex decision processes and offer
              opportunities to implement creative solutions using innovative materials. 
	To
              promote creativity and inspire imagination, the civil engineering community
              must be a diverse population.  One approach to attract diversity is to promote
              awareness of engineering through activities for pre-college students. Hands-on
              laboratory workshops on Civil Systems Design will be developed to demonstrate
              the excitement and social relevance of modern civil systems to pre-college
              students.




