Title       : Career: Prediction and Speculation in High-Performance Memory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9984856

Award Number: 9984856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Babak Falsafi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Technological advancements in semiconductor fabrication and innovations in
              processor microarchitecture have led to an ever-increasing processor-memory
              performance gap. While cache memory hierarchies have conventionally helped
              reduce the gap, the brute-force approach to build deeper hierarchies is
              resulting in prohibitively long latencies when accessing lower levels. This
              proposal's research component advocates using prediction and speculation in the
              memory system to reduce memory latencies. The research contribution is a novel
              memory system design, Proactive Memory, in which the system "proactively" moves
              and places data among the cache hierarchy levels in anticipation of a processor
              access. The key mechanisms enabling proactive memory are predictors that
              monitor and capture processor memory access patterns and accurately predict
              subsequent accesses.  Rapid technological improvements are resulting in an
              ever-increasing complexity in computer systems.  The educational activities
              seek to prepare the students with the necessary skills to overcome the
              challenges a computer architect faces in light of these rapid technological
              improvements. Specifically, the educational component seeks to enhance computer
              architecture education by teaching students about the foundations of
              multiprocessor architectures, familiarizing them with performance evaluation
              tools for computer system design, providing them with easy-to-use software
              simulation environments, and strengthening their communication skills and
              ability to present technical work.


