Title       : Design of Hybrid Materials for Gas Separations Using Molecular Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9984621

Award Number: 9984621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : February 15,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ford D-Ford@chennov2.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal Number:  CTS-9984621
Principal Investigator:  David M.
              Ford
Institution:	Texas A&M University
Title:  Design of Hybrid Materials for
              Gas Separations Using Molecular Simulation

An emerging class of gas
              separations, where a dilute species of higher molecular weight must be removed
              from a light gas stream, is becoming increasingly important due to economic and
              environmental driving forces. Examples include the removal of volatile organic
              compounds from air and the removal of higher molecular weight alkanes from
              natural gas.   This project examines a novel hybrid membrane for such
              separations.  The membranes are mesoporous (5 nanometer) ceramics that are
              surface-derivatized with organic oligomers having desired chemical
              functionalities.  A very useful aspect of these membranes is that free volume
              and surface chemistry can be modified independently; the former quantity is
              related to how many oligomer chains are deposited, while the latter is dictated
              by the chemistry of the chosen oligomer.  Both quantities can be varied to
              obtain  optimal characteristics for a particular separation.  In addition to
              experimental synthesis and testing, molecular simulation is being used as a
              primary tool for advancing the engineering of these hybrid membranes and
              providing a means for materials design. 

Membrane processes often provide
              favorable economic alternatives to traditional gas-separation processes. 
              Process economics dictate that membranes for such separations must be selective
              for the larger, more dilute components; this type of selectivity is the
              opposite of the usual "sieving" behavior exploited in most membrane
              separations. This work explores the synthesis and evaluation of a novel type of
              membrane created by chemically modifying the surfaces of porous ceramic
              materials with organic chains.  Such  treatment creates an environment that is
              friendly to larger organic compounds and enhances their removal from the gas
              stream. Such a separation strategy is expected to yield economic and
              operational advantages in practice.


