Title       : CAREER: Characterizing Preferential Water Flow in Laboratory and Field Soils
               with Gas Tracers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9984715

Award Number: 9984715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Imhoff imhoff@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9984715  Imhoff   While pesticides, herbicides and other chemicals and nutrients
              are intended for the root zone, leaching to groundwater or nearby surface water
              often leads to environmental contamination.  It has been hypothesied that
              spatial variability in water fluxes, or preferential flow, is the cause of the
              relatively fast transport to the groundwater observed in many field soils. 
              This same process is thought to be significant in landfills as well where it
              affects the distribution of leachate and overall rates of biological
              degradation and methane gas production.  While preferential flow has been
              recognized as an important mechanism influencing contaminant transport, its
              characterization has been hampered by a lack of adequate field tools for
              quantifying this process.  The research proposed will examine the utility of
              gas phase tracers in the laboratory and in field experiments.  Preferential
              water flow will be quantified by fitting parameters to a model describing the
              transport of a nonreactive water tracer.  Independent of the water tracer test,
              gas phase tracers will be used to determine the ratio of the gas/water
              interfacial area to the volumetric water content.  It is hypothesied that the
              ratio of these parameters determined from the gas tracers can be correlated
              with fitted parameters to the model for transport of the water tracer. If
              successful, gas tracers may be used to quantify the degree of preferential flow
              faster and at less cost than current methods, thereby providing a valuable tool
              for characterizing preferential flow in field soils and of leachate in
              landfills.
The educational objectives of this project are to develop
              active-learning or student-centered teaching methods involving problem-based
              learning, undergraduate tutors, undergaduate and graduate student research and
              a web-based teaching module that will strengthen the PI's pedagogical style and
              positively influence the teaching styles of other faculty in the department. 
              Student-centered learning will be incorporated in two undergraduate courses
              over a four-year period.  Their effectiveness will be determined through
              surveys and interviews using assessment tools selected from those recommended
              by the University of Delaware Institute for Tranforming Undergraduate
              Education. In this way, quantitative data on the benefits and/or problems with
              these teaching methods in an environmental engineering curriculum can be made
              available to other faculty within the engineering community. One aspect of the
              educational plan is to involve undergraduate and graduate students in the
              process of discovery through scientific research.  Students will actively
              participate in the above research on preferential flow, a critical process that
              affects the transport of agricultural chemicals in the subsurface.  ***

