Title       : CAREER: Biofilm Formation and Biological Control in Pseudomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a9984521

Award Number: 9984521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414790             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. O'Toole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The formation of bacterial biofilms, or surface attached communities, is
              important in agricultural, industrial, and medical settings.  It has become
              increasingly clear in the past 2 decades that in most natural environments
              bacteria are found predominately attached to surfaces, such as soil particles
              or plant roots.  When found in association with plant roots, certain bacterial
              strains such as fluorescent Pseudomonads can protect plants from pathogens in
              the soil in a process known as biological control and do so in a cost-effective
              and environmentally friendly manner.  Bacteria living in the rhizosphere can
              occupy three niches: i) as a biofilm on soil (abiotic surfaces), ii) as a
              biofilm on plants (biotic surfaces), and/or iii) as planktonic (free-swimming)
              cells.  It is not known how the ability to interact with biotic and abiotic
              surfaces, and to transition between a planktonic and attached life style,
              affects protection of plants and survival of the bacteria.  These are important
              issues for effective biological control strategies.  The role of biofilm
              formation in bacterial colonization of plant roots (a process thought to
              contribute to biological control) and biological control is also not well
              understood.  Surface attachment defective (sad) mutants of Pseudomonas
              fluorescens WCS365, a biological control strain, have been isolated which are
              defective for biofilm formation on an abiotic (plastic) surface.  The goal of
              this research project is to gain a better understanding of the role of genes
              required for biofilm formation in biological control, root colonization,
              attachment to soil, and bacterial survival.  To accomplish this goal,extensive
              phenotypic characterization of the sad mutants will be carried out.  The
              mechanistic role that the product of the sad-18 gene plays in biofilm
              formation, biological control, and survival in the soil will be explored in
              detail to complement the phenotypic studies.  Finally, the conservation of
              these sad genes in other fluorescent Pseudomonads will also be addressed.  The
              long term goal of this research is to better understand how natural isolates of
              bacteria can protect plants from disease-causing organisms.  This
              bacterial-based protection of plants is known as biological control.  The
              traditional methods to protect plants from disease or damage includes the
              extensive use of pesticides, herbicides, and fungicides.  This is a quite
              expensive process (costing billion of dollars annually) and presents a very
              real threat to the environment, drinking water supplies, and the health of farm
              workers.  Therefore, developing alternative means to protect agriculturally
              important plants by using more natural or organic approaches, such as
              biological control, is a very important area of research.
