Title       : CAREER: Colloidal Sedimentation and Colloidal Clusters: Exploring New Ways for
               Making Microstructured Materials with Novel Optical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9984655

Award Number: 9984655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maarten A. Rutgers rutgers.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a CAREER experimental research project that will explore colloidal
              sedimentation and colloidal cluster formation as a basis for generating new
              materials with important optical properties, such as photonic band gaps.
              Monodisperse colloids show great promise as building blocks for tomorrow's
              photonic materials since they self assemble into crystals with lattice repeats
              that are of the order of the wavelength of visible light. Two shortcomings,
              however, are low index of refraction for currently available monodisperse
              (crystallizable) spheres and crystal structures only moderately favorable for
              photonic bandgaps. To address the first issue this project will explore
              fluidization of colloidal materials as an effective means of particle size
              segregation. The final goal of this phase of the project is to narrow the size
              distribution of high index polydisperse particles, such as Titania, so they can
              be crystallized. The other research phase of the project will seek new
              colloidal crystal structures which have large predicted photonic bandgaps.
              Current colloidal crystals are nearly all grown from particles with spherically
              symmetric interaction potentials. Small clusters of spherical particles will
              have more complex inter-cluster interaction potentials and promise new crystal
              structures with potentially larger band gaps. Techniques for monodisperse
              colloidal cluster formation and crystallization will therefore be explored. The
              educational portion of the project will involve public outreach and
              collaboration with science museums. Exhibits based on giant soap films will be
              developed and new soap film physics experiments will be developed for high
              schools and colleges. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in
              all phases of the proposed research. A graduate course on soft condensed matter
              physics will also be developed, enhancing the physics curriculum at the Ohio
              State University.
%%%
This is a CAREER project that investigates colloidal
              crystalline materials that have interesting and technologically relevant
              optical properties. Opal is a naturally occurring gemstone gemstones that is a
              colloidal crystal built up of identical microscopic sand grains. Its iridescent
              properties show the profound influence that colloid lattices can have on light
              rays. Calculations show that colloidal crystalline materials, not unlike opal
              gems, called photonic bandgap materials, can be used to bend light rays around
              very sharp curves, much sharper than can be achieved by bending a glass fiber
              optic material. Further, by altering the properties of the sand grains and
              their structure, colloidal crystals can be synthesized that will reflect, but
              not transmit,  a particular range of colors, no matter what the position of the
              light source. When such materials are used to encase optical fibers the light
              cannot leak out, no matter how tight the turns. . Unfortunately the current
              state of the art in synthesizing colloidal crystals can not produce the right
              size particles nor arrange colloid particles in the crystal structures required
              by theory. This project addresses both these issues as it proposes ways to
              isolate new colloids and from them build new colloid crystals. This research in
              soft condensed matter physics may facilitate next generation computing and
              communications technologies. The educational portion of the project will
              involve public outreach and collaboration with science museums. Exhibits based
              on giant soap films will be developed and new soap film physics experiments
              will be developed for high schools and colleges. The project also provides an
              excellent means of educating students in this relatively new branch of physics
              through museum exhibits, high school and college laboratory experiments, and an
              advanced graduate course. 


