Title       : CAREER: Translinear Adaptive Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9984625

Award Number: 9984625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley A. Minch minch@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

     Portable computer and communication systems are all around today
              and
they will only become more prevalent in the days to come.  The design
              of
such mobile electronic systems involves a number of significant
              engineering
challenges.  Because they operate from batteries, they must both
              consume
very little power and operate on a low power-supply voltage. 
              Moreover,
because they are always on the move, such systems must be able
              to
dynamically adapt their performance to an ever-changing environment. 
              This
research involves the development of a unified framework for
              systematically
designing and implementing efficient adaptive signal-processing
              systems
that consume very little power and can operate on a low
              power-supply
voltage with applications in the areas of mobile communication
              systems and
enhanced human-computer interfaces.
     The class of dynamic
              translinear circuits implements the feed-forward
signal processing functions
              needed for continuous-time linear, polynomial,
and rational-function adaptive
              filters with very few devices.  Such
circuits are capable of operating with
              low power consumption and on a low
power-supply voltage.  This research
              involves the design an implementation
of continuous-time linear and nonlinear
              adaptive filtering algorithms with
dynamic translinear circuits with
              applications in the areas of mobile
communication systems and enhanced
              human-computer interfaces.  The primary
focus of this research is on the
              efficient hardware implementation of such
adaptive filters, assessing how
              device nonidealities and noise impact
system performance and developing robust
              architectures and adaptive
algorithms.
