Title       : CAREER: Modularized Silicon-based Neuromorphic Visual Processing Systems
               Implemented in Analog VLSI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9984386

Award Number: 9984386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert H. Titus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9984386
Titus

The project presented in this proposal combines educational
              and research activities through exploration and development.

The research
              portion of the work will be formed around the field of analog VLSI systems with
              an emphasis on neuromorphic processing.  A unique approach will be taken to
              implement an integrated artificial visual system that is formed from distinct
              components that are designed to work together seamlessly.  The entire system
              will be designed to operate as an entire, functional unit, but will be designed
              as modular pieces with each piece created individually; the complexity of the
              visual system requires that it be modeled in manageable pieces.  The visual
              system will consist of the low-level processing functions performed by the
              retina, mid-level stereopsis processing, and highlevel object recognition.  The
              retina function has been implemented successfully, but modifications will he
              made to previous designs to accommodate the connections to other levels of
              processing.  An analog VLSI stereopsis processor design that has been created
              will be redesigned to fully take advantage of top-down connections from an
              object recognition-processing unit.  Finally, a unique object recognition
              system will be designed based on current psychophysical and biological models
              of object recognition that is compatible with analog VLSI.  The final system
              will be a silicon-based system that performs multiple visual functions and
              implemented on an analog VLSI platform.

The proposed research will provide
              new insights into the development of artificial visual systems through the
              concept of modularization.  This type of processing-specific analog circuit is
              compact and has very low power consumption, making it ideally suited for low
              cost, high volume, and autonomous exploration devices.  Also, this work will
              generate a set of design standards for analog VLSI, which will aid the
              mainstreaming of this technology.  Students working on the research in this
              project will gain exposure to diverse fields of science and develop new
              insights into how to model and synthesize complex systems.

The teaching
              portion of the work will be formed around increasing the use of technology in
              the classrooms, by addressing the needs of a diverse student body through
              varied teaching methods, by increasing the understanding of integration and
              system-level IC design, and by addressing the retention and recruitment
              problems at the undergraduate and graduate levels, respectively.  These
              objectives are closely linked to one common theme: improving education through
              commitment.  By developing new methods or using the variety of existing methods
              to transfer knowledge to students, students from all walks of life can find
              electrical engineering to be exciting and fulfilling.  This will be
              accomplished by continuing to experiment with group learning techniques and
              alternative forms of evaluation and assessment.

The study of analog VLSI
              systems requires an understanding of all levels of a system, from transistor
              physics to amplifier design to IC-level layout issues to board-level
              interconnections.  Students must also have an understanding of these levels and
              their relationship in order to be successful designers of the more complex
              systems of the future.  These concepts will be reinforced by highlighting
              integration and system constraints in the core electronics class, by
              introducing a new IC layout elective class and examining the introduction of
              layout tools at the freshman level.

The proposed educational plan is closely
              tied to the research plan by involving undergraduate students in the research
              projects and by involving research-oriented graduate students in the
              educational process through guided supervision.  The results from the proposed
              research will be brought to undergraduate students in the form of group
              projects, case studies for reinforcing core knowledge, and through examples in
              class.  Student portfolios will be explored as means for aiding students in
              improving their understanding of material through regular assessment by
              maintaining an up-to-date website intended for elementary and high school
              students, they will have access to the ongoing research work.  Additionally,
              student-oriented research-based project demonstrations will be developed that
              will be brought into classrooms to further engage the students as they are
              formulating their future interests.
***



