Title       : CAREER: Microbial Reductive Dechlorination Coupled with Iron Corrosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a9984669

Award Number: 9984669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pei C. Chiu pei@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9984669  Chiu  This research is designed to understand the interactions between
              anaerobic microorganisms and elemental iron in groundwater systems containing
              chlorinated solvents.  Preliminary work with elemental iron and a
              hydrogenotrophic, dechlorinating microbial culture suggests important
              implications for two groundwater remediation technologies, permeable reactive
              barriers (PRBs) and accelerated bioremediation.  While complex biogeochemical
              processes in iron PRBs can critically affect their long term performance,
              leading to premature failure, data also suggest that iron may selectively
              support microbial dechlorination while suppressing competing microorganisms and
              thus may be used to enhance the efficiency of anaerobic bioremediation.  Batch
              and long-term column experiments will be conducted using a Dover mixed culture
              and its non-methanogenic sub-culture to study (1) the effects of microbial
              colonization and dechlorination on the fate of chlorinated ethenes in iron PRBs
              and (2) the potential of using iron to enhance biological dechlorination for
              site remediation.  Head space and aqueous samples will be taken continually at
              different depths to monitor chlorinated ethenes and their daughter products,
              hydrogen, acetate, methane and pH over time.  Iron and aqueous samples from
              batch and column experiments will also be examined by confocal and electron
              microscopes and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis to characterize surface
              colonization and microbial community structures.  In addition, samples of iron
              and groundwater will be obtained from PRBs in the field and similarly examined.
              
The education plan focuses on the application of problem-based learning in
              undergraduate courses to enhance learning effectiveness through the use of
              realistic problems and by encouraging student-centered learning and teamwork. 
              Academically prepared students, especially those from underrepresented groups,
              will be recruited in this and future research projects.  Research experience
              will be replicated in the classroom by developing discovery-based teaching
              modules so that the experience can be shared by all students.  Problem-based
              learning, undergraduate research and research-based education will help
              students develop critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork and communication
              skills.  ***

