Title       : CAREER: Making Culture Visible: Using Technology to Foster Culturally Responsive
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a9984429

Award Number: 9984429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nichole D. Pinkard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary views of learning (Cole, 1996; Gardner, 1991; Perkins, 1992; Saxe,
              1991;  Wertsch, 1991) have emphasized the importance of attending to the
              interactions among learners their contexts, and tools they use to mediate their
              interactions.  However, in the transformation of these views of learning into
              classroom instructional materials and practices under the banner of
              constructivism little attention has focused on the dimensions of culture and
              context that are influenced by the experiences of ethnicity, language
              variation, or race (Lee, 1994).  Attention to these cultural dimensions are of
              central importance, particularly to learning in school contexts, considering
              the increasing diversity of students in U.S. schools and the continued
              performance gap between minority and majority.  

The research focuses on
              understanding the complex interrelationship among culture, technology,
              instruction, design and student engagement and cognitive gain.  This CAREER
              proposal seeks to provide an avenue for this exploration in the context of
              designers', teachers', and students' use of the Lyric Reading Authoring Tool
              (described below) and its products. Lyric Reader is a tool that enables
              designers to build culturally responsive beginning literacy learning
              environments that use oral text (i.e. song lyrics, playground chants) drawn
              from children's cultural capital as sources of reading
              material.

Specifically, this research will focus on the development of a
              conceptual framework of the complex interrelationship among culture,
              technology, instruction, design and student engagement and cognitive gain by
              exploring the following questions:  What are the cognitive and motivational
              benefits of using culturally responsive learning environments with emergent
              readers from diverse ethnic and language backgrounds? How can Lyric Reader, a
              software-authoring tool, scaffold designers in the construction of culturally
              responsive computer-based learning environments?  In what ways can
              accessibility to on-going assessment data about students performance in
              culturally responsive learning environments influence teachers' design of
              classroom learning supports and their perceptions and expectations of low
              achieving, low income?  

Through the exploration of these three questions,
              this research hopes to contribute to an understanding of how technology can
              support designers and teachers in drawing on the cultural capital of all
              students. 

