Title       : Introduction of Semiconductor Laser Diodes into the Undergraduate Physics
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9451178

Award Number: 9451178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15351              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Hodapp thodapp@piper.hamline.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamline University
	      Snelling & Hewitt Avenues
	      Saint Paul, MN  55104    612/641-2800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451178  Hodapp  Over the past decade, solid-state laser diodes have made
              inroads  into a wide range of commercial electronics and industrial 
              applications. These inexpensive, monochromatic, wavelength tunable,  intense
              light sources are useful not only in CD players but in a  number of
              applications including atomic spectroscopy and laser-  cooling. This project
              will explore the physics of laser diodes and  their application to atomic
              spectroscopy as well as  introduce  first-year physics students to concepts of
              laser spectroscopy and  a portion of the advanced physics curriculum. The
              project will  construct a pair of optical workstations suitable for measuring 
              characteristics of laser diodes as well as for using the light to  perform
              absorption and saturated absorption spectroscopy on atomic  rubidium. These
              experiments have been designed with an open-ended  quality to them to allow
              students to explore the physics, rather  than to just execute a standard
              cookbook type of lab. As a portion  of this laboratory, upper-division students
              will be required to  present their findings to small groups of students in
              first-year  physics laboratories. In this way students will not only learn the 
              concepts more clearly (by having to present them), but the project  will
              provide an exciting introduction to physics not traditionally  seen in the
              first-year laboratory. These upper-division  laboratories are required of all
              physics majors and constitute a  significant step forward pedagogically, as it
              requires students to  develop their own experiments (within the context of the
              lab), make  their own predictions, and truly discover their own education.
