Title       : Instrumentation for Instruction in Contemporary Analytical Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9451709

Award Number: 9451709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65547              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam P. Perone   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Pesek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Englert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451709  Perone                               The Department of Chemistry is
              acquiring instrumentation to effect  transformation of the traditional
              sophomore quantitative analysis  into a course on modern analytical science. We
              are developing a  course where the basic underlying theme is exposure to
              concepts,  problems, issues, and procedures contained in a real, operating, 
              modem analytical laboratory. The key to achieving this is to  provide
              laboratory investigations which expose lower-division  students to the broad
              range of modern analytical technology. Among  the laboratory investigations 
              crucial to accomplishing this is the  commitment to addressing organic,
              biological, and environmental  studies, instead of the traditional emphasis on
              inorganic samples.  The types of investigations include: separations science; 
              multi-element and trace analysis; and combined physical & chemical 
              characterization. Because of its prominence in contemporary  analytical
              practice, separations science receives the highest  priority. We emphasize HPLC
              because it is most consistent with the  students' laboratory experience at this
              level and because of its  relevance to subsequent courses. For the
              multi-element and trace  analysis experience we have selected two approaches:
              analytical  voltammetry and atomic absorption. Analytical voltammetry is 
              selected because it is consistent with the students' experience  with solution
              chemistry; it provides an inexpensive introduction to  multi-element trace
              analysis, (stripping voltammetry); it can be  applied to both metallic and to
              organic/biochemical analytes; and  it establishes the technique as a detection
              approach for HPLC.  Atomic absorption is selected because it provides a more
              nearly  standard commercial laboratory technique for elemental analysis; it 
              exemplifies fundamental spectroscopy principles; and it provides  broader
              applicability to elemental analytes than voltammetry.  Superimposed on
              students' experience with modem technology will be  laboratory conduc t based
              on Federal Good Laboratory Practice  guidelines.
