Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy Laboratory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1994    
File        : a9451497

Award Number: 9451497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Glaunsinger Wglaunsinger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daphna R. Yaniv  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B L. Ramakrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart M. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1046,9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451497  Glaunsinger                                               The first
              multidisciplinary scanning probe microscopy (SPM)  laboratory course for
              undergraduate students using research-grade  instrumentation will be created in
              this project. The primary goal  of this initiative is to create a unique SPM
              undergraduate  laboratory course using affordable, state-of-the-art 
              instrumentation for scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic  force
              microscopy (AFM).  This ILI-LLD project is a significant  first step in
              bringing this very important new technique to the  undergraduate curriculum by
              chemists who are doing cutting edge  research in the area. The course is
              designed to serve as a magnet  to bring together students from different
              disciplines and ethnic  backgrounds and to help prepare them for the imminent
              revolution in  nano-science engineering and technology. The course will 
              incorporate the following key features: (i) Fundamental Principles  to provide
              students with a working knowledge of STM and AFM, (ii)  Core Laboratory
              Experiments to illustrate important applications of  STM and AFM, (iii)
              Laboratory Projects to give students the  opportunity to perform short-term
              research investigations of their  choice, and (iv) Cooperative Learning
              Activities to allow students  to learn from each other. The primary products of
              this project will  be a model multidisciplinary laboratory as well as a
              laboratory  manual documenting all of the tested and refined experiments. The 
              laboratory experiments will also be available as separate units to  maximize
              the impact on existing laboratory courses in the  undergraduate science and
              engineering curriculum. This project will  involve expert faculty from the
              Departments of  Chemistry/Biochemistry, Physics/Astronomy, Geology, Biology 
              Chemical/Bio/Materials Engineering and Electrical Engineering. The  course will
              complement many of the existing undergraduate courses  and laboratories in the
              above disciplines, provide highly qualified  students for undergra duate
              research projects, and strengthen  special programs such as the
              federally-sponsored Interdisciplinary  Undergraduate Program in Materials
              Synthesis and Processing and the  Coalition to Increase Minority Degrees. The
              multidisciplinary SPM  laboratory course will have a positive impact on the
              quality of  science and engineering education at the university, local, 
              regional and national levels.
