Title       : Computational Chemistry in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9451383

Award Number: 9451383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37457              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey r. Bocarsly BOCARSLY@UCONNVM.UCONN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cecil N. Hurley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Challa V. Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bertrand L. Chamberland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451383  Bocarsly                             An undergraduate laboratory for
              computational chemistry is being  established.  This laboratory and the
              accompanying computational  exercises are designed to interface with laboratory
              courses at each  level of the undergraduate curriculum, including general, 
              inorganic, organic and physical chemistry.  Each of the  computational
              exercises concerns aspects of compounds which are the  subject of experimental
              studies in the course curricula.  Thus, in  each case, students are either
              synthesizing and/or performing  physical studies on the same materials which
              are the subjects of  their computations.  The intention behind this approach is
              twofold.   First, each exercise provides the student with a demonstration of 
              the power of computational techniques in chemistry.  In addition,  the use of a
              combination of methods (experimental and  computational) to study a given
              molecular system illustrates for  students that science often progresses by
              focusing a broad variety  of techniques on a single problem.  The computer
              laboratory is structured as follows: two graphics  workstations with large
              computational capacity are networked to ten  Macintosh and ten personal
              computers.  The small systems serve as  terminals for the workstations. 
              Students construct their molecular  models at the small computer systems and
              submit their calculations  to one of the workstations.  This structure makes
              the software  capacity and the computational power of the workstations
              available  to all users.  Both Macintosh and personal computers are available 
              so that educational software written for either of these platforms  can be
              incorporated.
