Title       : Increasing Geohydrology/Geochemistry Input into Science Curricula Through
               Integrated Field/Laboratory Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9451560

Award Number: 9451560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Videtich videticp@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin C. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman W. TenBrink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johnine L. Callahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451560  Videtich  A long-term project is investigating hydrologic and chemical 
              changes that occur in ground water, wetlands, and ponds as a new  golf course
              on the campus evolves from a newly-seeded to a  well-established course.  This
              project involves students taking  geohydrology, geochemistry, field methods, 
              sedimentation-stratigraphy, geomorphology, and glacial geology  courses. 
              Students in each class perform an appropriate part of the  project.  Microbial
              degradation of selected pesticides is studied  by students in microbiology, who
              benefit directly from the project.   The data set is used in other science
              courses as a local example of  an environmental assessment project in progress.
              Geology, biology,  chemistry, health sciences and natural resources management 
              students are encouraged to take part in the project through  independent
              research projects.  The primary goal of the project is  to enhance earth
              science programs through providing a "hands on"  and applied science
              experience.  At the same time, the project  creates an interdisciplinary bridge
              between the sciences.  In  addition, the project (1) involves students in an
              environmental  study located on their campus, (2) enables them to help assure
              that  the university golf course will not adversely affect the  environment,
              and (3) provides valuable data to the scientific  community and the public on
              the evolution of the geohydrology and  geochemistry of ground and surface water
              associated with the aging  of a golf course.  The equipment purchased (e.g.,
              hole digger,  water sampling systems, piezometer, water analysis kits, and
              field  computer) also enhances the overall equipment holdings of the  geology
              department and thereby benefits geology students involved  in other projects.
