Title       : Science and the Future: Integrating Molecular Biology into a Classical
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9451943

Award Number: 9451943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15797              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. White mwhite@selu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian I. Crother  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Bounds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeastern Louisiana U
	      100 West Dakota
	      Hammond, LA  704012512    504/549-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451943  White  Molecular biology is one of the fastest growing fields in modern
               biology. Recombinant DNA technology has provided revolutionary  insight into a
              vast array of studies ranging from evolutionary  biology to medicine.
              Understanding the concepts of molecular  biology is a requisite for
              understanding current research in many  disciplines of biology and
              biochemistry. It is also critical for an  understanding of a variety of issues
              that will become more and more  important for students growing up in a world
              increasingly affected  by biotechnology. Courses at Southeastern Louisiana
              University  include discussions of molecular aspects of genetics, cell biology,
               embryology, microbiology and biochemistry. Unfortunately practical  experience
              in these subjects has been limited by lack of equipment.    We propose
              establishing a teaching laboratory to provide students  with opportunities to
              gain hands-on experience in molecular biology  as relates to a variety of
              disciplines in biology and biochemistry.  Students will gain experience with
              techniques such as isolation and  analysis of nucleic acids and proteins, DNA
              sequencing, DNA  fingerprinting and others. These techniques will be presented
              where  appropriate in established lab courses including embryology,  genetics,
              biochemistry, microbiology, and virology. Practical lab  experience will
              reinforce concepts taught in the lecture portion of  these courses.    Exposure
              to theories and techniques of molecular biology offers an  important advantage
              to students. This field has among the best  prospects for employment in the
              biological sciences. Students with  a practical knowledge of molecular biology
              will be at an advantage  when applying for advanced degree programs or seeking
              jobs in  industry.
