Title       : Integration of FT-NMR Instrument in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9451761

Award Number: 9451761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Eliason Eliason@MSUS1.MSUS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest State University
	      
	      Marshall, MN  56258    507/537-7100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451761  Eliason  The acquisition of an FT-NMR spectrometer will significantly 
              improve the chemistry curriculum. The new instrument will give  the students
              the hands-on ability to record their own spectra  which is pedagogically
              superior to book instruction alone, and a  hands-on experience has always been
              an important objective for  our department. A goal of this proposal is to
              introduce basic 1H,  13C, DEPT, 1H- 1H COSY and 1H-13C COSY techniques early in
              the  sophomore organic chemistry course. This will assist in  restructuring the
              laboratory curriculum of the second and third  years to provide experiments
              that engage all students in a  research oriented experience. Laboratory
              students will be  organized into research like teams. The team will be given an
               experiment, will discuss experimental design and procedures, will  collect and
              review data, and will draw conclusions and design new  experiments as
              necessary. Unlike other programs in which the  laboratory curriculum is a pure
              research project, our plan is to  provide a mixture of standard and open ended
              experiments. Our  goal is to provide a research type atmosphere while at the
              same  time providing an environment in which the student experiences  tangible
              success thereby providing the excitement of discovery to  attract students into
              our undergraduate research program.    The laboratory curriculum of organic,
              biophysical, biochemistry  and physical chemistry will be heavily impacted by
              this proposal.  The effectiveness of teaching of the basic theory of 1H NMR
              will  be aided with the use of 1H- 1H COSY as a teaching tool. The  power of
              1-D and 2-D NMR techniques to solve structural problems  will be shown both in
              organic qualitative analysis and in  biochemistry.    Concurrent with our
              efforts to revise our basic laboratory  curriculum we propose to formalize the
              involvement of students in  a structured research program. Instead of a single
              faculty member  working with a single student, project teams consisting of two
              or  more faculty  will be formed to develop cross discipline projects.  A
              special effort to recruit dual biology/chemistry major  students, who have
              tended not to be involved in research, will be  made to increase their
              participation.
