Title       : An Enhanced Laboratory Experience: An Integrated Approach toUndergraduate
               Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9451853

Award Number: 9451853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbra L. Gabriel gabrielbl@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice Wolla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Special laboratory equipment has been obtained for use in JMU's  newly formed
              College of Integrated Science and Technology. The  focus is on the freshman and
              sophomore years where engaging  students in the excitement of science is
              particularly important. A  special effort is being expended to attract more
              women and  minorities into science and science teaching careers.  The project 
              addresses the need to develop laboratory facilities in direct  support of the
              curriculum.  This is being done with an innovative  instructional approach that
              combines hands-on exercises with  specially prepared instructional technology
              units. The approach  promises better instructional quality, accommodates a wide
              range of  student preparation, reduces the need for large multiple station 
              labs, and insures the creation of an integrated laboratory  experience that can
              be adapted and used in other institutions.  Fewer student stations are
              required, because state-of-the-art  instructional technology is used to produce
              demonstrations that are  photo-recorded for interactive learning. A multimedia
              authoring  system is used to develop learning modules that familiarizes the 
              student with the experiment, the procedure, and the  instrumentation. The
              result not only enriches the laboratory  experience, but it also prepares the
              student to perform the  experiment without constant faculty supervision.
              Products of the  authoring system will be in the form of CD ROMs, video tapes, 
              interactive software packages, and/or presentation packages. The  authored
              experiments may also be disseminated to other schools and  for distance
              learning. The interdisciplinary nature of the program  is accomplished through
              a series of laboratory experiments in  environmental science, biology, modern
              physics, lasers and optics,  and automation.
