Title       : Leadership Projects in Laboratory Development: A Bioprocessing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9451339

Award Number: 9451339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. McDonald kamcdonald@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda F. Bisson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas L. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 7419,9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Educational programs in bioprocess engineering that emphasize 
              cross-disciplinary interactions between scientists and engineers  and a
              multidisciplinary team approach to problem-solving, are  urgently required. The
              implementation of these programs is  difficult, however, because few models
              exist on which to base the  development of such curricula.  This ILI-LLD
              project will create a  bioprocessing laboratory which addresses two key
              problems in the  current education of bioprocess engineers: the lack of
              interaction  between engineers and students in the life sciences and the lack
              of  hands-on laboratory experience with industrially-relevant  bioprocessing
              equipment.  This project will develop a  multidisciplinary bioprocessing
              laboratory that utilizes  interactive multimedia computer training modules and
              involves  industrial participation in the design, implementation and  valuation
              phases of the laboratory. Six laboratory experiments and  three multimedia
              modules will be developed.  The multidisciplinary  environment will require
              students to develop the ability to  communicate with colleagues from the
              biological sciences and will  be facilitated by interactive multimedia which
              will be used to help  bridge the information gap between engineering and the
              biological  sciences.  Finally, industrial participation will insure that the 
              laboratory trains undergraduates to meet the needs of the  bioprocessing
              industry.  Industrial representatives will attend end  of the quarter oral
              presentations by the laboratory groups, and  will review the final products of
              the LLD project: detailed  descriptions of the experiments and the multimedia
              modules.
