Title       : A Computing Laboratory for Multivariable Calculus and a Mathematics
               Concentration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9451834

Award Number: 9451834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Hendrick dhendrick@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Yuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Valente  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451834  Hendrick  The Colgate Department of Mathematics proposes to create a
              computing laboratory for use in multi  variable calculus and a variety of
              upper-division courses including linear algebra and differential  equations,
              numerical analysis, mathematical modeling, and probability and statistics. This
              laboratory will  be equipped with computers capable of running the program
              Mathematica. A unique element of this  laboratory will be the services it
              provides to users outside the laboratory. By using Colgate's fiber-optic 
              ethernet network, every student with a personal computer will be able to access
              the laboratory and  Mathematica from any location on campus.    The multi
              variable calculus course is the linchpin for this project, because it is
              required of all majors and  because, as the last general course taken before
              entering the mathematics concentration, it heavily  influences which students
              choose to major in mathematics. We intend to develop Mathematica notebooks  for
              this course that emphasize visualization and exploration. These notebooks will
              be assigned as weekly  projects. Similar notebooks have already been created
              for some of our other upper-division courses.    To equip the laboratory, we
              are requesting 18 computers in all. Seventeen personal computers capable  of
              running the NeXTStep operating system and Mathematica are requested, 15 for the
              laboratory and two  for classroom use. To support network users of Mathematica,
              we are also requesting one powerful  workstation computer. One overhead display
              panel is requested for classroom demonstrations.
