Title       : Computer-Based Technology in the Life Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9451679

Award Number: 9451679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim Haresign   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451679  Haresign  There are two major, interrelated objectives of this
              proposal: 1)  To introduce and familiarize students to computer-based
              technology  in the life sciences, and 2) To use this technology to improve 
              laboratory instruction in three specific courses: Bioacoustics will  be an
              introductory level course in which students will make field  and laboratory
              recordings of acoustically active animals.  The  recordings will be digitized
              and analyzed in the time and frequency  domains using custom-written software. 
              Again, using custom  software, students will be able to manipulate specific
              parameters  of the sound, play the altered sounds back to the animals and so 
              determine the behavioral relevance of specific acoustic parameters.   Students
              will learn techniques and methods of science mainly  through hands-on
              experience.  In Physiology, an intermediate level  course, students will use
              the equipment to study such diverse  physiological phenomena as: extracellular
              multiunit activity,  properties of skeletal muscle, mechanical and electrical
              activity  of the heart, blood pressure and pulse rate, and neural responses  to
              visual stimulation.  Using the computers, students will not only  acquire data,
              but will also analyze and display it in ways not  available for data obtained
              with polygraphs or oscilloscopes.   Experimental Neuroscience is an intensive
              laboratory course for  upper level students.  Laboratory exercises will
              demonstrate a  number of neurophysiological concepts (electroreception, signal 
              transduction and mechanoreceptor activity, muscle spindle  properties, central
              visual processing) and techniques (single and  multiple unit extracellular
              recording, level discrimination, raster  displays, detailed analysis of
              extracellular spike activity).   Students taking these courses will show
              improved computer literacy  and an increased understanding of the concepts
              presented in lab  exercises.
