Title       : A Parallel Computer System for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9451499

Award Number: 9451499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21702              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed E. Barbour barbour@gsu.cs.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chong-wei Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451499  Barbour                                                   This proposal
              investigates the construction of a Parallel and  Distributed Processing
              Laboratory to support new courses on  parallel processing in our undergraduate
              curriculum. The lab will  also be used as a test bed for student experiments
              including class  projects, parallel programming assignments and undergraduate 
              research projects. These projects will include, but will not be  limited to,
              designing and testing of parallel algorithms, measuring  performance of
              parallel algorithms, designing and implementing  distributed programs, setting
              N-way dynamic connection on LANs, and  implementing remote procedure call
              packages. Students will gain  practical experience in parallel programming,
              network system  programming for distributed applications, and application 
              development for neural networks, pattern recognition, and fuzzy  logic control
              systems.  The proposed parallel computer system will  consist of four SUN
              workstations (already in place), a parallel  CNAPS computer and a SUN Sparc
              Station. The SUN Sparc Station will  act as a front end for the CNAPS computer
              and as a server for the  four SUN workstations. This parallel and distributed
              system will be  connected to the department's existing LAN via a gateway which
              will  allow students to develop projects without interfering with the 
              operation of the LAN.  Due to the increasing importance of 
              parallel/distributed computations and computer networks, the  proposed
              laboratory will better prepare students for both  professional and academic
              careers. The lab will enhance the senior  year and the minority summer research
              programs supported by the  College of Arts and Sciences at Georgia Southern
              University. We  expect that the Physics and Biology Departments as well as the 
              Engineering studies and Engineering technology programs will also  benefit from
              this project.
