Title       : Multi-Disciplinary Incorporation of Scanning Electron Microscopy into the
               Undergraduate Biological and Physical Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9451235

Award Number: 9451235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather A. Owen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Dawson  (Principal Investigator former)
              John T. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wei-Ping Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah W. Kuehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Harper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Groves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Major departments in the College of Science and Technology at  Western Kentucky
              University continue their efforts to  strengthen the undergraduate degree
              programs in the sciences.  A working knowledge of electron microscopy is an
              essential  component of the undergraduate curriculum, the most plausible 
              avenue for exposure is through scanning electron microscopy  (SEM). This grant
              requests funds to purchase an SEM,  specifically the JSM-5400 low-vacuum (LV)
              SEM by JEOL,  equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer 
              (EDS/X-ray). This instrumentation is ideal for the academic  setting because it
              allows for traditional high-resolution  imaging of "fixed" samples or
              on-the-spot observation of  nontreated, noncoated, (even hydrated) samples. The
              LV/EDS  X-ray configuration will satisfy both the implicit time  restraints of
              laboratory instruction and the more stringent  requirements for
              multidisciplinary utilization. The primary  goals are: (1) to train
              undergraduate students in biology,  chemistry, geology, and physics in the use
              and application of  SEM and EDS X-ray microanalysis, (2) to develop new 
              laboratory exercises for several courses, including Cell and  Developmental
              Biology, Ecology, Geomorphology, Sedimentology,  Polymer Chemistry, Solid State
              Physics, and (3) to extend the  breath of investigative possibilities for
              undergraduate  student/faculty research.
