Title       : Molecular Genetic Techniques of Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9451047

Award Number: 9451047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Moore pmoore@music.transy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Transylvania University
	      300 North Broadway
	      Lexington, KY  405081797    606/233-8120

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451047  Moore  The objective of this proposal is to equip a teaching laboratory
               for a state-of-the-art molecular genetics techniques course.  Molecular
              genetics is becoming an increasingly important tool in  most areas of
              biological research. It is critical that students  have access to knowledge of
              molecular genetics and practical  experience in molecular genetic techniques.
              This course is  designed to introduce the students to the theory and basic 
              biological principles underlying molecular genetic techniques.  Students will
              also be exposed to a variety of research programs  and job opportunities in
              areas utilizing molecular genetic  techniques. In addition, students will gain
              practical experience  in a variety of up-to-date molecular genetic techniques.
              The  laboratory component of the course will focus on a single  organism,
              Dictyostelium discoideum, in order to give the students  the opportunity to
              gain some in-depth knowledge about the  biological system on which the
              experiments are being carried out  and to analyze the data they collect in a
              meaningful way. In  addition to the laboratory experiments, the students will
              learn  how to access and use computer molecular genetics data bases.  Exposure
              to computers in the laboratory is essential as computers  become an integral
              part of biological research. In addition to  the material and techniques
              learned during the course, increased  exposure to molecular genetics and other
              laboratory techniques,  along with the availability of modern laboratory
              equipment, will  encourage students to participate in independent research
              either  with the faculty at Transylvania University or at other research 
              institutions. Major instruments requested include equipment  necessary for
              submarine agarose gel electrophoresis,  polyacrylimide gel electrophoresis, 2
              DNA sequencing gel  electrophoresis systems, a thermocycler, and 4
              microcomputers  with appropriate software and accessories.
