Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy Laboratory Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9451480

Award Number: 9451480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Glaunsinger Wglaunsinger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart M. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451480  Glaunsinger  The first multidisciplinary scanning probe microscopy
              (SPM)  laboratory for undergraduate students using research-grade 
              instrumentation will be created in this project. The primary goal  of this
              initiative is to create a unique SPM undergraduate  laboratory using
              affordable, state-of-the-art instrumentation for  scanning tunneling microscopy
              (STM) and atomic force microscopy  (AFM). The proposed laboratory is designed
              to serve as a magnet to  bring together students from different disciplines and
              ethnic  backgrounds to help prepare them for the imminent revolution in 
              nano-science, engineering and technology. The proposed laboratory  will be
              built around research-grade instruments that are capable of  operating in both
              STM and AFM modes at nanoscale resolution under  ambient conditions, in vitro
              and in situ under electrochemical  control. The multidisciplinary SPM
              laboratory will be completely  equipped with (i) sample and probe preparation
              equipment, (ii) four  SPM workstations, (iii) post-acquisition data processing
              equipment,  and (iv) testing equipment. This project will involve expert 
              faculty from the Department of Chemistry/Biochemistry,  Physics/Astronomy,
              Geology, Biology, Chemical/Bio/Materials  Engineering and Electrical
              Engineering. The proposed laboratory  will serve a new multidisciplinary SPM
              laboratory course,  complement many of the existing undergraduate courses and 
              laboratories in the above disciplines, provide highly qualified  students for
              undergraduate research projects, and strengthen  special programs such as the
              federally funded Interdisciplinary  Undergraduate Program in Materials
              Synthesis and Processing and the  Coalition to Increase Minority Degrees. The
              proposed  multidisciplinary SPM laboratory will have a positive impact on the 
              quality of science and engineering education at the university,  local,
              regional and national levels.
