Title       : Discovery-Oriented Multidisciplinary Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9451210

Award Number: 9451210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen K. Shieh shieh@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob M. Abel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Lepore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451210  Shieh  A discovery-oriented multidisciplinary engineering laboratory 
              course entitled: Discovery-Oriented Multidisciplinary Engineering  Laboratory
              is being developed in this project. The  course  serves  two main purposes.
              First, it will be offered at the freshman level  as a means to retain the
              students currently in the engineering  program and encourage the transfer of
              non-engineering students who  are seeking scientific and technical literacy
              into the engineering  program. Second, it will be offered to minority high
              school  students and primary, middle and high school science teachers as a 
              major vehicle to increase the presence of minority in engineering  professions
              and recruit top high school students to engineering  schools.  Unlike
              traditional laboratory courses offered at the  freshman level, this course is
              not designed to have students  performing experiments for the sole purpose of
              proving theories  which may be irrelevant to their engineering studies.
              Instead, the  course  encourages students to gain hand-on experience by having 
              them  assemble laboratory apparatus and design the experiments,  utilize the
              experimental data to "discover" the underlying  principles/ theories, and
              eventually establish realistic links  between practice and theory. The proposed
              experimental focus areas  are  of a multidisciplinary nature, having practical
              relevancy, and  crossing traditional departmental boundaries.  The 
              equipment/instrumentation is adequate for accommodating up to 20  students in
              the class. Results and experience obtained from the  development and
              implementation of this course will be disseminated  through the NSF- sponsored
              Gateway Coalition,  conference/seminar/workshop presentations, and
              journal/newsletter  publications.
