Title       : Integrated, Interactive Learning Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9451870

Award Number: 9451870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23723              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Cartwright dcartwri@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451870  Cartwright  The use of modeling for the description of physical,
              natural and  societal systems is already well established. The increasing power
               of computers has allowed the "sophistication" of these models to  change such
              that students can now perform calculations on models of  a complexity not
              possible for students of a generation ago. These  changes have made it
              increasingly important that students learn to  assess the assumptions, validity
              and value of the models they use  and it is important that the content and
              approach to current  teaching reflects these changes. Furthermore the
              confidence to  challenge and examine modeling assumptions and an awareness of
              the  relationship between the model and the real system needs to be  developed
              during the student's formative years at university. A new  course "Exploring
              Engineering (EG100)", given to all freshman  engineers in their first semester,
              and which is open to students in  the college of Arts and Sciences, provides a
              unique opportunity to  do this for large number of students. This can be
              further developed  in the second semester in "Engineering Mechanics I (EG220)".
              To do  this effectively with freshman level students requires a different 
              approach to that used in the traditional laboratory or classroom  situation.
              The advent of fast accurate personal computers  supporting engineering analysis
              software enables this different  approach. This project will develop an
              Integrated, Interactive  Learning Laboratory (IILL) using a Macintosh platform
              running the  LabView and Working Model software. This combination will be 
              central to the IILL and will provide for a simple, adaptable and  self-paced
              approach suited to a variety of learning styles.  Integration of the model
              system and the real system will be  achieved by having students use either
              LabView or Working Model to  carry out "what if" experiments on the model, to
              gain understanding  of, and assess, modeling assumptions, and then have them
              make  experimental measurements for immed iate comparison with the model.  The
              purpose of this will be to provide students with the  opportunity to examine,
              simultaneously, the important connections  and differences between real systems
              and the models that are made  of these systems.
