Title       : MULTI-Lab: Multimedia and User Interface Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9451851

Award Number: 9451851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie E. Kaufman ari@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy J. Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prateek Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhard Schloss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451851  Kaufman  User interfaces and multimedia technologies will be of
              critical  importance in computer applications for the nineties and beyond. 
              Facilities for training undergraduates in these areas are limited,  both at
              Stony Brook and elsewhere. Training requires collaboration  between computer
              scientists and psychologists, as well as  specialized computer systems that
              support images, sound, video, and  advanced I/O devices. The Departments of
              Computer Science and  Psychology at Stony Brook have recently been awarded an
              NSF  Educational Infrastructure grant to develop an innovative, 
              interdisciplinary curriculum in the design and implementation  aspects of
              computer-human interaction and multimedia.  The  curriculum consists of nine
              courses: User Interface Development,  Human Information Processing, Computer
              Graphics, Computer-Supported  Cooperative Work, Visualization, Multimedia,
              Human Factors in  Interface Design, and two Senior Design courses.  We are
              creating an undergraduate multimedia user-interface lab, the  MULTI-Lab, which
              enables the implementation of the curriculum with  over 150 undergraduates
              every semester.  The MULTI-Lab is paramount  to the success of our curriculum. 
              Every participating student has  hands-on experience in the design,
              prototyping, and evaluation of  a variety of user interfaces and multimedia
              systems.  The MULTI-Lab  is a data-, audio-, and video-networked heterogeneous
              laboratory of  multimedia Macintoshes, with a few PCs and Sun Unix
              workstations,  along with a selection of I/O devices and multi-media
              peripherals.   The instructional material for the curriculum is multimedia 
              courseware and software that will be disseminated widely as a set  of CD-ROMs
              and monographs in a series called "Stony Brook  Curriculum in Computer-Human
              Interaction."
