Title       : Real World Problems Solved Collaboratively by Diverse Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9451675

Award Number: 9451675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie R. Ellis jellis@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451675  Ellis                                                   Calls for
              improvements in engineering education stem from troubles  that surface in the
              capstone design project and in students' early  experiences in the work world.
              Though students have extensive  experience in solving textbook problems that
              have been set out for  them, they often report difficulty in solving
              engineering problems  in real-world situation they confront. This project
              provides  students multiple opportunities to integrate different areas of 
              electrical engineering while working in teams to solve technical  problems in
              their community.  This project affects students at each  level of the
              curriculum: students in the first semester of the  capstone design project will
              take on the role of project managers;  students in at least three other
              classes--electronics or  electromechanics, circuits and digital logic take on
              the role of  designers. The project managers craft separate assignments for
              each  of the three other classes. This corresponds to a project manager 
              dividing a large project among several different departments, each  with its
              own area of expertise. These assignments are used as  laboratory projects for
              the classes involved, and the students who  successfully complete their
              projects can work on integrating the  entire system into a single solution to
              the real-world problem. The  project has support from 100% of the electrical
              engineering  faculty.  The requested equipment will be dedicated to projects 
              that span the curriculum both in subject area and in level of  sophistication.
              Four work-stations equipped with computers and  instrumentation will be
              provided to students working  collaboratively on real-world projects from
              various sectors of the  community: local education, industry, individuals
              requiring  assistive technology, and the university itself. Special-purpose 
              equipment to be shared by the teams is also included.
