Title       : Development of an Interactive Digital Image Database for Teaching Undergraduate
               Earth Science Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9451635

Award Number: 9451635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32309              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen S. Mattioli   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela E. Jansma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451635  Mattioli                                                       An
              interactive, point-and-click, digital image database is being  developed to act
              as a complementary tool to the petrographic  microscope in four core courses in
              Geology:  Introductory  Laboratory, Optical Mineralogy, Igneous/Metamorphic,
              and  Sedimentary Petrology.  The database links digital images of hand 
              specimens and thin sections with relevant observations from other  techniques,
              models of physical and chemical processes, and tectonic  setting.  A student
              using the database as a self-study guide  becomes empowered by determining the
              agenda for his or her learning  session within the context of a specific
              course, and thus is an  active problem-solver and not a passive recipient of
              information.   At the center of the database metastructure is the "Image 
              Database."  It consists of a set of digital images of hand  specimens and thin
              sections for each of the minerals and rocks,  which now form the teaching
              collection used in the 4 core  laboratories.  Every image in the Image Database
              is multiply linked  and selectable from a dialog box offering the following
              options:   1) other images of hand specimens of related rock types; 2) other 
              examples of the same mineral in different rocks; and 3) additional  images of
              photomicrographs of other primary mineralogical  constituents of a rock.  Links
              are recursive, i.e. once a mineral  is selected from option (3), the user can
              explore all the images  linked to it, and in turn all their mineralogical
              constituents.   Text, such as brief descriptions of terms normally used to
              describe  the selected mineral or rock, tabulated chemical data, and  graphics,
              including mineral structures or rock classification  diagrams, also are linked
              to the images.  Introduction of the image  database of rocks and minerals
              organized around a conceptual  framework based on Earth System Science and
              plate tectonics  improves our teaching effectiveness by allowing students
              greater  control in the learning  process.  Increased computer literacy among 
              our students is an additional benefit.
