Title       : Fostering Creativity, Teamwork and Scientific Thinking in the Introductory
               Biology Laboratory: A Computer-Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9451880

Award Number: 9451880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Dawley RDAWLEY@ACAD.URSINUS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean L. Scholz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Kneizys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ursinus College
	      Office of the Treasurer
	      Collegeville, PA  19426    215/489-4111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451880  Dawley  Computer will be used in creating introductory biology
              laboratories  that foster scientific thinking among students by encouraging 
              creativity, communication, and teamwork.  As important as it is to  give
              introductory students an experimental, instrument-rich  laboratory experience,
              this experience will be empty if it  emphasizes cookbook technique at the
              expense of scientific  creativity. Here we propose using computers specifically
              to nurture  scientific creativity in our students by giving them flexibility in
               experimental design, encouraging teamwork, and making it possible  for them to
              communicate with a wide circle of their peers.  These  laboratories will foster
              creativity by requiring student teams of  four to design experiments in
              multi-week, open-ended exercises.  Each team will have its own laboratory bench
              equipped with a  Macintosh computer linked to a local area network and to the 
              Internet. Computers will be used to give students a wider range of  options in
              creating their experimental designs and to increase  their flexibility in
              asking the question "What if we try it this  way?" The software we propose
              using is sufficiently versatile and  general that it encourages students to
              explore different  experimental approaches without dictating a particular
              design.  Ideas, initially developed within student teams, will be exchanged 
              among teams using the local network and computer-based oral  presentations.
