Title       : Enhancing the UCSB Physics Learning Center for Teaching Non-science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9451071

Award Number: 9451071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Sherwin Sherwin@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Lubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Freedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rollin J. Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451071  Sherwin                              The Physics Learning Center (PLC)
              at the University of California,  Santa Barbara is a facility in the physics
              building that functions  as an interactive science museum. We propose to equip
              the PLC as a  site for holding microcomputer-based laboratory sessions, or 
              "discovery sessions," for the introductory physics course for  non-science
              majors. This course, which has heretofore had no  laboratory component, will be
              restructured to emphasize the  applications and utility of physics. The
              "discovery sessions" are  intended both to increase the general scientific
              literacy of  non-science majors and to give them an understanding of the 
              scientific process. Students in the "discovery sessions" will  collect and
              analyze time-series data using the Universal Lab  Interface (ULI), and video
              data using camcorders and the VideoLab  software for digitized video. New, fast
              microcomputers will be  acquired for this purpose. Multiple setups of several
              selected  apparati will be obtained for use in the "discovery sessions," as 
              will single copies of certain apparati, such as a fast  oscilloscope, which are
              suitable for a variety of different uses.  The apparatus and microcomputers
              added to the PLC under this  proposal will also be used by students in other
              lower- and  upper-division physics courses for individual exploration and for 
              carrying out computer-based homework assignments. In addition, the 
              microcomputers will be used by astronomy students for exercises in 
              astronomical image processing. All apparatus will be available to  local K-12
              educators through outreach programs. The UCSB College of  Letters and Science
              has made a commitment to provide funds to match  the NSF contribution to this
              proposal. The Department of Physics  has pledged release time from teaching for
              Dr. Sherwin for the 1994  Fall quarter, and will provide a teaching assistant
              to help in the  development of materials.
