Title       : US-Mozambique Program Development: Exploring Opportunities for Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9912463

Award Number: 9912463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27789              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Schoneboom jschoneb@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alphonse Bigirimana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 5928,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              INT-9912463

The Africa Program of the American Association for the
              Advancement of Science (AAAS) has organized a forum on "Science in Mozambique:
              Exploring Opportunities for Collaboration," to be held during the AAAS Annual
              Meeting in Washington, D.C., in February 2000.  Support is being provided for
              six Mozambican researchers to participate in this forum, as well as in the rest
              of the Annual Meeting.  They will give presentations on the state of Mozambican
              science in such diverse fields as agronomy, forestry, marine biology,
              archeology, anthropology, physics, and botany, to be followed by an interactive
              discussion with audience members on collaborative research opportunities. 
              Additionally, one Mozambican delegate will give a presentation at the Symposium
              on Ethnobotany/Bioprospecting, and another delegate will participate in the
              Roundtable on Large Marine Ecosystems in Africa.  The target audience will
              include researchers, US policymakers, and representatives of donor funding
              agencies.  The Mozambican participants are: Dr. Lidia Brito, Vice Rector for
              Academic Affairs at the University of Eduardo Mondlane (UEM); Dr. Antonio
              Hoguane, Coordinator of the Chair of Marine Sciences and Oceanography, UEM; Mr.
              Salomao Bandeira, Head of the Botany Section in the Department of Biological
              Sciences, UEM; Ms. Zelia Menete, Faculty of Agronomy and Forest Engineering,
              UEM; Dr. Paula Meneses, Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, UEM; and
              Mr. Augusto Cabral, Director of the Museum of Natural History.

The
              Mozambican delegation will also give a similar presentation at the
              Africa-America Institute's National Summit on Africa, which is also meeting in
              Washington, D.C., at the same time.  Additionally, the Mozambican researchers
              will independently meet with US researchers and government officials, and donor
              organization representatives or other relevant individuals, to explore specific
              collaborative opportunities in their fields of expertise.

Mozambique's
              recovery from a prolonged period of armed conflict (which ended in 1992) is
              enabling its researchers to explore opportunities for intellectual exchange and
              scientific collaboration with other nations.  A large country (approximately
              498,000 square miles), it contains varied geographical regions, experiences
              many different climatic conditions, and has a rich diversity of plant and
              animal species and ecosystems, many of which have not been studied by US
              researchers.  UEM has an excellent scientific faculty and some of the finest
              research facilities in Subsaharan Africa, and is Mozambique's premier research
              institution.  The recently rehabilitated and reopened Museum of Natural History
              has research collections that include specimens of more than one million
              insects, as well as specimens for 400 bird species.  These collections can
              provide researchers with important historical information on the biodiversity
              of many of Mozambique's insect and animal populations.  This visit will enable
              the Mozambican researchers to interact with a wide audience of US researchers
              and professionals for the purposes of drawing attention to the research
              opportunities that are available in Mozambique, and stimulating interest in the
              development of collaborative projects.


