Title       : REU: The Seneca Village Project: Developing an Archeological Research Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9912273

Award Number: 9912273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53035              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Wall ddizw@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nan A. Rothschild  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1391,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, undergraduates will participate in one phase of the
              archaeological study of Seneca Village, a 19th-Century African-American and
              Irish immigrant community located in today's Central Park.  The project will
              consist of three parts.  The first will include historical research with the
              goal of identifying the various buildings that made up the village and the
              various people who lived and worked in them, as well as the locations and
              extent of the Village's three cemeteries.  The second part will involve working
              with a geophysicist and geophysical equipment to ascertain whether or not
              archaeological remains of the village survive intact in the ground and, if so,
              to identify the people with whom they were associated by means of the
              historical data.  The third part will involve integrating both the historical
              and geophysical data to construct a research design addressing questions
              related to the construction of class and race in mid-19th -century New York. 
              The students will be selected from the colleges that belong to the New York
              City Archaeological Consortium, i.e., the colleges of the City University,
              Columbia University, and New York University.  In addition to learning the
              fundamentals of historical research and geophysical remote sensing techniques,
              the students will learn how to use the data that they will have gathered from
              two very different kinds of sources in generating a research design.  These
              problem-solving skills will help to equip them for graduate study and encourage
              them to consider it seriously.
