Title       : Design for Safety of Complex Structural Systems: Crashworthiness and
               Survivability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9912520

Award Number: 9912520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250741             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro R. Diaz diaz@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop a computer-based methodology for design
              and optimization of complex structural systems for safety, enhanced
              crash-worthiness, and survivability in the event of a crash.  Special emphasis
              is placed on the evolution and optimization of the design, from the initial,
              conceptual stages, to later stages of detailed design. The computer-based model
              will allow the assessment and optimization of the performance of a structural
              system across different stages of the design process, including conceptual
              stages, and stages where different components are represented in different
              levels of design detail.   A wavelet-based multi-scale analysis will provide
              the mathematical framework that allows the mapping of models of the same system
              across different levels of resolution.   Algorithms will accommodate a
              reasonably rich subset of the component models already in use in industrial
              practice, for example, commercially available finite element models. 
              Optimization algorithms will be developed to deal with some of the peculiar
              features of structural design for safety problems such as a large number of
              design variables, non-smooth functions, and computationally very costly
              function evaluations.

The most obvious applications of this work will be in
              automotive and aircraft industries. If successful this work will lead to
              improvements in the design of vehicles for enhanced passenger and cargo
              protection. The methods and tools developed under this grant will provide
              engineers with a better understanding of the process of energy management in
              the event of a crash and with new computer models and algorithms to facilitate
              the process of designing structures where a livable volume is provided for the
              occupants throughout a crash sequence.
