Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Characterization of Alkaloid Biosynthetic Genes
               in Nicotiana Tabacum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9912099

Award Number: 9912099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26450              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Jelesko jelesko@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9912099
Jelesko

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Professor John Jelesko of Virginia Polytechnic Institute in
              Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Masaki Furuya of the Hitachi Advanced Research
              Laboratory in Saitama, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of
              the characterization of alkaloid biosynthetic genes in Nicotiana Tabacum. 
              Tropane alkaloids are important secondary plant metabolites involved in plant
              chemical ecology.  Despite the importance of plant alkaloids little is known
              about the molecular biology of alkaloid biosynthetic genes or their regulation.
               The goal of this research project is to use an advanced transcription
              profiling method, called Fluorescent Differential Display (FDD), to identify
              and isolate tropane alkaloid biosynthetic genes in Nicotiana Tabacum (tobacco).
               The researchers will perform several large-scale FDD screens to identify
              alkaloid biosynthetic genes in tobacco.  They will attempt to identify genes
              that are differentially expressed between a wild type tobacco accession and
              mutant tobacco accessions that have defined double and single mutations that
              greatly reduce tropane alkaloid levels.  By utilizing specific root culture
              conditions and defined mutations in near isogenic backgrounds they will
              identify differentially expressed genes specifically involved in alkaloid
              biosynthesis.  This approach overcomes the difficulties inherent with
              traditional biochemical and genetic methods in Nicotiana species.  

The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities.  The research should provide important
              information on alkaloid biosynthesis in plants, which should then result in
              potential applications in plant biotechnology.  The research will also be of
              interest to the pharmaceutical industries.  The project advances international
              human resources through the participation of a postdoc and a graduate student. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in international
              scientific journals and will also be presented at scientific meetings in the
              U.S. and abroad.

