Title       : Electrical Charging of Nanoparticles by Ions and Free Electrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9912538

Award Number: 9912538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Y.H. Pui   (Principal Investigator current)
              Da-Ren Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal Title:		Electrical Charging of Nanoparticles by Ions and
              Free						Electrons
Proposal Number:		CTS-9912538
Principal
              Investigator:	David Pui
Institution:		University of Minnesota

The objective
              of this project is to experimentally and theoretically investigate the charging
              of nanoparticles by ions and free electrons.  Electric charging of
              nanoparticles is presently only partially understood, and the results of this
              project would be of immediate interest in materials science and health science.
               In materials science applications to semiconductor manufacturing can be
              envisioned.  In health science the control of airborne particulates could be of
              significant benefit.  A fundamental study will be performed to investigate the
              transition and free-molecule charging theories.  The study will provide
              information on the maximum charging efficiency that can be achieved by ion and
              free electron charging.  An improved unpopular charge distributions involving
              singly and doubly charged particles, which will be a more sensitive test of
              charging theories than the traditional fraction-of-charge measurements.  The
              new charger has potential applications in many fields including classification
              of nanoparticles, materials science, and microelectronics.  Numerical solutions
              for the Boltzmann Collision Equation will be obtained.  Experimental and
              theoretical challenges arise because the particle size and the mean free path
              of gas molecules are of the same order of magnitude under normal operating
              conditions.  The numerical results will be validated with the experimental
              results obtained with the new charger.  If successful, this work will have
              potential applications in areas such as materials synthesis, organic coatings,
              fuel-cell catalysis, and drug delivery.

