Title       : The Role of Race in Punishing Criminal Violence: Jury Sentencing in Capital
               Cases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a9912101

Award Number: 9912101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249592             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Bowers cjbill@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marla Sandys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin D. Fleury-Steiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This study builds upon recently developed findings of stark differences in the
              decision-making patterns of black and white jurors from the Capital Jury
              Project (CJP), a national study of some 1136 jurors from 332 capital trials in
              14 states. The CJP investigators found that jury racial composition and race of
              individual jurors have an impact on sentencing decision processes and on
              outcomes. The data show that juries with black members, especially black males,
              are less likely than all-white juries to impose a death sentence, and that this
              tendency is most prominent in black-defendant/white-victim (B/W) cases. The
              data also indicate that black and white jurors differ in decision-making
              patterns and in what they regard as important in arriving at their sentencing
              decisions.

Through a case-focused examination of the role of race, gender,
              and social class in making capital sentencing decisions, this three-year study
              provides empirically-grounded evidence on: (1) How members of different social
              groups serving as jurors view crimes of lethal violence, their victims, and
              their perpetrators, and (2) How these views affect the capital sentencing
              decision.   Using data from black and white jurors who have served as members
              of the same juries, the research compares and contrasts thinking about the
              crime, the defendant, and the victim, thus incorporating the realities of
              making hard decisions in actual cases.

This investigation entails sampling
              of 54 capital trials in which both white and African American jurors were
              sworn. Eighteen trials will be chosen to represent each of the three principal
              offender/victim racial combinations: white on white (W/W), black on white
              (B/W), and black on black (B/B) killings. Interviews will be sought with six
              jurors in each case, and black jurors will be oversampled to achieve a minimum
              of at least 30 African American jurors from cases within each offender victim
              racial combination. For rapport and candor in these sensitive interviews, the
              project employs same race interviewers--both African-American and white
              interviewers working together on each case. Attorney interviews and sentencing
              trial transcripts are used to indicate the character of the evidence and
              arguments to which jurors were exposed, and to yield other data for comparison
              and statistical control.

	

