Title       : Collaborative Research: SOFeX: Mesoscale Iron fertilization Effects on Plankton
               Community Structure, Phytoplankton Growth and Zooplankton Grazing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9912230

Award Number: 9912230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Landry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Bidigare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Southern Ocean is a critical region for understanding the role of the oceans
              in global carbon cycling and its potential to regulate climate change. Besides
              being an area of high influx of atmospheric carbon and deep water formation,
              the persistently high concentrations of major nutrients in Antarctic
              circumpolar waters represent the largest pool of unrealized primary production
              potential in the oceans. This project is part of a larger effort to test the
              hypothesis that iron availability limits phytoplankton production and biomass
              accumulation, nutrient utilization and C02drawdown in the Southern Ocean.  
              Drs. Landry, Chisholm and Bidigare, will contribute by investigating the
              effects of iron enrichment and silicate availability on the species composition
              and size structure of the plankton community and taxon-specific growth rates
              and fluorescence responses of the phytoplankton. Functional and taxonomic
              components of the plankton community from bacteria to mesozooplankton will be
              quantified by a combination of flow cytometry, taxon-specific pigments, video
              image-analysis microscopy and optical plankton counting. In addition, they will
              use dilution and gut fluorescence techniques to determine micro- and
              mesozooplankton contributions to grazing and to evaluate grazing as an
              alternate control mechanism preventing significant net growth of some or all of
              the phytoplankton populations. The research will bring a community perspective
              to the interpretation of these in situ fertilization experiments which is
              essential for a mechanistic understanding of the biological and geochemical
              responses.
