Title       : Research Needs Workshop on the Izmit, Turkey Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9912145

Award Number: 9912145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. Tubbesing skt@eeri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earthquake Eng Res Inst
	      499 14th St Suite 320
	      Oakland, CA  946121928    /   -

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
The Izmit, Turkey earthquake has resulted in significant loss of life,
              injuries to thousands, destruction of thousands of buildings and subsequent
              displacement of hundreds of thousands of people.  Lifeline systems have been
              damaged, causing disruption to infrastructure service delivery systems.  This
              earthquake holds many lessons for the U.S., and there is much to gain from
              studying the event.  The Anatolian Fault system is very similar to the San
              Andreas and Hayward systems in the San Francisco Bay area, and an earthquake of
              similar magnitude striking there would result in many of the same
              challenges.

This award is to support a workshop activity to be coordinated
              by the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI).  Through this
              workshop, the U.S. research community will be able to establish ties to
              counterparts in the scientific, engineering, planning, and policy communities
              in Turkey, and develop a plan to capture the lessons before perishable data are
              lost.  EERI has coordinated field visits to Turkey during August and September
              1999, and early field reports point to dramatic geologic and geotechnical
              impacts including surface faulting and dramatic ground displacement and
              subsidence.  Structural engineers report on the poor performance of thousands
              of non-ductile concrete buildings, and the media has widely reported on the
              numerous challenges to emergency response that have developed.

This workshop
              will be convened to develop an integrated agenda of collaborative research and
              database resources, identifying topics that show the greatest promise for
              access and to advance the state of knowledge and practice in the U.S.
