Title       : An Algorithmic Evaluation of Optical Interconnection Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9912395

Award Number: 9912395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sartaj K. Sahni sahni@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanguthevar Rajasekaran  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel architectures based on the optical interconnect technology are becoming
              more and more popular as reflected by the numerous optical computers that have
              been proposed in recent years.  Optical computers have been shown to possess
              superior interconnect properties compared to their electrical counterparts.
              These architectures offer the potential of building affordable machines
              operating at extremely high speeds.

The development of algorithms for the
              proposed optical architectures is complicated by the fact that some models
              support pipelined data transfer, other models have a heterogeneous interconnect
              topology, and yet other models use an asymmetric topology.  Although algorithms
              have been designed for some of these models, this development is in its
              infancy.  The developed algorithms are mainly for a limited set of fundamental
              problems, and even this level of development has been done for only a few of
              the proposed architectures.  Further, the developed algorithms assume that the
              size of the architecture is a function of the problem size.  This assumption is
              clearly invalid in practice.  Typically, the problem size will be much larger
              than the size of the architecture.  An important question is if the optical
              architecture algorithms that have been developed so far are scalable.  That is,
              can they be efficiently extended to solve problems whose size is considerably
              larger than the machine size.  In this project the base of known efficient
              algorithms for optical architectures will be significantly expanded.  Special
              attention will be paid to scalable algorithms.  A cross-architecture
              performance study from the algorithms point of view will be performed.  This
              study will be conducted in the domains of fundamental data operations and image
              processing.  Scalability study has been conducted in the past by various
              researchers on models such as the PRAM, meshes with buses, and so on.  But
              little has been done for the optical models.  Also, many of the past works (for
              example, on meshes with buses) have studied the scalability issue by simulating
              a machine of one size on a machine of different size.  Such studies are
              restricted in their applicability.  In this project the general scalability
              issue will be investigated and hence the scalability of algorithms will be
              explored directly.  In particular, the following question will be addressed: 
              As the size of the input increases arbitrarily, how do the speedup and
              efficiency of the algorithm under concern change?

The problem domains of
              interest are fundamental data operations such as sorting, routing, selection,
              etc. and image processing operations such as clustering, template matching,
              histogram, FFT, etc.  These operations have been chosen since they span a
              number of application domains.  At least three optical architectures, namely,
              Arrays with Reconfigurable Optical Buses (AROBs), Optical Transpose
              Interconnection Systems (OTISs), and Partitionable Optical Passive Star (POPS)
              computers, will be considered.  The algorithms and algorithmic techniques to be
              developed in this project can be expected to be applicable to other
              architectures as well.

