Title       : Collaborative Research: Tree Ring Based Records of Temperature and Glacier
               Fluctuation Spanning the Past Two Millennia, Prince William Sound, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9912124

Award Number: 9912124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56626              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Barclay barclayd@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this research is to develop a continuous tree-ring
              chronology spanning the past 2000-years from living and subfossil wood around
              Prince William Sound, southern Alaska. This chronology will provide an annually
              resolved record of North Pacific climate for the past two-millennia. In
              addition, development of the long tree-ring record will involve cross-dating of
              trees killed by advances of Columbia and other glaciers around Prince William
              Sound; interpretation of the dates of tree germination and death on these
              glacier forefields will enable glacier fluctuations in the region to be
              reconstructed with decadal precision.

Subfossil logs will be sampled at five
              localities in eastern, northern and western Prince William Sound. Four of these
              sites have previously been studied during earlier investigations and provide
              tree-ring records spanning cal. AD 100 to 700 and AD 873 to 1991. Further
              sampling will increase sample size and hence chronology signals quality in
              these existing collections, and also reduce the gap in record between AD 700
              and 873. The fifth site at Columbia Glacier has been intensively studied in
              regard to dynamics of the iceberg-calving glacier system, but lacks a detailed
              record of prehistoric fluctuations. Preliminary collections suggest the
              tree-ring samples to be found at Columbia are of the correct age and length to
              completely bridge the gap in the existing tree-ring records and so allow
              completion of a continuous tree-ring-series spanning the past two
              millennia.

The 2000-year ring-width chronology will be the longest
              continuous tree-ring-series in North America from north of the Great Lakes to
              date. The annually resolved climate record will compliment other such
              multi-millennia length records being developed elsewhere in the world and be of
              use in global analyses of natural climate variability. The development of
              calendar-dated glacial histories extending back before AD 1000 will be the
              first time this has been achieved anywhere. These records of land-terminating
              glacial fluctuations will provide an integrated proxy record of past
              temperature and precipitation changes to compliment the tree-ring record. The
              reconstruction of fluctuations of Columbia Glacier will include timing and
              rates of advances, and allow evaluation of climatic versus non-climatic forcing
              of this tidewater-calving glacier system.

