Title       : Decentralized Control and Computation of Large Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9912045

Award Number: 9912045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragoslav Siljak dsiljak@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aleksandar I. Zecevic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rapidly increasing demand for power in the newly formed competitive environment
              of open access transmission can dramatically magnify the undesirable
              consequences of contingencies, and alter the way we look at system security
              requirements.  This concern presents a number of challenges to the computation
              and control of large power systems.  An important problem in this context is
              the development of new algorithms that will speed up the computation of control
              parameters and the simulation of transient phenomena through the use of
              parallel computing.  In order to achieve this objective, it is necessary to
              develop powerful decomposition schemes which can properly identify dominant
              subsystems and their interconnections.

Epsilon decomposition was developed
              as a flexible universal algorithm with linear complexity that can identify
              weakly coupled subsystems.  This decomposition was successfully used to
              identify coherent groups of generators in transient stability studies, as well
              as to enhance the parallelization of load flow calculations.  An important goal
              of the proposed research will be to develop new variants of epsilon
              decomposition for a variety of numerical and control applications.  We will
              focus on transient stability analysis by waveform relaxation and parallel
              solutions of large sparse Riccari equations.

In parallelizing transient
              stability simulation, we propose to apply multilevel epsilon decomposition to
              the Jacobian of the discretized differential-algebraic equations that describe
              the machine dynamics.  The resulting partitioning will then be used to
              optimally combine Gauss-Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel waveform relaxation. 
              Particular attention will be devoted to scheduling schemes, which establish the
              order in which subsystems should be processed, and determine which groups of
              variables can be updated simultaneously.

The parallel solution of large,
              spare Riccati equations requires a different type of decomposition, one which
              will simultaneously partition the state and input matrices.  In this context,
              we propose to utilize epsilon decomposition as a preconditioner for the
              iterative solution of the Riccati equation, in conjunction with Krylov subspace
              techniques.  We will also develop optimal schemes for interprocessor
              communication, which is a prerequisite for efficient parallel computation.

