Title       : Trophic Controls on the Life Cycle of Pfiesteria piscicida and the Second Known
               Toxic Pfiesteria-like Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9912089

Award Number: 9912089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn M. Burkholder joann burkholder@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard B. Glasgow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recently, the potential for subtle but serious chronic/sublethal impacts from
              dino-flagellates known as the toxic Pfiesteria complex on fish health as well
              as human health was realized during toxic outbreaks in several tributaries of
              the largest estuary on the U.S. mainland, Chesapeake Bay.  Much more massive
              fish kills and epizootics by Pfiesteria also had occurred in the second largest
              estuary, the Albemarle-Pamlico, for nearly a decade before the Chesapeake
              outbreaks.  In the proposed research we will continue to examine trophic
              controls on the complex life cycles of Pfiesteria piscicida, and will extend
              similar effort to characterize the life cycle of a second toxic Pfiesteria-like
              species (not yet formally named) that recently was identified from the Neuse
              and Pocomoke Estuaries in the Albemarle-Pamlico Estuarine Ecosystem and
              Chesapeake Bay, respectively.  Using advanced video imaging and motion analysis
              software, we will obtain full photographic documentation of the stage
              transformations in the complex life cycle of the two species of fish
              ambush-predators, through manipulation of available prey (algae, bacteria,
              shellfish, finfish, mammalian tissues) and through alteration of environmental
              conditions (e.g., sudden temperature and salinity shock).  This research will
              greatly improve recognition of Pfiesteria in field samples from fish
              kills/epizootics, and will also enhance general understanding of trophic
              controls on stage transformations and abundance of both known species in the
              toxic Pfiesteria complex.
