Title       : Dissertation: Formative Subsistence Economy in the Tuxtla Region of Southern
               Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9912271

Award Number: 9912271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9826               (Estimated)
Investigator: Clara M. Scarry Margie_Scarry@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Margaret Scarry, MS Amber VanDerwarker will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her work is to understand the
              processes which led to the rise of Olmec civilization on the Gulf coast of
              Mexico. The earliest Olmec sites date to ca. 1,400 BC and because they are so
              early, have been the focus of considerable archaeological attention. The Olmec
              are best known for the massive, multi-ton stone heads which they carved from
              basalt boulders and then transported to major sites. As the earliest known
              civilization in Middle America, they provided the general base on which Mayan
              and other cultures were based. While a great deal is now known about major
              Olmec sites, it is clear that they were situated in a broader social and
              geographic context and than many Olmec people were broadly distributed across
              hinterland regions. Very little archaeological work has been conducted in these
              areas. It is not understood how large regional centers developed and whether
              enough food could be produced locally to support such population aggregations.
              Some archaeologists have postulated a trade system which exchanged agricultural
              produce from outlying areas for specialist produced "urban" goods and have
              speculated that transactions of this type facilitated the further development
              of a ranked socially stratified society. However very little is known about the
              subsistence and agricultural practices in hinterland areas.

MS VanDerwarker
              will analyze faunal and flora remains recovered from two sites - La Joya and
              Bezuapan - both located in the Tuxtla Mountains in southern Veracruz, Mexico.
              Taken together they span the period which saw the Olmec rise. She will identify
              the range of plant and animal foods present, determine the relative frequency
              of each and examine how these changed over time. Data will reveal the extent to
              which inhabitants depended on hunted and gathered, as opposed to agricultural
              foods, whether all were produced locally or some obtained through trade, and
              whether locally grown foods were bulk processed for transport. She will also
              collect samples of human bone for isotopic analysis which can reveal the
              importance of maize and animal protein in the diet.

This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will shed important light on the rise of the first
              civilization in Middle America and will assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

