Title       : US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement: From Pattern to Process in Land Use Change:
               Land Reform and Agricultural Intensification in Meru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9912067

Award Number: 9912067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9020               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Campbell djc@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Smucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0314000   Rural Development                       
Program Ref : 5928,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9912067

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate student,
              Mr. Thomas Smucker, working under the guidance of Professor David Campbell, of
              the Department of Geography at Michigan State University, to conduct a study of
              the importance of land tenure security to agricultural intensification in Meru,
              Kenya.  

Many parts of rural Africa are undergoing rapid political,
              environmental, and economic changes which are affecting land ownership and
              usage patterns.  Land titling tends to occur first in the relatively wetter
              margins of semi-arid lands, which pushes subsistence production systems into
              increasingly marginal lands.  The intersections of these various dimensions of
              marginality create opportunities--and barriers--for agricultural
              intensification, and they also provide a framework for analyzing current
              patterns of land use change.  In Kenya, initial expansion of cash crop
              production began in Meru before governmental land demarcation.  Land titling
              further accelerated the integration of most of the highlands of Meru into a
              monetary economy.  As a result of population growth and the resulting pressure
              on highland resources, landless or land-poor farmers have begun a downslope
              migration into the semi-arid lands of Meru, where they are in competition with
              the local Tharaku-Meru inhabitants. Using a political ecology framework, which
              views human-environment interactions as structured by power relations in
              society, Mr. Smucker will explore the current phase of land titling in Meru,
              its impact on the broader land tenure security system, and its implications for
              investment in landscape capital to support agricultural intensification.  The
              study will be conducted at three lower midland sites representing various
              stages of land titling.  Project results are expected to show the relationship
              between patterns of agricultural intensification and the complex social
              processes which underlie the emergence of contemporary patterns of land use
              change.  Dr. Robin Reid, at Kenya's International Livestock Research Institute,
              and Dr. Edna Wangui, of the Department of Geography at Kenyatta University,
              will provide guidance on this project to Mr. Smucker.

The results are
              expected to increase the current knowledge about the social driving forces of
              land use change, and will be of value to geographers, conservationists, and
              policy makers.  This project will also support an international research
              experience very early in the career of an outstanding graduate student.  This
              project is being jointly funded by the Division of International Programs and
              the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences.

