Title       : Dissertation: The Structure of Ritual Practice: An Ethnoarchaeological
               Investigation of Community Ritual Activity Areas in the Maya Highlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9912134

Award Number: 9912134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10472              (Estimated)
Investigator: Payson Sheets sheetsp@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Payson Sheets, MS Linda Brown will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct ethnographic research among Mayan
              speaking peoples in the highland Guatemalan village of Santiago Atitlan and
              record information on local level, rural religious practices as well as the
              material byproducts of these. She will then use this information to interpret
              archaeological materials and gain insight into prehistoric Mayan ritual.
              Ethnographers who work in Middle American has distinguished between "Great" and
              "Little" religious traditions. The "Great Tradition" refers to large scale
              state sponsored religion which after Spanish settlement became Catholicism. The
              "Little Tradition" consists of deeply rooted locally based traditional
              practices which involve, among other things, feasting, ritual intoxication,
              shrines and burial practices. These serve to forge community unity and provide
              a set of principles which help to order local life. Because these practices
              were recorded by early Spanish observers and were widespread in the Mayan
              region, they likely are of considerable antiquity and most probably played an
              important role in prehistoric social organization. While archaeologists have
              directed great attention to the excavation of monumental temples and gained
              considerable insight into the prehistoric Great Tradition, its smaller
              counterpart is poorly understood. The goal of MS Brown's research is to remedy
              this situation. Because it is unclear what  the archaeological signatures of a
              Little Tradition might be, MS Brown will begin in the ethnographic present and
              study such practices in a traditional Mayan village. She will interview
              practitioners and observe the potential material signatures which rituals
              produce. She will map their spatial placement on the landscape and conduct
              controlled excavations at recent sites to determine how they are incorporated
              into the archaeological record. With this information she will then analyze
              materials from two structures at the prehistoric Mayan site of Ceren. Buried in
              a catastrophic volcanic eruption, Ceren provides unparalleled insight into
              prehistoric Mayan life. Researchers believe that several areas within the site
              were foci of Small Tradition ritual but it has been difficult to determine how
              such an hypothesis might be tested.

This research is important for several
              reasons. Archaeologists wish to understand the bases of prehistoric Mayan
              social organization which allowed the development of this civilization and MS
              Brown's work is directly relevant to this goal. The ethnographic data she
              collects will be potentially valuable in the interpretation of many Mayan
              sites. This award will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

