Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2002       
File        : a9912220

Award Number: 9912220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leemor Joshua-Tor leemor@cshl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hengartner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


ABSTRACT          Michael Hengartner         Proposal # DBI -
              9912220



To encourage the development of young scientists in the field of
              biology, the Undergraduate Research Program at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              has, since 1959, annually sponsored between ten to twenty-five undergraduates
              from throughout the United States for an intensive ten-week long summer
              research experience.  The students are housed on grounds and each one is
              assigned to a permanent Laboratory staff member to perform an independent
              research project in the mentor's fieldof expertise. Each  student begins his or
              her project with the advisor's close guidance and is subsequently encouraged to
              work independently. This allows students to develop to their full potential and
              to sample first hand the excitement of experimental science.  During the
              program the students present two series of seminars, one in which the students
              describe their proposed research and a final series in which the results of
              each project are summarized.  There is also a series of seminars by Laboratory
              staff specifically for the undergraduates in addition to daily lectures given
              as part of the Laboratory series of post-graduate biology courses.  This
              undergraduate research program is very oversubscribed and, therefore, focuses
              its selection on individuals who, with proper direction, are likely to make a
              contribution to science in their ensuing careers.  Strong emphasis is placed on
              recruiting underrepresented minorities to encourage them to pursue scientific
              careers.  The success of the program is evidenced by the number of past
              participants who have become eminent scientists.


