Title       : The Design, Analysis and Application of Approximation Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9912422

Award Number: 9912422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270805             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Shmoys shmoys@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal-9912422
PI:  David Shmoys

Most combinatorial optimization problems
              that arise in applications from scheduling, logistics, and network design, for
              example, are NP-hard, and hence unlikely to have a polynomial-time algorithm
              that finds an optimal solution. This project is focused on the study of
              approximation algorithms for these problems, where the aim is to design
              effective algorithms that are guaranteed to produce near-optimal solutions, and
              typically produce solutions of extremely high quality.
This project aims to
              further develop the three major techniques that have emerged as consistently
              producing superior results: rounding techniques based on mathematical
              programming relaxations, primal-dual methods, and local search methods.
              Although there has been significant progress, there are many problems for which
              the current state of knowledge is not sufficient. This project is devoted to
              the investigation of several problems in this area.
The primary focus of this
              work is to investigate algorithms that produce solutions guaranteed to be
              nearly-optimal by relying on information contained in the optimal solution to a
              linear programming relaxation.  One consequence of such results would be to
              provide a theoretical justification for the strength of the bounds given by
              these linear programming relaxations.  By giving algorithms for which one can
              prove that the solution found has value relatively close to the LP bound, one
              also shows that relative error of the solution (compared to the integer
              optimum) is also small.  Furthermore, past experience has shown that the
              insight needed to devise algorithms with such performance guarantees can also
              lead to algorithms with superior empirical performance.
This work focuses on
              several specific areas to attempt to design approximation algorithms with good
              performance guarantees and good practical performance. 
Facility location,
              clustering problems, and scheduling problems arise in a number of application
              settings, including computational biology and project resource management, and
              this project considers a number of basic models, with the aim of developing
              algorithmic techniques that are not particularly application specific.
For
              several basic problems including the k-median problem, the uncapacitated
              facility location problem, the bin-packing problem, and the problem of
              scheduling jobs on parallel machines subject to precedence constraints, the aim
              of this work is to design algorithms with superior performance than was known
              previously.
Polyhedral methods are the foremost techniques used to find
              optimal solutions to hard discrete optimization problems.  These methods
              require the solution of a series of linear programming relaxations. Heuristic
              methods that rely on linear programming can be easily integrated into this
              approach, with the aim of speeding up these methods, since they can take
              advantage of the work already done is solving these linear programs.  This work
              also studies the efficacy of such heuristics in enhancing the polyhedral
              methods to solving (to optimality) these problems.
