Title       : SGER: Universities as Sites of Democratic Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9912517

Award Number: 9912517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Teune   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This pilot study of 15 American colleges and universities in the Fall of 1999
              and early Spring of 2000 is a survey of institutional practices and
              dispositions toward democracy.  It parallels a similar study to be conducted by
              the Committee of Higher Education and Research of the Council of Europe across
              a range of countries and regions of stability and conflict.  The second stage
              of the research begins in late Spring of 2000 and involves random samples of
              about 125 university or college settings in both Europe and the United States. 
              Unless the reserarch begins this Fall, it is not possible for the United States
              to be a partner engaged in the design of this research.

	The immediate goal
              of this comparative study is to map what is being done by universities as
              institutions, as well as their activities as social and political nodes in
              their localities, that might affect democratic political development among
              their students, their community, region, and country.

The focus of the data
              and information gathered are colleges and universities as socializaing
              institutions for democratic values and competencies.  The two kinds of data
              are:  (1) interviews with informants within the university (students, faculty,
              and administrators) and community leaders (government, education, media, civic
              associatoins, and business), and (2) an inventory of accessible data from each
              instituttion and localty.  Each selected university site has one researcher who
              conducts about 45 interviews.  The questionnaire format includes both categoric
              ratings and open questions probing  for university policies and actions.  The
              questions are evaluated for constructing cross-nationally viable scales in the
              second stage of the research.

	The criterion to be used  for selecting sites
              is variation, covering private and public, large and small institutions, urban
              and rural settings, and states and regions.  In Europe, in addition to
              selection across regions, areas of conflict in Northern Ireland and the Balkans
              are targeted.

	The budget allocates most of the money to researchers in the
              colleges and universities selected and to a training workshop of those
              researchers in Philadephia.  The Council of Europe intends an amount greater
              than this in addition to funds for analysis.

	If successful, the large-scale
              study of samples of colleges and univerisities in Europe and the United States
              will be launched, with the official title, Universities as Sites of Citizenship
              and Civic Responsibility.  This is under the auspices of an Internaitonal
              Consortium composed of members from the Council of Europe Committee on Higher
              Education and Research and, in the United States, the American Association for
              Higher Education, Association of American Colleges and Universities, American
              Council on Education, and Campus Compact.  There is a three-person coordinating
              committee of the Consortium to adminster the research.  The research is part of
              the Council of Europe's program, Education for Democratic Citizenship. 

