Title       : Collaborative Research: Summer Workshops in Theoretical Economics (July - August
               2000, 2001, and 2002 in Palo Alto, California)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a9912108

Award Number: 9912108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225510             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Douglas Bernheim bernheim@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Judd  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas J. Sargent  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides renewed support for the annual Summer Workshops on Economic
              Theory conducted each summer by the Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics
              (SITE). This six-week collection of workshops brings together prominent
              scholars as well as younger economists for presentation and discussion of their
              current research. This workshop series has just completed its 30th year and
              continues to serve as an international forum for the study of innovative topics
              in economic theory, mathematical economics, and related areas. The topics
              covered in SITE programs and the content of the sessions offer valuable and
              unique opportunities for economists to come together. Some topics, such as
              general equilibrium, microeconomic theory, and game theory, are long-term
              interests of SITE.  However, the topics of SITE sessions have evolved, just as
              economic theory and mathematical economics have evolved in economics generally.
              Accordingly, sessions based on newer topics, such as empirical work based on
              theoretical models, computational methods, strategic interactions, theoretical
              public finance, and theoretical macroeconomics, represent new directions that
              SITE has taken in recent years and expects to continue in future years. The
              more applied sessions at SITE, such as computation and theory-based
              econometrics, focus on the relation to economic theory and mathematical
              techniques. The macroeconomics sessions are also more focussed on the
              theoretical and mathematical aspects of those topics than the typical
              macroeconomic conference.
