Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Query Languages for XML with Multimedia
               Presentations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9912229

Award Number: 9912229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gultekin Ozsoyoglu tekin@eecs.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5940,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9912229
Ozsoyoglu 

Description:  This project supports a cooperative project
              by the Professor Gultekin Ozsoyoglu, Department of Electrical Engineering and
              Computer Science research at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), Cleveland,
              Ohio and Dr. Ozgur Ulusoy, Department of Computer Engineering and Information
              Science, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.  They plan to investigate query
              languages for XML, the Extensible Markup Language which is proposed as a
              standard web Markup language by the World Wide Web Consortium.  The research
              has two goals: to study ways of storing XML documents into databases, and
              querying such databases; and to extend XML with multimedia presentations, and
              investigate XML-embedded multimedia presentation storage, delivery, and
              querying.  XML specifications do not yet incorporate content-based multimedia
              data modeling within XML documents.  In addition, present semistructured data
              manipulation languages and data models do not yet deal with multimedia, much
              less with presentations and synchronization issues in XML documents in the web.
               This research will model content-based multimedia data as well as multimedia
              presentations within XML, revise/merge/consolidate XML language proposals and
              multimedia data/presentation languages, and investigate the query processing
              issues of the resulting newly defined languages.
 
Scope: The topic is widely
              recognized as a critical problem area for the next generation of global
              information systems.  XML is clearly emerging as the standard according to
              which data (publications as well as other data) will be made available on the
              Internet.  We are in the early stages of the full specification of XML and in
              the infancy of database support for XML data.  The CWRU group has experience
              with multimedia databases. The group at Bilkent has complimentary expertise in
              distributed and real-time systems.  Literature and other resources for the
              project are easily obtained from the Web; thus students in Turkey working on
              this project will not need specialized facilities.  In addition to the
              collaboration with a colleague in Turkey, there will be training of a Turkish
              graduate student at the CWRU facilities.  This project fits the mission of the
              Division of International Programs (INT) for support of mutually beneficial
              research.
