Title       : Multiscale Studies of Synoptic and Mesoscale Disturbances Over the North
               Pacific, North America, and North Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9912075

Award Number: 9912075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance F. Bosart bosart@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4444,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Under this award, the Principal Investigator will undertake multiscale (time and
              space) observational and numerical studies of the life cycles of mid-latitude
              and tropical disturbances.  This research is motivated by the results of
              recently completed and ongoing NSF supported investigations that have
              demonstrated how: (1) the life cycles of significant mid-latitude weather
              systems can be controlled by long-lived coherent disturbances in the upper
              troposphere that circumnavigate the globe and in turn are influenced by the
              configuration and evolution of the planetary-scale flow; (2) mid-latitude
              disturbances can impact the tropics through cool surges that lead to an
              acceleration of the trade wind easterlies and the subtropical jet; (3) how the
              winter-season split jet in the Australia-New Zealand sector of the Southern
              Hemisphere owes its existence to the appearance and disappearance of the
              polar-front jet near the coast of Antarctica; (4) storms at the end of the
              Pacific storm track follow preferential pathways as they move across western
              North America, and (5) mesoscale potential vorticity anomalies aloft that
              rotate clockwise around warm-season, quasi-stationary mid-latitude continental
              anticyclones can trigger the formation of mesoscale convective systems that in
              some cases can become associated with incipient tropical storms.  Ongoing
              research on these topics will continue.

New research will focus primarily on
              studies of the extratropical transition of tropical cyclones. Advantage will be
              taken of new reanalysis data sets and new remotely sensed satellite
              observations (e.g., upper troposphere water vapor winds and advanced microwave
              sounder unit-radiances that can reveal warm cores in tropical cyclones).  The
              availability of these new data sets and observations should permit, for
              example, an examination of the structure of transiting tropical cyclones (e.g.,
              warm to cold core; symmetric to asymmetric) in an effort to understand the
              factors that may contribute to the explosive reintensification potential of the
              storms.  Cases will be drawn from past and future difficult-to-predict
              transitioning storms.  The research methodology will be based upon ongoing work
              and will involve both an observational and a modeling component. 

