Title       : Outbursts from an Ice-Dammed Lake: A Collaborative Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9912180

Award Number: 9912180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Fountain fountaina@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Anderson OPP-99-12129
Fountain OPP-99-12180
Walder OPP-99
              -12306


This is a collaborative study which includes Portland State
              University, the U.S. Geological Survey, and University of California, Santa
              Cruz.  Outburst floods, or jokulhlaups, occur when ice-dammed water bodies
              drain suddenly. These floods can have devastating downstream effects.  They can
              dramatically reshape stream channels and can be a hazard to human settlements. 
              The mechanisms (timing, size, and geomorphic effect of outburst floods) by
              which impounded water is stored and released have been poorly studied because
              outburst floods are unpredictable.  What is known comes primarily from
              observations in Iceland where subglacial and ice marginal lakes drain
              periodically.  Elsewhere, observations have been serendipitous or after the
              fact.  The Principal Investigators will investigate a site with predictable,
              annual outbursts on the Kennicott Glacier in Wrangell-St. Elias National Park,
              Alaska.  The drainage of ice-marginal Hidden Creek Lake endangers nearby
              residents and visitors to the National Park.
The Principal Investigators will
              examine outburst flood triggering to begin testing and refining existing
              theoretical models.  Their hypothesis is that the ice dam does not form a
              "tight" hydraulic seal that is abruptly broken by flotation.  Instead, as the
              lake level rises, it initially becomes connected to a distributed basal
              drainage system resulting in a slow, stable leak.  The lake level eventually
              rises enough that hydraulic connection is established with an arborescent
              channel network away from the edge of the glacier.  The lake then drains
              rapidly, and may be related to seasonal development of a conduit system or to
              the termination state of a glacier surge.
The proposal has four main goals to
              the field work: 1) to measure ice-dam deformation as the lake fills and empties
              and characterize how the ice dam behaves mechanically; 2) to measure lake level
              as a function of time, determine lake hypsometry, and measure the lake's
              thermal structure. 3) to examine the hydraulic integrity of the ice dam and
              temporal changes in the subglacial drainage system using boreholes; and 4) to
              monitor the flood and changes in channel morphology in the outlet river near
              the glacier terminus. 



