Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9912036

Award Number: 9912036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Wells mawells@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT       Michael A. Wells       DBI# 9912036




            This
              three year REU project will support undergraduates conducting research projects
              in molecular biosciences at the University of Arizona. Ten students per year
              will participate in a twelve week summer experience. A significant number of
              the participants will be women and/
or minority students. Students from Tucson
              (i.e. Pima Community College ) will have the option of working year round and
              those from out of town will be encouraged to return to campus to work during
              winter and spring breaks and for multiple summers. Faculty members have a
              strong commitment to undergraduate research.
             Students apply to
              the program and once selected by a faculty/alumni committee, they interview
              prospective faculty sponsor to determine where they will work. This insures
              that students work on projects of interest to them and fosters a productive
              working relationship among students, faculty members, and lab groups. An
              orientation covers laboratory and radiation safety training, and animal care
              and use. They participate in lab meetings, seminars, and field trips, as well
              as in a two-day Ethics retreat held at Biosphere II. A monthly
              newsletter
featuring articles contributed by students is distributed to all
              participants, program alumni, and
program faculty. Students present their
              experimental results at an annual poster conference. 










