Title       : Modeling of Elastohydrodynamically Lubricated Contacts with Chemical Degradation
               of Polymer Additives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a9912501

Award Number: 9912501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iiya I. Kudish ikudish@nova.gmi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9912501
Kudish
Chemical degradation of polymer additive molecules in
              lubricated tribological contacts may significantly alter the lubricant rheology
              and contact film properties.  This study is a theoretical study of  the
              coupling between elastohydrodynamic behavior of a lubricated contact and the
              strain and temperature induced polymer degradation reactions which occur in the
              contact.  A statistical modeling of polymer alignment and bond cleavage as a
              function of polymer chain length, molecular structure, and local shear and
              strain rates at different locations within a contact zone will be performed. 
              In particular, a kinetics equation describing polymer chemical degradation will
              be derived, analyzed, and solved under different assumptions.  This equation is
              based on a probabilistic approach.  The predictions derived from the kinetics
              equation will be linked to elastohydrodynamic lubrication calculations through
              lubricant viscosity in order to formulate a new coupled
              chemo-elastohydrodynamic treatment of lubricated contacts.  This formulation
              will be used to asymptotically and numerically model lubrication in the
              presence of chemical degradation.  The effects of pressure, temperature,
              strain, and polymer chain length on polymer degradation will be studied.  The
              major difference of this formulation from the ones for non-Newtonian lubricant
              fluids is that the polymer and lubricant chemical changes are irreversible. 
              The results will be compared with direct experimental measurements of lubricant
              properties to be performed at Lubrizol.  The results are expected to establish
              the conditions under which polymer additive degradation can be expected to
              significantly affect film formation (thickness, temperature, strain, etc.) in
              lubricated contracts and thus, to contribute to further thermal, mechanical,
              and chemical degradation.  That allows to further the understanding of the
              tribochemical behavior of lubricants in various machine elements and joints
              such as engines, bearings, and gears.
***


