Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Choice, Code-Switching and Social
               Identity in Guadeloupe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9912014

Award Number: 9912014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7320               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In Guadeloupe, as elsewhere, individuals have several linguistic resources -
              styles, dialects, registers, varieties, languages - from which to choose.
              Speakers may opt for one or may mix or alternate different ones. The complexity
              of Guadeloupean society and its ambiguous political status make it a compelling
              site in which to study the relationship between code choice, linguistic
              variation, language ideologies and the enactment of social identity.
              Guadeloupeans are French citizens and almost all are bilingual in French and
              Guadeloupean Creole. This project will investigate social patterns of code
              choice, as well as explore code-switching as one speech practice from which
              speakers may choose.

This is a propitious time for such a study, as the
              island is experiencing a transformation in social attitudes related to the
              social division of codes. The present study uses ethnographic research on
              language use to examine how salient social divisions are marked and produced by
              patterns of code choice and code-switching. The research integrates two main
              sociological foci: the role of language in displaying identity, and the
              ideological components of language variation. The analytic framework combines
              qualitative methods of participant observation and discourse analysis (for
              studying patterns of code choice and code-mixing) with quantitative methods
              (for measuring language attitudes and linguistic variation). 

This study
              will contribute to our understanding of Creole languages, the role of language
              ideologies in language choice and language variation, the cultural meanings of
              code-switching, and the role of speech in constructing social identity and the
              role of language in defining boundaries.
