Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Biological Sciences at Carnegie
               Mellon University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9912260

Award Number: 9912260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Murphy murphy@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT                      Murphy, Robert F.           Proposal #   
              DBI-9912260

Since 1987, the Department of Biological Sciences at Carnegie
              Mellon University has offered a Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
              with support from the REU Program of the National Science Foundation.  Since
              1989, the SURP has also been supported by a grant from the Howard Hughes
              Medical Institute.  In 1998 and 1999, the program was expanded again to include
              participants supported by the Beckman Scholars Program and a Computational
              Biology and Chemistry program underwritten by the Merck Company Foundation. 
              The REU program is run each summer and provides intensive, individualized
              research experiences in molecular biology and genetics, cell and developmental
              biology, biochemistry and biophysics.  All participants must be United States
              citizens or permanent residents and must be in their sophomore or junior year
              at the time of application.  The REU program is primarily aimed at students
              from small colleges and universities that do not have extensive research
              opportunities.  Students from groups underrepresented in the sciences are
              especially encouraged to apply.  Participants in the program receive a stipend
              of $3,000, free University housing, and reimbursement for reasonable travel
              costs.  The core of the program is an individual research project carried out
              under the supervision of one of the participating faculty.  The scientific
              progf am includes research presentations by faculty, presentations and
              discussion by students of articles from the scientific literature, sessions on
              career options and scientific ethics, and a concluding symposium in which all
              students present the results of their research.  Students receive tf aining in
              creating sophisticated computerized presentations and receive a video tape of
              their presentation at the end of the program.  In addition to the scientific
              program, students participate in a variety of other activities, including the
              annual Department whitewater rafting
              trip.































ABSTRACT  
                             Jocelyn Spragg                Proposal #   DBI -
              9912216



The Division of Medical Sciences is the part of Harvard
              University that supervises Ph.D. training programs of the Graduate School of
              Arts and Sciences for students who are engaged in basic biological research in
              laboratories on the Medical School campus.  The Division submits this proposal
              for a 10-week summer research program for undergraduate students to participate
              in research projects in the field of cellular and molecular biology.  Funds are
              requested for 10 students each year for three years.  Participants will be
              recruited from a nation-wide pool, with particular emphasis on recruiting
              students who are interested in careers in biological research and on recruiting
              qualified minority students and women.  In addition to their research projects,
              students participate in a weekly studentfaculty research discussion seminar
              series at which they teach each other about their projects, and in a weekly
              career development series, which covers such topics as choosing graduate
              programs, completing successful applications, and interviewing.  Three sessions
              each summer are devoted to discussions of ethical issues in biological
              sciences.
Students also participate in a peer advising/mentoring program with
              current graduate students and are provided additional opportunities to meet
              other majority and minority research faculty and graduate students in both
              academic and social settings.  These opportunities are provided by the program,
              by the individual research groups, and through living in housing on the Medical
              School campus.  Students receive a stipend, housing, travel to and from the
              program, and emergency illness and accident health insurance.  Several
              mechanisms of formative and summative evaluation are employed.  As part of a
              developing network, program alumni will receive twice-yearly newsletters,
              contact information about each other, and open access to continued advising and
              counseling by the program director and their individual research
              advisors.



















