Title       : REU: Cellular and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a9912216

Award Number: 9912216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jocelyn Spragg jspragg@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT                  Jocelyn Spragg                Proposal #   DBI -
              9912216



The Division of Medical Sciences is the part of Harvard
              University that supervises Ph.D. training programs of the Graduate School of
              Arts and Sciences for students who are engaged in basic biological research in
              laboratories on the Medical School campus.  The Division submits this proposal
              for a 10-week summer research program for undergraduate students to participate
              in research projects in the field of cellular and molecular biology.  Funds are
              requested for 10 students each year for three years.  Participants will be
              recruited from a nation-wide pool, with particular emphasis on recruiting
              students who are interested in careers in biological research and on recruiting
              qualified minority students and women.  In addition to their research projects,
              students participate in a weekly studentfaculty research discussion seminar
              series at which they teach each other about their projects, and in a weekly
              career development series, which covers such topics as choosing graduate
              programs, completing successful applications, and interviewing.  Three sessions
              each summer are devoted to discussions of ethical issues in biological
              sciences.
Students also participate in a peer advising/mentoring program with
              current graduate students and are provided additional opportunities to meet
              other majority and minority research faculty and graduate students in both
              academic and social settings.  These opportunities are provided by the program,
              by the individual research groups, and through living in housing on the Medical
              School campus.  Students receive a stipend, housing, travel to and from the
              program, and emergency illness and accident health insurance.  Several
              mechanisms of formative and summative evaluation are employed.  As part of a
              developing network, program alumni will receive twice-yearly newsletters,
              contact information about each other, and open access to continued advising and
              counseling by the program director and their individual research
              advisors.


















Abstract - John David - Proposal
              #    DBI - 9988022



Our NSF-REU Site Program will provide summer research
              opportunities for undergraduates from three primarily undergraduate regional
              colleges and five Historically Black Colleges and Universities.  We will work
              in collaboration with this select group of schools to provide their students
              the kind of research experience only available at a major comprehensive
              research university.  This NSF-REU program will complement undergraduate
              internship programs for University of Missouri (MU) students funded by the
              University.
The research programs of the MU faculty mentors will center on the
              theme "Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems."
              These programs use methodology ranging from recombinant DNA technology to
              molecular cytology to sophisticated population genetics.  All NSF-REU faculty
              mentors will be personally involved in their research projects and have a
              history of highly successful partnerships with undergraduate intems.
Faculty
              liaisons at our eight partner schools (Florida A&M University, Grinnell
              College, Jackson State University, Prairie View A&M University, Southwest
              Missouri State University, Truman State University, University of Arkansas-Pine
              Bluff, and Xavier University-Louisiana) will be responsible for the selection
              of the intems.  They will assist in the preparation of the intems before the
              summer research experience at MU and the continuation of the training of the
              intems when they return to their home campus.
The research experience is the
              heart of our summer program.  We will also help intems develop critical
              communications skills through brown-bag lunches, lab group meetings, and an
              end-ofprogram Summer Undergraduate Research Science Symposium.  We will provide
              financial support for intems to also present their research at regional and
              national meetings in their discipline.  Finally, we have developed a number of
              enrichment activities including panel discussions on preparation for graduate
              school and career options and a science ethics workshop.


