Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Co-Translational Processing of Ubiquitin Gene
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9912054

Award Number: 9912054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith D. Wilkinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9912054
Wilkinson

Description:  This award is for biochemistry research
              entitled U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Co-Translational Processing of
              Ubiquitin Gene Products.  Professor Keith Wilkinson of Emory University,
              Atlanta and Indian collaborator Sobhanaditya Jonnalagadda of Osmania
              University, Hyderabad will study the metabolism of ubiquitin.  Cell growth and
              function is controlled by the constellation of proteins present in the cell. 
              This is regulated both by the rates of protein synthesis and protein
              degradation.  Protein degradation is regulated by Ubiquitin, a small protein
              that acts as a targeting signal to direct proteins to sites of degradation.
              Ubiquitin is always synthesized as a precursor protein that must be
              proteolytically processed to yield the mature protein.  The proposed studies
              will test the hypothesis that this processing occurs during synthesis of the
              protein and is catalyzed by ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases.  This would be a
              novel form of precursor protein processing and may be important in
              understanding the regulation of protein processing. 

Scope:  This award
              formalizes and extends collaboration between the PIs who are among the early
              investigators in this field.  PI Wilkinson has a distinguished record of
              contributions in the ubiquitin field and with deubiquitinating enzymes.  The
              Indian coPI is an experienced researcher working directly in the area of this
              application.  The research will address an important but largely neglected area
              and, if successful, will define a new pathway of protein processing and several
              synthesis site related issues.  This research has the potential to seed
              cutting-edge ubiquitin research in India, where there has been little research
              activity in this area of science.  Graduate students at both universities will
              be engaged in the project and gain unique perspectives through the
              international participants. 


