Title       : U.S.-Madagascar Dissertation Enhancement: The Ranomafana Fragments Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9912116

Award Number: 9912116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17668              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Patterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5992,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9912116
Patterson

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
              student, Mr. Alex Dehgan, working under the guidance of Dr. Bruce Patterson,
              MacArthur Curator of Zoology at The Field Museum, to conduct a study in
              Madagascar on how different lemur behaviors affect their relative persistence
              in forest fragments, and the resulting impact on lemur demographics. 
 
Why
              do some but not all species become extinct when the size of their small
              fragmented habitat is reduced?  Behavior already has an important role in
              determining an animal's ability to persist in the midst of habitat
              fragmentation, and Dehgan theorizes that behavior will also have a significant
              effect on how habitat fragmentation impacts a particular species' distribution
              on the landscape level.  He also predicts that the extent of a species'
              behavioral flexibility (as determined by constraints developed through the
              course of its evolution), and the behavioral characteristics that it possesses,
              are important for determining its susceptibility to extinction, which will also
              affect its distribution across the landscape. Madagascar's lemurs exhibit an
              extraordinarily diverse range of behaviors, social systems, and ecological
              habits within a single, evolutionarily-related unit, and they provide a unique
              opportunity to understand the role that behavioral constraint has on the
              complex social organization of a species in the midst of fragmented landscapes.
               Dehgan will explore the linkage between behavior and biogeography to determine
              how behavioral differences among lemurs affect their relative persistence in
              forest fragments, and he will seek to uncover the proximate mechanisms behind
              such distributions.  The study will be conducted on 12 subsets of lemurs in
              fragmented rainforest habitats in and around Ranomafana National Park.  Dr. B.
              Andriamihaja, of the Madagascar Institute for Conservation of Tropical
              Environments, and Professor Berthe Rakotosamimanan, of the University of
              Antananarivo, will provide guidance to Mr. Dehgan on this project.

The
              expected results should provide an important link between biogeographic
              patterns of extinction and local ecological processes and behaviors, which will
              create a better understanding of the mechanisms that drive local extinction and
              determine animal distributions, and will be an important new contribution to
              fragmentation theories.  This project is being jointly funded by the Division
              of International Programs and the Division of Environmental Biology.

