Title       : REU: Marine Models in Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a9912287

Award Number: 9912287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eliezar A. Dawidowicz ldawidow@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Burris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT     Burris     Proposal # DBI - 9912287


The Marine Models in
              Biological Research (MMBR) Program is an eight-week intensive research
              experience for undergraduates at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL).  The
              MBL is an international center for research, education, and training in
              biology.  From the time of its founding in 1888, the MBL has been known not
              only for the quality of its research, but also for its exceptional educational
              programs.  Students in the MMBR program attend lectures and seminars, and
              conduct individual research projects under the guidance of faculty mentors. 
              They attend workshops on laboratory safety, microscopy, and ethics, and are
              introduced to other
research facilities in the area, such as the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution.
Students are recruited by the following methods:
              via the MMBR web site that describes the program
              (http://www.wfu.edu/-browne/mmbr@ and is accessible through a link on the MBL
              home page, through the listing of the program on the NSF REU web site, through
              a poster describing the program which is sent to the undergraduate biology
              departments of regional colleges and universities, and by word-of-mouth by the
              mentors and former student participants.  In addition to students who are
              supported by this NSF REU Site Grant, other students at MBL on individual REUs
              or through funding from their universities (typically two to four), also
              participate in the regularly scheduled MMBR activities, increasing the number
              of students who benefit from the program.
Mentors are summer or year-round
              investigators at the Laboratory, drawn from throughout the country.  They
              represent a wide range of institutions and research interests, and reflect the
              diversity of the MBL.  Each mentor impresses upon his or her student that the
              project in which the student is engaged is part of a larger, ongoing, original
              research program and not just an academic exercise.  The mentors are directed
              to explain how each student's work will contribute to long-range project goals,
              and the context and rationale of each project is made clear to the student. 
              For eight weeks the students live and work as researchers.

