Title       : Load Dispatch Control of Electric Power Systems Based on Equipment Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9912495

Award Number: 9912495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Asok Ray axr2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Spare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shashi Phoha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pattada Kallappa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed GOALI research generalizes the notion of life extending control of
              a single generating unit to load control to several generating units
              interconnected on a common grid.  This research introduces a novel concept of
              Life Extending Load Dispatch System (LELDS) that is characterized by:

 A
              two-tier structure for load scheduling and life extension of individual
              generating units over the grid;
 Load dispatching and unit commitment based on
              health monitoring, conducted at the upper level;
 Localized robust life
              extending control of individual generating units conducted at the lower
              level.

The objective of this research is to investigate feasibility and
              viability of the proposed Life Extending Load Dispatch System (LELDS) over a
              conventional Load Dispatch System (LDS) that does not explicitly address the
              issue of equipment health (i.e., structural durability) of power plants. As
              unit reliability has become one of the most dominant economic factors in the
              deregulated environment, market pricing and penalties of energy supplied or
              lost often far outweigh the economics of transmission loss considerations or
              fine tuning of the generation levels.  The LELDS will include the requirements
              of several dynamic and steady state energy services that are important to the
              regulation and control of grid as a whole.   In the present environment of
              electricity deregulation, revenue and economic penalties are assigned to each
              of the grid energy control services thereby elevating their impact on the
              generating units and utility companies in contrast to the previous regulated
              environment.  From this perspective, potential benefits of the proposed LELDS
              include:  increased power system reliability and lower electricity generation
              cost, reduced maintenance, and increased availability of the generating units
              to satisfy energy market transactions as well as fluctuating native load on the
              grid.  An additional feature of the proposed research is exchange of real-time
              information among the LELDS and generating units for remote health monitoring,
              diagnostics, and maintenance.  Feasibility of these concepts will be validated
              on a testbed that will simulate a power system grid along with pertinent
              electromechanical and thermal-hydraulic dynamics of individual generating
              units.

