Title       : (SGER) Ground-Penetrating Radar: A Tool for the Next Generation of Outcrop
               Studies?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1999  
File        : a9912062

Award Number: 9912062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan K. Franseen evanf@kgs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan P. Byrnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Stiles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jianghai Xia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9912062
Franseen	

Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is a relatively untested
              method for outcrop studies that has the potential to: 1) greatly aid in our
              understanding of the near-surface stratigraphic record, 2) allow direct imaging
              of three-dimensional geometries and heterogeneities of sedimentary bodies, and
              3) provide the ability to predict some petrophysical properties needed for
              understanding rock properties, stratal architecture, and modeling fluid flow in
              strata that are important analogs to subsurface aquifers and petroleum
              reservoirs.
	This project combines a team of sedimentologists/stratigraphers,
              geophysicists, hydrogeologists and petrophysicists, and utilizes new scientific
              approaches to investigate the controls on GPR attributes and to demonstrate the
              potential of GPR to the stratigraphic record for outcrop studies.  The field
              site for the project is located in a quarry where limestone and siliciclastic
              strata of interest for this project will be actively quarried in conjunction
              with the design of the project. The approaches to be used in this study include
              detailed outcrop and core studies of stratigraphic and geologic rock
              properties, rigorous geophysical testing of GPR, including the utilization of
              new methods recently pioneered by members of the team, collection of
              petrophysical data on pore geometry and porosity/permeability influences on GPR
              reflection characteristics, synthetic GPR modeling, and fluid-flow
              modeling.
	The methods and results from this proposed study and future
              extensions will help advance GPR into the mainstream of geophysical methods
              utilized in outcrop studies for stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and fluid-flow
              applications.



