Title       : Investigations on Transport Phenomena Governing Interfacial Bonding Evolution in
               Thermoplastic Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a9912093

Award Number: 9912093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Pitchumani r.pitchumani@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thermoplastic-matrix composites are fabricated by incrementally stacking
              and
fusion-bonding layers of fiber-reinforced thermoplastic prepreg tapes to
              a
desired shape and thickness. The evolution of interlaminar bond
              strength---a
principal product quality measure---is governed by the
              development of
interfacial contact area through flattening of the prepreg
              surface
asperities (referred to as the "intimate contact" process), and
              the
interdiffusion of polymer molecules across the contacted areas
              (termed
"healing"). The geometric complexities of the surface asperity
              structures,
and the mechanistic complexities of the strongly coupled
              microscale
processes of "intimate contact" and "healing" pose a fundamental
              challenge
to a reliable description of interfacial bonding evolution
              during
processing. The overall goal of the project is to overcome
              these
impediments. The inherent geometric complexities of the microscale will
              be
rendered tractable using an innovative fractal representation of
              surface
asperity profiles. This will form the basis of microscale
              transport
phenomena models to be developed for describing the asperity
              spreading and
polymer interdiffusion processes. A coupling of the microscale
              process
description with the macroscale heat and momentum transport phenomena
              models
will be used to elicit a comprehensive understanding of interfacial
              bonding
development as function of the process parameters.
              Complementary
experimental studies will be conducted aimed at validating the
              theoretical
developments. 

