Title       : Collaborative Research: Studies of Contracting and Strategic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9912002

Award Number: 9912002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Whinston mwhinston@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        This proposal describes two projects. The first, "Non-cooperative
              Foundations for Competition with Externalities," is collaborative work between
              llya Segal and Michael Whinston. The second, "Strategic Precommitment in House
              Location Choices" is work that will be done solely by Michael Whinston.

    
                   The first project studies bilateral contracting between one principal and
              N agents in the presence of externalities among different agents' contracts
              with the principal.  Two approaches to analyzing these settings exist in the
              literature.  One studies specific non-cooperative bilateral bargaining games. 
              The other supposes that N is large and analyzes a type of competitive
              equilibrium.  Neither is currently fully satisfactory.  The first approach has
              the problem that different non-cooperative contracting games lead to difficult,
              and often multiple, outcomes.  The second has the problem that the notions of
              competitive equilibrium studied have not been justified as a limit of
              situations in which N gets large, as has the traditional concept of competitive
              equilibrium.  This project has two goals.  First, to identify predictions for
              these contracting settings that are robust to the specific bargaining processes
              assumed.  Second, to develop a non-cooperative foundation for competitive
              equilibrium in these settings.  Preliminary research suggests that one can
              identify robust equilibrium predictions for two commonly studied
              non-cooperative games, and that when a competitive equilibrium exists, it is
              indeed the only limit of equilibrium outcomes of these games.

          The
              second project is an empirical investigation of strategic precommitment.  Among
              the most significant aspects of the influx of game theory into economics has
              been its use to develop models of strategic precommitment.  In such models, one
              agent's choice of a long-lived decision variable is determined in part by the
              agent's expectation that this choice will affect the decisions made by
              later-moving agents.  Such models have been used in recent years in numerous
              areas of economics.  However, despite their widespread theoretical use, much
              less attention has focused on examining the empirical applicability of the
              theory of strategic precommitment.  This project attempts to do so in the
              context of location decisions made by builders of single family houses.  There
              are several reasons why this is an attractive area to look for such effects. 
              First, the location decision that accompanies building a single-family house is
              extremely permanent.  Second, among the various factors that contribute to the
              utility of the homeowner, the distance from neighboring houses is almost
              certainly a significant one.  Third, house building decisions are typically
              staggered and so permit a comparison of the behavior of the location decisions
              made when a parcel is already fully surrounded by already built-upon parcels to
              the location choices made when one adjacent parcel is still not built-upon. 
              Fourth, there are a number of observable factors that affect the desirability
              of various locations on a parcel of land that can aid in the identification of
              strategic effects.   Finally, the type of models built here may have further
              application to issues in urban economics such as the study of the impact of
              zoning regulation.

