Title       : Geographic Variation in Sperm Function: Swimming Performance and its Biochemical
               Correlates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9912084

Award Number: 9912084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Podolsky podolsky@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Most marine naimals reproduce by releasing gametes into open water, where
              fertilization takes place.  External fertilization in the sea thus exposes
              gamelets to variation in environmental conditons, and fertilization success for
              free-spawning animals is highly variable.  Temperature has a marked effect on
              fertilization success and varies with latitude and season.  Therefore, natural
              selection should favor organisms with gametes that are tuned, phsyiologically
              and mechanically, to temperatures at which the animals normally reproduce.  The
              strong correlation between latitude and temperature allows a test of this
              hypothesis by comparing gamete characteristics from animals collected along a
              latitude temperature gradient.                  This proposal examines such
              characteristics for closely-related species of marine animals, sea urchins,
              that live at different latitudes and together span a wide range of temperatures
              during their reproductive season.  The proposed research uses motion analysis
              of the motility of sperm at different temperatures, as well as biochemical
              analysis of key enzymes involved in motility, to draw a connection between
              mechanisms and processes involved in fertilization success.  Results of this
              work have implications for understanding the evolution of temperature
              adaptation as well as environmental factors that determine reproductive success
              in marine organisms. 
