Title       : GOALI: A Computational-Experimental Program for Multiple Scale Fracture
               Simulation and Design of Metal Forming Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9912547

Award Number: 9912547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Somnath Ghosh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry  (GOALI) project will
              involve the principal investigator and researchers at the ALCOA Technical
              Center (ATC).  This award is to institute an integrated
              experimental-computational research program targeted at improving productivity
              and product quality.  This will be accomplished by developing advanced multiple
              scale computational models and software for simulating failure in materials
              processing and subsequent process design.  It will augment two newly initiated
              thrust areas at ATC on:  (1) understanding the effect alloy microstructure and
              process parameters on edge cracking in cold rolling processes; and  (2)
              improving cut-edge quality and minimize burr and debris in material shearing
              processes such as slitting.  Furthermore, collaborations with Scientific
              Forming Technologies Corporation (SFTC) and Ohio Supercomputer center will
              elevate the simulation software to the advanced level of high performance
              computing needed for solving complex industrial problems.

Experimentally
              motivated-validated, multi-scale computer models will introduce adaptive
              multi-level hierarchy and represent details of material microstructure from
              quantitative metallography, to simulate ductile fracture.  The adaptive
              multi-level system of computational modules will concurrently predict variables
              at the scales of the work-piece and model localization and ductile fracture as
              a phenomenon of incidence, interaction and propagation of damage across the
              scales.  Adaptive hierarchy of computational sub-domains with varying
              resolutions will differentiate between non-critical and evolving critical
              regions and will zoom in at 'damaging hotspots' for pure microscopic
              simulations.  Microscopic stress and damage analysis of real microstructures
              will be done by the specially developed Voronoi cell finite element models. 
              The forming simulations will be coupled with design methodologies and software
              to predict 'optimal' microstructural constitution and process parameters. 
              Experiments on localization and failure in deformation processing will be
              performed, and will include mechanical testing of notched specimens for
              load-displacement and fracture toughness data, and real process like cold
              rolling and sheet metal shearing for 

