Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-Purpose, Multi-User Mask Aligner
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9912490

Award Number: 9912490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yue Kuo yuekuo@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynden A. Archer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael V. Pishko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The mask aligner is a critical equipment for interdisciplinary researches that
              require the definition of small-geometry patterns precisely and repeatedly.
              This proposal is for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art contact/proximity
              mask aligner for multi-purpose, multi-user researches and education. In
              addition to conventional exposure and alignment functions, this equipment has
              the following capabilities: 1) a wide wavelength range of exposure light for
              resolution requirements, 2) holding varieties types and sizes of substrates for
              miscellaneous applications, and 3) maintaining constant light intensity for the
              consistent operation condition.   

This mask aligner is used by three
              research groups in microelectronics, biotechnology, and polymer science.
              Totally, seventeen graduate students, four undergraduate students, and one post
              doctoral scholar utilize this equipment for research. The aligner is also an
              educational tool for new courses, undergraduate or short-term research.
              Students from diversified backgrounds have been involved in these activities
              recently. This mask aligner expands research capabilities of other groups in
              science and engineering fields in the Texas A&M University.

The mask aligner
              is located in the recently upgraded Thin Film Microelectronic Research
              Laboratory. The university cost-shared 33% of the equipment price as well as
              complete shipping and installation/training expenses. The equipment's annual
              maintenance cost is supplied by PI's and co-PIs' other research grants.  
              






