Title       : Linear and Nonlinear Indentification of Low Complexity Uncertain Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a9912533

Award Number: 9912533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Chen jchen@ucrengr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9912533
Chen

This proposal initiates a nobel research program into the area
              of control-oriented identication, investigating linear and nonlinear methods
              for identification of low-complexity uncertain models.  The principal goal is
              to develop new, theoretically sound and practically useful identification
              theories and techniques for modeling physical systems in a way compatible to
              control design theory and practice. The program is motivated and guided by
              problems of fundamental interest and problems of significant relevance to
              practicing engineers, with specific application areas focused on active noise
              suppression and combustion instability problems.  The research plan addresses
              outstanding issues and calls for attention to new, emerging problem areas.  It
              recognizes specifically computational and model complexity as the key obstacle,
              and nonlinear identification and model validation as the new thrust area, both
              of which are believed to have the potential to develop into important research
              areas in systems and control research.  The main technical objectives to be
              accomplished are:

To investigate a new paradigm of mixed
              deterministic/probabilistic identification problems.  The task attempts to
              provide techniques and algorithms for identification and validation of
              deterministic uncertain models under probabilistic/stochastic noise
              assumptions.

To develop nonlinear identification and model validation
              methods for special classes of nonlinear systems.  The main focus will be on
              nonlinear systems with typical memoryless nonlinearities of engineering
              relevance.  A central thrust will be the identification and validation of
              nonlinear dynamical systems with limit cycles.

To test and gu ide the
              theoretical development via simulation and experimental work.  Noise control
              and combustion instability problems are identified as application and testing
              benchmarks.

A detailed research plan has been formulated to address these
              issues, which consists of concrete, realistic solution strategies that are
              believed to be both theoretically signficant and practically feasible.  The
              plan seeks to merge theory, simulation, and experimentation, and is supported
              by well-established concepts and tools found in classical interpolation theory,
              convex optimization, stochastic processes, system identification, robust
              control, and nonlinear dynamics.  It is felt that the successful completion of
              this project would significantly impact the contemporary as well as future
              theoretical and applied research in the areas of system identification and
              control.  In the short term, it would advance signficantly the current
              state-of-the-art identification techniques, in development of computationally
              efficient identification algorithms.  In the long term, it would lend insight
              and  thrust to key issues and problems found in modeling and identification of
              nonlinear dynamical systems.  Additionally, the application studies link the
              program directly to, and hence  have the the potential to be of direct impact,
              on a number of ongoing research projects currently under pursuit in industrial
              R&D laboratories.

The program is projected to span a course of three years
              from July 1, 2000 to June 30, 2003.  Support is requested for the PI, for two
              summer months full time, each year, and for one graduate student, throughout
              the entire award period.  The completed project will yield as main deliverables
              new, theoretically significant and practically feasible identification
              approaches, consisting of:

a fully developed paradigm and algorithms for
              identification and model validation based upon a mixed
              deterministic/probabilistic setting,

nonlinear identification and model
              validation techniques,

worked-out benchmark examples and problems for the
              mixed deterministic/probabilistic paradigm and the nonlinear model validation
              methds,

Tested noise control data and combustion models.   
***    

