Title       : investigation of Elasto-Plastic Interfacial Crack Tip Fields Using Infrared
               Interferometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9912066

Award Number: 9912066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hareesh V. Tippur htippur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The current understanding the influence of plasticity effects on the interfacial
              fracture has been modest despite of the practical significance in a wide range
              of dissimilar material systems including metal-ceramic, metal-metal and
              polymer-metal sandwiches.  The work in this area has largely remained
              analytical/numerical in nature and experimental investigations are needed to
              further relate the local and global parameters and gain insight into the crack
              initiation and growth behaviors as in case of elastic counterparts.  A detailed
              experimental study of the similarities of crack tip fields, mode-mixity,
              J-dominance, crack growth resistance, to name a few, would be valuable for
              modeling interfacial crack initiation and crack growth. To this end, an
              experimental effort on interfacial fracture behavior of bi-materials that are
              elastically similar but plastically dissimilar is proposed using a newly
              developed infrared interferometer.  The research is aimed at gaining insight
              into the asymmetries introduced by plasticity near the interfacial crack tip in
              bimaterial specimens that are dissimilar in their plastic characteristics but
              identical elastically. 

The above effort will utilize an infrared
              Twyman-Green interferometer recently developed by the PI for investigating
              crack tip fields in full-field, real-time, non-contacting mode even in the
              presence of extensive plasticity and surface roughening. In this technique, the
              limitation of the surface roughness/texture encountered with the onset of
              plasticity/damage when using visible light has been circumvented through a
              favorable roughness to wavelength ratio.  The method also offers advantages
              such as greater latitude in working with surfaces in 'as-is' condition and it
              does not need reference exposures.



