Title       : Regulatory Control of Hybrid Systems Based on Discrete Abstractions: Theory &
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9912458

Award Number: 9912458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panos J. Antsaklis antsaklis.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The dynamic behavior of complex systems typically involves the interaction of
              continuous and
discrete dynamics. The study of such hybrid dynamic processes
              is central in the analysis and
design of modern engineering systems. The aim
              of the proposed work is to develop new method-
ologies and computer algorithms
              to solve important feedback control problems in hybrid systems.
This work is
              motivated by the need to address challenging problems in the control and
              coordi-
nation of modern complex engineering applications such as multiple
              robotic systems mounted on
space or underwater platforms, eets of autonomous
              vehicles, and chemical and manufacturing
plants.

The proposed work uses a
              hybrid system framework for regulatory feedback control that is based
on
              discrete abstractions and it o_ers signi_cant promise in addressing
              successfully a number of
open control design issues. The proposed approach
              utilizes discrete approximations or abstrac-
tions of the continuous dynamics,
              which are re_ned appropriately using the concept of quasideter-
minism, to
              provide adequate information so that a controller can be designed to meet the
              control
speci_cations. It is proposed to extend initial control synthesis
              results that use piecewise-linear
models to more general systems, and also
              develop additional design methods based on Lyapunov
functions and on Petri net
              supervisory control methodologies. The proposed research includes
              the
exploration of realistic applications from the areas of manufacturing and
              autonomous vehicles.
The impact of this work will be in both theory and
              applications. In particular, it will provide
a theoretical design framework
              for regulatory feedback control of hybrid systems and will also
in uence the
              areas of reachability analysis, hybrid automata, and veri_cation algorithms.
              Fur-
thermore, it will provide algorithms for the control of autonomous
              systems which will be tested
on our Complex Systems Simulation Facility.

