Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Tropical Ecology and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9912316

Award Number: 9912316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elvia J. Melendez-Ackerman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ethel M. Rios Orlandi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



ABSTRACT       Melendez-Ackerman      Proposal # DBI - 9912316


This
              proposal seeks to encourage talented Hispanic undergraduate students into
              pursuing
research careers in Ecology and Evolution with emphasis on tropical
              systems.  This proposal is a joint effort of the Institute for Tropical
              Ecosystems Studies and the Dean of Graduate Studies and Research.. Funding will
              support eight undergraduate students each year to conduct independent research
              studies for ten weeks at the El Verde Field Station.  Student selection into
              the program will be based on GPAs, research interest and their potential for
              pursuing graduate studies (as evident in letters of research interests and
              letters of recommendation).  Selection preference will be given to students
              attending non-research institutions and universities with little access to
              research in Ecology and Evolution.  Selected students will work with one of
              several participating faculty in ongoing projects but will also develop their
              own mini-project under the supervision of their mentors.  During this intensive
              ten week program, students will become familiar with a wide variety of research
              techniques that will help them address ecological and evolutionary research
              problems. The research experience will be complemented by a number of ancillary
              activities including seminars, workshops, colloquia and social activities. 
              Through these activities students will be exposed to a variety of research
              topics, current issues within the scientific community and the social milieu of
              ecology.  Thorough annual evaluations of the REU program will ensure that it is
              effective and that the goals of this proposal are fulfilled. 




