Title       : Optical Nonlinearities Enhanced by Near-Field Diffraction in Artificial
               Dielectric Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9912476

Award Number: 9912476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Fainman fainman@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9912476
Fainman

Given the enormous increase in communication capacity
              provided by high bandwidth optical fibers, new technologies will soon be
              necessary to provide ultra-high bandwidth switching and networking
              capabilities.  The bandwidth available in optical fibers is currently exploited
              using wavelength and time division multiplexing techniques, both of which
              increasingly rely on the ability to generate, detect, switch, multiplex and
              demultiplex optical information-carrying waves using direct efficient nonlinear
              optical interactions.  Growth in the capabilities and applications of these
              technologies using existing nonlinear optical materials and devices is limited
              by efficiency (due to the relatively small effective nonlinear coefficients and
              the short effective interaction lengths imposed by dephasing).

The goal of
              this proposal is to conduct basic research towards the development of efficient
              optical nonlinearities exploiting the near field interactions in artificial
              nanostructures.  The proposed approach will focus on: (i) enhancement of
              optical nonlinearities by engineering nanostructures that exhibit local-field
              concentration, (ii) incorporation of the optical nonlinearity enhancement due
              to the very high field effects achievable with ultrashort laser pulses, and
              (iii) engineering broadband phase-matching nano- and micro-structures to meet
              the needs of optoelectronic and imaging systems (e.g., using the unique
              properties of photonic crystals to allow operation in broad angular and
              wavelength bands).  The specific objectives of this proposal include rigorous
              modeling, design, fabrication and characterization of these novel nonlinear
              optical nanostructures.  Special emphasis will also be given to our ultimate
              objective of using these enhanced optical nonlinearities to build functional
              meso-optic devices and components that will have a significant impact on
              optical communication networks (e.g. wavelength converters, space-to-time and
              time-to-space demultiplexers, switches, etc.) and imaging systems (e.g.
              time-gating for biomedical imaging), as well as on additional novel
              applications (e.g. higher order harmonic generation for high-resolution optical
              lithography).

The proposed research will not only have a significant impact
              on the development of all-optical nonlinear processors for optical
              communication networks and imaging systems, but also result in development of
              the basic technology for studying the near field nonlinear optical effects in
              meso-scale optical architectures.  The proposed studies will also advance the
              basic science and engineering in such areas as vector optical wave diffraction
              in near-field nonlinear dielectric nanostructures, understanding of nonlinear
              optical processes in nanostructured materials, and fabrication of such devices
              using deposition and ion implantation techniques.  The proposed project will
              also play a unique role in the education and development of human resources in
              science and engineering at the graduate and undergraduate levels, as under our
              prior NSF support (contributing to over 100 manuscripts in refereed journals
              and conference presentations, the completion of 6 Ph.D. and 5 M.Sc. degrees,
              NSF REU for 8 undergraduate students, and the current supervision of 10 Ph.D.
              students).
***


