Title       : The Impact of Calculus Reform on Long-term Student Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a9912017

Award Number: 9912017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Conrad G. Katzenmeyer                   
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Ganter sganter@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Bookman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ICalculus reform has been a major educational innovation extending over the past
              decade and more.  Many colleges and universities have adopted, at least in
              part, some form of calculus reform in their calculus courses.  The reform has
              also been the focus of considerable controversy in the mathematics community,
              with vocal defenders and opponents to be found within many mathematics
              departments.  However, there has been little empirical evidence to support
              either position.  A previous review of the literature on calculus reform by one
              of the authors (Ganter) concluded that findings were mixed regarding impacts on
              student achievement and attitudes. 

This study attempts to provide
              information on long-term effects of calculus reform by employing matching sets
              of students who were enrolled in either "traditional" or "reform" calculus
              classes.  The performance of these students, drawn from classes in 7
              institutions, will be examined in courses subsequent to calculus.  A larger
              sample of seniors from these same institutions will also be tested on their
              knowledge of calculus.
The interest of employers in calculus reform
              backgrounds will also be explored.

The study will be carried out by the
              Principal Investigators with the assistance of 7 evaluation "Fellows" drawn
              from the institutions involved in the study and trained by the Principal
              Investigators.  The "Fellows" will then be a continuing resource for the
              mathematics and science communities. 


