Title       : Neuroscience Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site at BYU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9912126

Award Number: 9912126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Lephart Edwin_Lephart@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan M. Judd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reuben W. Rhees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT        Edwin Lephart         DBI# 9912126

	

           The
              Neuroscience Center at Brigham Young University proposes to establish a
              Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site in Neuroscience.  Special
              efforts will be made to recruit students from underrepresented
              groups/individuals in Neuroscience and especially those from two and four year
              colleges in our geographical region (and throughout the U.S.) that have little
              or no research opportunities.  Special efforts will be made to encourage women
              and minorities to apply.  Due to the geographical location and past successful
              track record in supporting undergraduate research the program expects to be
              especially effective in reaching Native American, Hispanic, and Pacific Island
              students.
	A total of 10 students will participate in this REU site during a
              10 week summer program covering Neuroscience research areas, such as, hormones
              and behavior, neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, electrophysiology,
              immunocytochemistry, molecular neurobiology, neuroimaging, and regulatory
              behaviors.  The students will receive instruction in experimental research
              techniques by participating in ongoing or new research projects that require
              each student to present oral and written reports of their research activities. 
              One of the major goals is to produce scientifically literate individuals having
              the ability to design, conduct and analyze research activities.  Moreover, to
              have undergraduate students think critically in an integrative fashion based
              upon research-rich and inquiry-based research curricula (through scientific
              articles, literature searches and training in auxiliary research skills). As a
              result of this experience, the program will provide research opportunities for
              undergraduates in Neuroscience that will be critical in their educational
              training so that each student may draw upon first hand experiences that will
              assist them in future career choices in science.


