Title       : High Risk Exploratory: Test Excavations at Four Middle Stone Age Sites Near
               Mossel Bay, Western Cape Province, South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9912465

Award Number: 9912465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19916              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Curtis Marean will conduct
              exploratory archaeological excavation in a series of rock shelter sites located
              near Mossel Bay in the Western Cape Province of South Africa. The Archaeology
              Program provides relatively modest high risk exploratory research grants and
              the project is funded under this competition. In a preliminary reconnaissance,
              Dr. Marean and his colleagues noted that the four sites under consideration all
              contain intact deposit. In most, artifacts dating to the Middle Stone Age (MSA)
              period are either visible in exposed sections or have been discovered on the
              ground surface in the immediate region. Thus there is good reason to expect,
              although it is far from certain, that in situ materials are present. Dr. Marean
              and his colleagues will produce detailed surface maps for each of the rock
              shelters and then conduct test excavations. The lithic, faunal and shell
              material recovered will be analyzed after the completion of fieldwork and on
              the basis of the results it will then be possible to design a full research
              program.

The long term goal of this work is to understand the cultural
              transition from "archaic" to "modern" human behavior. While hominids a quarter
              of a million years ago could fashion well crafted symmetrical stone tools they
              lacked many of the traits such as art, religion, ethnicity and long distance
              trade which characterize all modern people. By 40,000 years ago these are
              evident in the archaeological record and it is clear that our ancestors from
              this latter period had modern human capabilities. Dr. Marean and many other
              researchers wish to understand the process which underlies this transition.
              Archaeological evidence indicates that this change first took place in Africa
              during the MSA and several sites along the South African coast provide early
              and tentative indications of new behaviors. However the information to date is
              severely limited and solid chronologies are yet to be established. The Mossel
              Bay sites assume importance in this context both because of their location and
              because of preliminary evidence that they contain datable materials. Dr.
              Marean's research will determine which of the sites contains the most abundant,
              best preserved and longest sequence and with this information it will be
              possible to design a long term research project.

