Title       : SHRIMP U-Pb Geochronology of Transantarctic Mountains Basement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9912081

Award Number: 9912081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Goodge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Goodge OPP 9912081

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a
              geochronological investigation relating to the tectonic development of the East
              Antarctic continental shield. The East Antarctic shield represents one of
              Earth's oldest and largest cratonic provinces, with a long-lived Archean to
              Proterozoic history. It is the central piece in the eastern Gondwanaland
              mosaic, and it likely played an important role in the Neoproterozoic
              amalgamation of the Rodinia supercontinent. Because much of the shield is
              covered by the polar ice cap, our knowledge of early Archean to Neoproterozoic
              geologic events comes mostly from coastal outcrops in areas such as Enderby
              Land and Queen Maud Land. However, crustal thicknesses and geophysical patterns
              show that the Transantarctic Mountains orogenic belt forms the Pacific edge of
              the East Antarctic shield. Underlying the central Transantarctic Mountains are
              crystalline basement rocks of the shield itself (Nimrod Group), juxtaposed
              against Neoproterozoic and lower Paleozoic marginal-basin sedimentary
              assemblages (Beardmore and Byrd groups). Together, these rock units record
              Archean crustal growth, Proterozoic crustal modifications, sediment deposition
              across a Neoproterozoic rift margin, and early Paleozoic plate-margin
              convergence. The central Transantarctic Mountains is therefore a critical area
              along the Pacific margin of East Antarctica to study both the Precambrian
              crystalline shield and its deformed supracrustal cover.

Recent U-Pb age
              dating of the Nimrod and Beardmore groups by use of the Super High Resolution
              Ion MicroProbe (SHRIMP) has greatly expanded our understanding of East
              Antarctic shield evolution and the transition from rift- to active-margin
              tectonics during the late Neoproterozoic and early Paleozoic. From a relatively
              small number of samples analyzed to date, SHRIMP analysis has demonstrated a
              multi-stage Archean and Proterozoic history of the Nimrod Group, and placed new
              constraints on the depositional age and sedimentary provenance of the Beardmore
              Group. This new project will significantly expand the geochronological
              framework of basement and supracrustal assemblages in the Transantarctic
              Mountains, with goals as follows:
1. Detailed study of metamorphic and igneous
              rocks from the Nimrod Group, in order to fully characterize the Archean and
              Proterozoic history of Precambrian igneous, metamorphic and detrital zircon
              components, as well as the Ross-age pre-, syn- and post-tectonic magmatic
              sequence.
2. Expanded study of siliciclastic rocks from the Beardmore Group
              and related lower Paleozoic sequences, primarily by age analysis of detrital
              zircons in order to constrain depositional ages and sedimentary provenance.
              With existing sample material and some provided by other researchers from other
              parts of the Transantarctic Mountains, it will be possible to address regional
              provenance variations among these transitional Neoproterozoic-lower Paleozoic
              sequences. Diagenetic xenotime will also be analyzed in order to attempt direct
              dating of the depositional age of the different rock units.

To complete this
              study, SHRIMP U-Pb zircon and xenotime analyses will be completed in
              collaboration with researchers at the Australian National University (ANU) in
              Canberra. Analyses will be completed in the SHRIMP facility during a 6-month
              period from July to December, 2000. ANU will provide sample processing at no
              charge and instrument access at collaborative rates. Therefore, the full costs
              of this work are to be shared between NSF (SHRIMP machine time and incidental
              support costs), Southern Methodist University (salary and basic office
              support), and ANU (reduced in-house instrument rates, no charge for sample
              processing, and sabbatical support with office space, library access, and
              computer support).


