Title       : Dissertation: Holocene Human Prey Acquisition in Central Missouri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9912118

Award Number: 9912118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Lee Lyman lymanr@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. R. Lee Lyman, Mr. Steve Wolverton will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will select samples from two archaeological
              sites, Arnold Research Cave and Graham Cave - both located in Central Missouri
              - and submit them for radiocarbon dating. The goal of his research is to
              understand how human populations at a technologically simple hunting and
              gathering level of subsistence respond to the challenge of environmental change
              and to accomplish this accurate dating is essential. Although the last Ice Age
              ended in North America ca. 12,000 years ago, the more recent Holocene period
              has been characterized by significant climatic change with marked and prolonged
              changes in temperature and rainfall. From approximately 8,000 to 6,00 years ago
              the US Midwest underwent a period of drought with decreased rainfall and higher
              temperatures. Vegetation zones shifted Eastwards as prairie replaced woodland.
              Both Arnold Research and Graham Caves contain long stratified archaeological
              sequences which span this drier Hypsithermal period and the subsequent climatic
              amelioration. Both sites contain abundant faunal material which have the
              potential to shed light on changing human diet and subsistence strategies.
              Preliminary analysis by previous researchers suggest that these remains
              indicate a dietary shift caused by harsh environmental conditions and that
              local residents were forced to broaden their subsistence base and acquisition
              strategies to incorporate less desirable harder to obtain items in their diet.
              Through detailed analysis of both assemblages, Mr. Wolverton will evaluate this
              hypothesis. Because morphology is related to environment and animals such as
              deer do not grow as large in stressed situations, Mr. Wolverton will determine
              how body size changes over time. He will also reconstruct age profiles for
              several prey species to evaluate the proposition that hunters were forced to
              obtain increasingly young animals. Finally he will analyze the frequencies of
              individual bones within a species to reconstruct consumption practices which
              also relate to relative food availability.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will increase understanding of the prehistory of the United
              States and shed new light on how humans adapt to environmental change. Mr.
              Wolverton is using a battery of relatively new analytic techniques and his work
              will help archaeologists evaluate their potential. The project will also assist
              in training a promising young scientist.

