Title       : REU Site: Cognition and Environmental Decision Making: An REU Site Proposed at
               the College of Menominee Nation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9912351

Award Number: 9912351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Medin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Holly YoungBear-Tibbetts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Menominee N
	      P O Box 1179
	      Keshena, WI  54135    /   -

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1321,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in
              Cognition and Environmental Decision-Making at the College of Menominee Nation
              (CMN) in Keshena, Wisconsin.  The site is targeted to Native American Indian
              undergraduate students at CMN as well as students recruited nationally. 
              Research opportunities will be provided in an environment that is not foreign
              to the students and organized around research issues (inter-group conflict,
              cultural differences, resource conservation) that are relevant to the students'
              background and experience.  The overall research framework is concerned with
              the interactions of knowledge (especially mental models of the environment),
              values and behaviors associated with environmental decision-making.  The
              program is comprised of an integrative mixture of Northwestern University's
              Program in Cognitive Studies of the Environment and the College of the
              Menominee Nation's Sustainable Development Institute, Natural Resources, and
              Education programs.  Research faculty from both campuses will be associated
              with the summer program.  The eight students selected for the site will take
              classes, conduct independent research, take field trips, and present their
              research at the end of the ten-week session.

This award contributes to the
              Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in
              science through active undergraduate research experiences.

