Title       : REU: Research Experiences in Disturbance Impacts and Ecosystem-level Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9912288

Award Number: 9912288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98996              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Franzi david.franzi@Plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim Mihuc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9912288
Franzi

The center for Earth and Environmental Science at Plattsburgh
              State University (PSU) and the W.H. Miner Agricultural Research Institute will
              provide a 6-week summer research experience for 10 highly motivated
              undergraduate students interested in ecosystem research.  The PSU summer
              research program will involve an interdisciplinary investigation of ice-storm
              disturbance on ecosystem-level processes in the Altona Flat Rock jack pine
              barrens of northeastern New York.  The physical environment of the pine barrens
              strongly influences ecosystem processes such as runoff, organic matter
              decomposition and nutrient cycling, and aquatic and terrestrial habitats.  The
              high level of damage to the pine barrens by the January, 1998 ice storm and
              subsequent "restoration cutting" provide a unique opportunity for undergraduate
              students to investigate the impacts of natural and anthropogenic disturbances
              on ecosystem processes.  This special ecosystem has been a focus of
              undergraduate research at PSU since 1972 and the REU program will build upon
              these ongoing efforts.  The principle objectives are to promote the
              professional development of undergraduate researchers and instill a better
              appreciation for ecosystem complexity, function and value.  The REU
              participants, individually and in small groups, will work closely with the
              program's eight faculty mentors on research projects ranging from surface and
              ground water hydrogeology, biogeochemistry, and terrestrial plant and
              invertebrate ecology.  The program will challenge its student researchers to
              expand their disciplinary focus and develop an interdisciplinary perspective. 
              Weekly project meetings will be used to evaluate progress, examine
              interdisciplinary linkages between individual research components, and develop
              new and expanded research plans.  Students will also participate in
              environmental seminars where they will have an opportunity to debate ethical,
              gender and minority, and environmental policy issues with the program staff and
              invited professionals.

