Title       : US-Turkey Workshop on the Izmit Earthquake, American Geophysical Union Meeting;
               San Francisco, California, December 13-17, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9912582

Award Number: 9912582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Reilinger reilinge@erl.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1304,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9912582
Reilinger

Description: This award is to support the participation of
              eight scientists from Turkey in the Fall 1999 Meeting of the American
              Geophysics Union in San Francisco, December 13-17, 1999.  The meeting will have
              a session devoted to the August 17, 1999 earthquake centered in Izmit, Turkey,
              and measuring 7.4 on the Richter scale.  The session is organized by Dr. Robert
              Reilinger of the Earth, Atmosphere, and Planetary Sciences Department at M.I.T.
                The purpose of the session is to exchange data and other information gathered
              by Turkish and US scientists in the days following that strong quake.  
              Significant data was obtained in Turkey by the P.I.'s team, under a grant made
              by NSF/EAR, immediately following the quake.  This earthquake is of special
              interest to the geophysical community because it represents the latest in a
              series of earthquakes in this century that ruptured sequentially from east to
              west along the entire length of the North Anatolian fault (NAF).  The surface
              offsets for this sequence of earthquakes has been well documented and has
              provided a wealth of information on the interaction of sequential earthquakes,
              which has relevance to earthquake processes in general, and to seismic hazard
              studies in the Istanbul region.  Furthermore, the Izmit earthquake occurred in
              an area that is being monitored in detail with Global Positioning System
              observations.  These geodetic observations are providing new information on
              pre-, co-, and post-seismic deformation.  This information will enhance our
              understanding of the mechanics of the entire earthquake cycle.  In particular,
              and because of the similarities between the NAF and the San Andreas fault, the
              information gained from the Izmit earthquake will aid our understanding of
              earthquake processes along the San Andreas and other continental transform
              faults.

Scope:  This project will support participation by key scientists
              from Turkey, who are actively involved in seismic studies using GPS
              measurements of ground movement, in an important meeting intended to understand
              the results from field data collected in the major earthquake of 1999 in
              Turkey.  Their participation should lead to improvement in the interpretation
              of the results obtained and in the conclusions to be reached.  The attendance
              by these scientists should help US geologists and geophysicists with their
              future research in this field, and would enhance the potential for further
              collaboration.  The participation of the Turkish scientists will therefore have
              mutual benefits to all involved in these studies and for future efforts.  The
              project fits well within the objectives of the Division of International
              Programs for facilitating the exchange of important scientific data with
              foreign countries, and for enhancing mutually beneficial international
              collaboration.  

