Title       : Grinding with Cubic Boron Nitride (CBN) Electroplated Wheels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9912550

Award Number: 9912550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Malkin malkin@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to investigate the grinding process with
              electroplated cubic boron nitride (CBN) wheels.  These wheels are manufactured
              with a single layer of CBN superabrasive grains held on the wheel hub surface
              by an electroplated nickel bond.  The sharp superabrasive grain tips protruding
              from the electroplated nickel binder at the start of grinding progressively
              dull down with continued use, thereby resulting in a progressive increase in
              the forces and a corresponding decrease in the surface roughness throughout the
              wheel life.  This investigation is aimed at characterizing the wheel wear and
              its effects on the prevailing mechanisms of the grinding process throughout the
              wheel life.  The research encompasses: (1) characterization of the new (unused)
              wheel topography; (2) experimental measurement and modeling of how the wheel
              topography changes due to wheel wear and its effect on the forces, power, and
              surface roughness during the wheel life; and (3) investigation of the energy
              partition for calculating grinding temperatures and predicting thermal damage. 
              Quantitative models will be developed to predict the wheel topography, wheel
              wear, grinding forces and energy, surface roughness, wheel life, grinding
              temperatures, and thermal damage. 

          Electroplated CBN abrasive
              wheels are becoming widely used in the production of precision metallic
              components especially in the aerospace and automotive industries.  While
              significant efforts have been directed towards making better electroplated
              superabrasive wheels, virtually no fundamental research has been reported
              concerning the grinding behavior with these wheels. The results of the present
              investigation will provide the analytical basis for predicting and simulating
              grinding behavior, design of grinding cycles, and optimal control of the
              process.  As such, it will support the efficient utilization of electroplated
              CBN wheels by providing the information needed to confidently specify the
              optimal process parameters for a specific production application. 


