Title       : Doctorial Dissertation: Cranial Variation in South Central Andean Populations: A
               Descriptive and Comparative Assessment of Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9912065

Award Number: 9912065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9785               (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Philip Rightmire gpright@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To understand how prehistoric South American Andean human groups were related,
              the following research questions will be asked: do "cultures" constructed from
              artifact patterns defined by archaeologists correspond to the categories
              established from the human skeleton defined by biological anthropologists?  How
              does biological variation between and within the groups correspond to geography
              and time;  and how do trends in cranial morphology reflect models of
              inter-regional exchange shown in the archaeological record?

This project
              will investigate the range of biological variation within a collection of human
              skulls from prehistoric Bolivian populations.  The skulls, collected from
              archaeological sites in the South-Central Andes Mountains, are currently housed
              at the Museo Arqueologico de la Universidad de San Simon in Cochabamba,
              Bolivia.  The collection will be measured and scored.  The data will be
              subjected to statistical analyses.  The biological distances (reflecting
              isolation of groups from one another) generated from these procedures will help
              to cluster the groups "genetically".  These biological clusters will then be
              compared to aggregates that archaeologists have created from artifactual
              evidence found at the same sites where the skulls were
              uncovered.

Information from such comparisons will help determine whether the
              biological and cultural units of prehistory correspond, for a given geographic
              context and time period.  This research is designed to illuminate explanations
              of the past that treat human cultures as basic units in prehistory, and to
              explore culture contact through three archaeological models: vertical
              ecological complementarity, trade caravans, or migration/colonization.  It is
              expected that the results from this study will be most consistent with the
              trade caravan model, where trends in cranial morphology coincide with patterns
              in the archaeological record for the same geographic area.  Where there is
              evidence that biology does not mirror culture in the past, then many of the
              methods and assumptions employed by archaeologists will have to be
              reevaluated.

This project will complement current studies of biological
              distance among South American populations.  The data collected will also
              contribute to the disciplines of biological anthropology and archaeology by
              providing information on a unique skeletal collection which documents an
              exciting and understudied area of prehistoric South America.

