Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research: Host Expansion and Speciationin Phytophagous
               Insects: Behavioral, Ecological, and Genetic Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9111433

Award Number: 9111433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Craig   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne K. Itami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have proposed                      
              speciation models for herbivorous insects that make critical                   
              assumptions about genetics, behavior, and ecological interactions              
              with the host plants.  Testing these assumptions will lead to an               
              improved understanding of plant-herbivore interactions.  If these              
              assumptions are tested in populations that have recently                       
              diverged, or are in the process of diverging, these tests can                  
              help determine which of several competing models of speciation                 
              are most plausible.  Hypotheses about these assumptions will be                
              tested in two populations of a gall-making herbivore on two                    
              closely related host plants.  These populations are of one                     
              morphological species and are partially reproductively isolated                
              due to differences in host preference for mating and egg-laying.               
              Knowledge of genetic and other mechanisms responsible for these                
              preferences are crucial to understanding how herbivore speciation              
              occurs.  These questions will be explored with a series of field,              
              experimental garden, and greenhouse experiments.  Results from                 
              crosses between the host-associated populations will be used to                
              determine how host-and mating-site preferences and the ability to              
              survive different host plants is inherited.  Additional                        
              experiments will be conducted to determine how environment and                 
              experience influence oviposition-and mating-site preference.                   
              Studies will also be conducted to determine how natural selection              
              differs between host plants that could select for divergence of                
              populations.  Finally, whether there is genetic variation within               
              one host-associated population could preadapt the behavioral for               
              a shift to a new host plant will be investigated.  Taken                       
              together, these data will provide insight into the ecology of                  
              plant-herbivore, interactions, the evolution of  host expansions,              
              speciation, as well as the specialized adaptations of                          
              agricultural pests.
