Title       : Publicly Assisted Housing and Neighborhood Dynamics: A Preliminary Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1991   
File        : a9111201

Award Number: 9111201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ayse Can   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                 Following termination in 1973 of federal programs aimed at large-           
              scale urban housing construction, local governments have assumed greater       
              responsibility for policy development and implementation to meet               
              neighborhood housing needs.  Different jurisdictions have responded in         
              different ways, but many have sought to target investments in areas            
              where they hoped that public assistance would spur private redevelopment       
              efforts, thereby leading to neighborhood revitalization.  The selection        
              of sites where public investments are made are crucial decisions in the        
              implementation of policies like these.  Despite considerable monitoring,       
              relatively little scientific attention has focused on the impacts of           
              these investments on the neighborhood quality and on the demographic           
              composition of neighborhood residents.  This project, which is supported       
              by a Research-Planning Grant for Women Scientists and Engineers, will          
              refine conceptual frameworks for exploration of these and related              
              questions, and it will provide an opportunity for identification and           
              preliminary analyses of data with which to address these issues.               
              Preliminary work will focus on one or more cities in New York state.           
              Among data sources to be explored at the Census of Population and              
              Housing, data from various public agencies documenting public services         
              and publicly assisted housing, and other geographic information                
              available from the New York State Data Center.                                 
                 This project will provide new insights into the general knowledge of        
              the ways that public housing investments and policies, and it will             
              establish a sound base for future empirical analyses of the impacts of         
              public housing decisions on neighborhood dynamics.  In addition, the           
              project will provide a superb opportunity for a young female scholar           
              with an excellent background to further improve her basic research             
              skills.
