Title       : Ion Mixing As A Processing Technique For Monolithic And And Array Integration of
               Photonic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9111837

Award Number: 9111837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Yu yu@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Asbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Silvanus S. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Integration of photonic devices has been the subject                           
              of much research interest in recent years due to its                           
              implications for optical communication systems.                                
              However, the development of the fabrication                                    
              processes involved in photonic integration has not                             
              been trivial due largely to the diversity in functions                         
              and consequently modes of operation of various                                 
              photonic devices.  Because of these requirements,                              
              many photonic device structures have poor                                      
              compatibility for monolithic fabrication.  There is                            
              an important need to develop better large scale                                
              manufacturable processes to facilitate photonic                                
              integration.  We propose to investigate ion mixing                             
              as a process for planar integration of photonic                                
              devices made of quantum-well and superlattice                                  
              structures.  As a processing technique, ion mixing                             
              offers many advantages: (i) the process can be                                 
              carried out at sufficiently low temperatures to allow                          
              for a self-aligned process, (ii) metallic ion masks for                        
              self-alignment purposes can serve as electrodes for                            
              devices, (iii) readily available noble gas ions are just                       
              as efficient as shallow dopant ions with similar                               
              atomic mass in causing disordering, and (iv)                                   
              judiciously chosen ions can be used to induce                                  
              disordering and to improve device isolation                                    
              simultaneously.  However, there are several issues                             
              that need to be resolved before ion-mixing becomes                             
              a useful process for photonic integration.  The first                          
              issue is to understand the mixing process at a                                 
              microscopic level so as to relate the intermixing of                           
              semiconductor materials and their properties such                              
              as bandgap, optical index, with or without strain                              
              involved.  The second has to do with the material                              
              damage caused by ion-irradiation which can affect                              
              both the transport and the optical properties.                                 
              Approaches to reduce this damage to a level                                    
              acceptable to photonic integration will be                                     
              investigated in this study.  The third issue is to                             
              study how ion-mixing can be used in the formation                              
              of laser waveguide, a critical component of photonic                           
              technology.  A fourth issue is to investigate the use                          
              of ion mixing in the improvement of heterojunction                             
              bipolar transistors.  To address these issues, the                             
              proposed program has the following objectives: (i)                             
              investigation of process control of ion mixing,                                
              particularly the reduction of ion irradiation damage                           
              to a level acceptable for photonic devices, (ii) the                           
              planarization of devices by ion mixing with an initial                         
                                                                                             
                                 (2)                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              goal if fabricating planar stripe index guided lasers,                         
              and (iii) monolithic device integration by ion                                 
              mixing, driving toward modulator/laser and                                     
              laser/HBT integration.
