Title       : Comparative Study of The Influence of Structural Variations on Juvenile Justice
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9111556

Award Number: 9111556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72652              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Sampson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              To date most of the research on the juvenile justice system has                
              focused on individual-level case processing, examining variations              
              within a given jurisdiction that could be explained by either case             
              or defendant-specific characteristics.  Probably the most common               
              topic has emphasized how "extra-legal" factors such as race, social            
              class, and gender influence court decisioning.  This tradition of              
              work has added substantially to our understanding of juvenile                  
              justice and the workings of the court.  The picture, however, is               
              necessarily incomplete.  Despite the vast number of studies on the             
              micro causes of juvenile justice processing (i.e., within court                
              variation), there are few efforts that have examined its macro                 
              causes; that is, differences among court systems that can be                   
              attributed to the characteristics of the communities in which they             
              reside.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The study being undertaken by Dr. Sampson represents a major                   
              advance in current research on official reactions to juvenile                  
              delinquency by shifting from micro level concerns to macro level               
              interests in examining how environmental and structural factors                
              affect the operations of the juvenile courts.  Specifically, the               
              research asks the question: how do features of the community--                 
              especially urbanization, population density, heterogeneity,                    
              concentration of poverty, and court-organizational structure--                 
              influence rates of referral, formal petitioning, secure pre-                   
              disposition detention, release, and placement.  These five                     
              dimensions of justice court processing, classified by crime type,              
              age, race, and sex, will be analyzed in conjunction with social,               
              economic, demographic, and court organizational data for over 300              
              counties in 1985 and 1990.  Both stability and change in the                   
              macrostructural context of juvenile courts will be examined as they            
              bear on theories of the underclass and social dislocations,                    
              political economy, conflict, and social control.  Through rigorous             
              analysis of how contextual factors shape juvenile court processing             
              across jurisdictions and over time, this study is likely to produce            
              important new knowledge that will establish the research agenda for            
              years to come.
