Title       : Dissertation Research: Wealth Status and Late Classic Maya Household Activities:
               Ceramic Variability in the Belize River Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9111535

Award Number: 9111535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Lucero  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Hill, Professor of Anthropology               
              at UCLA, MS Lisa Lucero will collect data for her doctoral                     
              dissertation. As part of a larger long term project she will                   
              conduct archaeological excavation in the upper Belize River area               
              in Belize. The focus of her work will be the late Maya period                  
              (ca. 600-900 AD) which represents the highest level of                         
              integration in the region. She will excavate a series of four                  
              domestic compounds divided between upland and lowland regions and              
              high, medium and low status groups. Sites will be cored to locate              
              activity areas and on this basis large horizontal excavation will              
              be conducted. The recovered remains - mostly ceramics - will then              
              be studied to determine their function, the amount of work                     
              required to produce them, and whether they were made at the site               
              or imported from elsewhere. With this data it should then be                   
              possible to compare compounds on the basis of economic and social              
              organization.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Work in the Mayan area has shown that domestic units formed                    
              descrete groups and provided the basic building blocks of                      
              society. While much work has been done on elite groups very                    
              little is known about their lower class counterparts. Also it is               
              not understood how these units were integrated to form the larger              
              functioning society. Was, for example, production specialized by               
              class and did exchange across class lines strengthen societial                 
              bonds? By examining a series of compounds which cross both                     
              geographic and status grounds, MS Lucero will be able to examine               
              such issues.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will                  
              increase our understanding of how one of the great New World                   
              prehistoric civilizations developed and was maintained and it                  
              will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
