Title       : Mapping the Innovation Process: An Integration of Cognitive and Social
               Approaches to the Invention of the Telephone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1991  
File        : a9111424

Award Number: 9111424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84146              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. B. Carlson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Gorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In technology studies, nothing is more mysterious yet more central             
              than the act of invention.  Technological historians, however, have            
              yet to develop a precise interpretation of how an inventor                     
              identifies an opportunity, develops a new idea, and manifests it               
              in a physical device.  In response to this conceptual lacuna, Drs.             
              Carlson and Gorman are studying invention as a mental or cognitive             
              process.  To do so, they are comparing how Alexander Graham Bell,              
              Thomas A. Edison, and Elisha Gray developed the telephone from 1870            
              to 1880.  They have chosen these inventors because their work is               
              well documented by notebooks, sketches, and artifacts and because              
              their efforts to perfect this invention have received limited                  
              scholarly attention.  To analyze and compare the work of these                 
              inventors, they are drawing on recent work in cognitive science.               
              In particular, they are considering three elements of the cognitive            
              process of invention:  how an inventor conceptualizes an invention             
              (mental model);  the strategies he or she uses to develop an                   
              invention (heuristics); and the specific technical devices he or               
              she uses to construct an invention (mechanical representations).               
              To study these three elements, they have created computer mapping              
              techniques which allow them to use the inventors' original sketches            
              in branching-tree diagrams.  In addition, they intend to                       
              investigate how an inventor's cognitive practices are influenced               
              by his or her social context.  Through this research, they expect              
              to enrich the history of technology with a new conceptual framework            
              and a detailed study of a major invention, suggest to cognitive                
              scientists how technological creativity may be effectively studied,            
              and help interested laymen see inventors not as mysterious geniuses            
              but as individuals with specific talents and skills.
