Title       : Creativity & Representing in Science: A Cognitive-Historical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9111779

Award Number: 9111779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Nersessian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Nersessian is addressing a central question in the area of                 
              science and technology studies:  how do new conceptual structures              
              emerge in scientific revolutions.  Philosophers and historians of              
              science have been divided on the issue:  some have viewed                      
              conceptual change in science as occurring suddenly, often as a                 
              psychological Gestalt switch;  others have viewed change as                    
              extended over a long period of time.  This project seeks to show               
              how a more refined understanding of conceptual change can be                   
              achieved by combining the short-term cognitive -- or psychological             
              -- approach with the long-term historical one.  It does so on the              
              basis of two premises.  First, the extant literature has                       
              demonstrated that conceptual change in science is rarely, if ever,             
              sudden.  Hence, in order to understand the evolution of conceptual             
              change, the temporal perspective of history is needed.   Second,               
              conceptual change in science has its roots in ordinary thinking;               
              the representational and problem-solving practices of scientists               
              and outgrowths and refinements of ordinary cognitive resources.                
              This investigation unites the resources of two methods normally                
              kept separate by applying a new interdisciplinary method that                  
              deploys modern tools of cognitive analysis in fine-structure long-             
              term examinations of theoretical and experimental practices                    
              responsibly for major conceptual innovations.
