Title       : Collaborative Research:A Test of Macrofloral and MicrofloralBiofacies in a
               Peat-Accumulating Delta, Sarawak, Malaysia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1994  
File        : a9111842

Award Number: 9111842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gastaldo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Coal exploration models have vacillated from one spectrum                 
              extreme to another during the past 30 years.  When the Mississippi             
              delta was believed to be the stereotypical depositional regime for             
              thick peat accumulations (coal analogues), all attention was                   
              focused on the identification and delimitation of deltaic                      
              lithofacies.  When it was demonstrated that conditions in the                  
              Mississippi delta were not precursors to thick peat accumulation,              
              coastal models were generated in which thick peats were restricted             
              to coastal plain sites adjacent to one or more deltas.  No longer              
              were deltas the exploration target.  In modern peat accumulating               
              regimes of southeast Asia both extremes do occur but intermediate              
              conditions also prevail.  Previously, the PI has identified five               
              phytotaphonomic facies in the clastic-dominated, tide-influenced               
              Mahakam River delta of eastern Kalimantan, Indonesia.  In this                 
              system the only peat that has been encountered is detrital in                  
              origin, accumulating along the delta front.  The present project               
              is designed to test whether or not the same macrofloral biofacies              
              are characteristic of a contemporaneous delta, the Rajang River                
              delta, Sarawak (on the opposite side of the island of Borneo), in              
              which ombrogenous peat swamps have formed.  The project is designed            
              to recover vibracores in the same clastic sedimentary environments             
              as was previously sampled in the Mahakam River delta in order to               
              determine if deltaic biofacies are applicable throughout the                   
              gradient of deltaic types occurring in the same climatic regime.               
              In addition, the project offers the opportunity to assess                      
              palynofacies and determine whether or not proportions of                       
              palynodebris actually can be used to differentiate sedimentary                 
              environments, or if the systematic affinities of pollen and spores             
              are necessary data to apply palynofacies characteristics as an aid             
              in environmental interpretation.  Additionally, macrofloral                    
              biofacies will be used to test whether the predisposition for                  
              autochthonous peat accumulation is based more on the vegetational              
              community succession (as reflected in differences in prevailing                
              edaphic conditions) than on other physical parameters.
