Title       : Core Support for Archaeometric Service of a Radiocarbon Dating Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9111714

Award Number: 9111714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Haas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With three years of National Science Foundation support, Dr.                   
              Herbert Haas will continue the operation of the Southern                       
              Methodist University radiocarbon laboratory and increase its                   
              ability to date archaeologically significant samples.  Through                 
              his widespread contacts with the anthropological community, Dr.                
              Haas collaborates with archaeologists working in many parts of                 
              the world and provides absolute ages for organic samples which                 
              they submit.  Currently, the laboratory supports projects                      
              involving over 89 archaeologists working in more than 31 states                
              and countries.  With NSF support, this collaboration will                      
              continue.  Secondly, Dr. Haas will work to refine the radiocarbon              
              dating technique itself and will concentrate in two areas.  He                 
              will develop better procedures for dating the humic acids in                   
              soils.  To achieve this, he will date samples from secure                      
              stratigraphic contexts where independent means for age evaluation              
              are available.  He will also analyze multiple samples from a                   
              single soil horizons which extend over large geographical areas.               
              Secondly, Dr. Haas will focus on dates which lie near the limits               
              of the radiocarbon technique.  While in theory determinations up               
              to 55,000 years old are possible, most laboratories are equipped               
              to work accurately over only a ca. 35-40,000 time span.  Dr. Haas              
              will concentrate on the 35-55,000 interval.  He will develop                   
              techniques for sample evaluation and for elimination of sources                
              of potential contamination which may be introduced during the                  
              dating process.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The goal of anthropological archaeology is to trace the process                
              of cultural development over time.  To accomplish this, it is                  
              essential that materials and excavated sites be chronologically                
              accurately placed.  The radiocarbon technique provides an                      
              important way to accomplish this and it is crucial to the                      
              discipline that laboratories sympathetic to these goal be                      
              supported.  The SMU laboratory is well known both for the                      
              carefulness of its work and its willingness to analyze difficult               
              samples. With NSF support, this important resource will be                     
              maintained.  The research conducted will not only provide dates                
              for archaeological use but also refine the dating technique                    
              itself.
