Title       : Dissertation Research: Mate Choice in the Bicolor Damselfish, Segastes partitus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1991  
File        : a9111546

Award Number: 9111546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8770               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland A. Knapp  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In many mating systems, females mate repeatedly during a                  
              reproductive period.  Under such conditions, mate choice may                   
              involve two distinct phases:  initial mate selection and                       
              subsequent female fidelity.  When males provide parental care,                 
              natural selection should favor female mate preferences that                    
              result in higher offspring fitness.  However, at the beginning of              
              a reproductive period, females cannot directly assess offspring                
              fitness, and so may choose mates based on indicators of potential              
              offspring fitness.  Once the initial mate selection has been                   
              made, females should be able to assess offspring fitness directly              
              by monitoring the survival of offspring resulting from previous                
              matings.                                                                       
                   This research will involve a detailed study of female mate                
              choice in the bicolor damselfish, Stegastes partitus, a coral                  
              reef fish in which males provide exclusive parental care of eggs.              
              The objectives of this study are to (1) establish the connection,              
              if any, between the initial female choice of a character and the               
              fitness consequences to offspring of the female preference, (2)                
              manipulate the character to establish causality, (3) determine                 
              whether subsequent mating decisions are more strongly influenced               
              by direct information on offspring fitness, and (4) manipulate                 
              the cue to determine whether female responses do indeed increase               
              subsequent offspring fitness.  The research represents one of the              
              first fully integrated studies of mating dynamics.
