Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Three-Dimensional Regionalization and
               Modeling for Sedimentary Basin Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9111646

Award Number: 9111646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10150              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo A. Olea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Lynn Watney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1552,
Abstract    :
              This award supports John C. Davis and several colleagues and                   
              students of the Energy Research Center of the University of Kansas             
              to collaborate in geological research with Jan Harff and others of             
              the Mathematical Geology Department of the Central Institute for               
              the Physics of the Earth, Potsdam, Germany.  The two groups have               
              been independently engaged in improving methods for regional                   
              geological modelling while working locally to model the North                  
              German depression and the Western Kansas shelf.  They are now                  
              combining their fundamentally different modelling approaches to                
              produce a new and stronger modelling process, based on three-                  
              dimensional regionalization.   A further and more significant                  
              objective of their collaboration is to produce computer software,              
              running interactively on a graphical computer workstation, that can            
              easily be used for the regionalization and modeling of any                     
              sedimentary basin.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Three-dimensional regionalization is a quantitative process that               
              seeks to divide a sedimentary basin into discrete parts that are               
              simultaneously as homogeneous and distinct as possible in their                
              characteristics, and also as geographically compact as possible.               
              The resulting subdivisions can then be treated as discrete entities,           
              greatly simplifying both static and dynamic modelling of the basin.            
              There is increasing need for improved methods of basin analysis in             
              order to locate energy and water resources and to predict fluid                
              movement for environmental purposes.  Implementation of this                   
              greatly enhanced method of basin analysis in software operable in a            
              workstation environment will have a substantial impact beyond the              
              field of sedimentary geology.                                                  
                                                                                             
              A further contribution of this collaboration is that it links                  
              fundamental concepts of geostatistical theory with computer                    
              methodologies that have been developed relatively independently in             
              the Eastern bloc and in the West.  The valuable developments in                
              this area of quantitative geology by scientists of the former socialist        
              countries of Europe and the USSR (including Dr. Harff and his                  
              group at Potsdam) are not widely known.  Basically, the "eastern "             
              approach focused on the discovery and description of discontinuous             
              aspects of geological structures and processes, while "western"                
              researchers have tended to focus on the continuous aspect of                   
              geological properties.
