Title       : Synthesis, Reactivity and Catalysis of Novel Metallacarboranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1993     
File        : a9111437

Award Number: 9111437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339500             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Frederick Hawthorne mfh@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program is made to Dr. M. Frederick Hawthorne of the Chemistry                 
              Department, University of California at Los Angeles.  The                      
              research will focus primarily on the synthesis, structural                     
              characterization, and reactivity of metallacarboranes of                       
              main-group and lanthanide elements.  Included will be studies                  
              of metallacarboranes incorporating Mg, Sc, Y, La, Ce, Nd, Gd,                  
              Lu, Th, and U.  These compounds are expected to exhibit unusual                
              structures and high reactivity.  Difficulities in synthesizing                 
              and characterizing lanthanacarboranes will be overcome by                      
              complexing the lanthanide to porphyrins or macrocycles.  Alkyl,                
              hydride, and polyhydride complexes of the lanthanacarboranes                   
              will also be synthesized.  New carborane sandwich complexes of                 
              In, Ge, Sn, Pb, P, As, and Sb will be prepared as will                         
              low-valent sigma-bonded carborane complexes of Si, Ge, Sn, P,                  
              and As.  Finally, carborane anions will be used as supports for                
              dialkylaluminum cations.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The new carborane and metallacarborane species synthesized are                 
              expected to exhibit new types of bonding and reactivity.  Not                  
              only will the results increase fundamental understanding of                    
              main group and cluster compounds, but materials useful for the                 
              synthesis of additional complexes of this type will be                         
              developed.  Such compounds gain importance when their potential                
              utility for development of electronic or polymeric materials is                
              considered.  In addition, the hydride species may be effective                 
              catalysts for C-H bond activation.
