Title       : The Economics and Econometrics of Self-Selection with Applications to the
               Evaluation of Government Training Programs and to Understanding Sectoral Wage
               Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9111455

Award Number: 9111455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392016             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Heckman j-heckman@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo Paes de Barros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to evaluate the effects of                     
              government training program on trainees and to analyze the                     
              determinants of income inequality .  Special attention is paid to              
              selection bias in this analysis, and the study will develop a                  
              theoretical foundation for developing estimating models that take              
              into account this bias.  The research will include three empirical             
              studies utilizing these models.  The first will use recently                   
              available experimental and non-experimental data to evaluate the               
              impacts of the leading Federal manpower training program--the Job              
              Training Partnership Act.  The objective of this study is to                   
              ascertain the determinants of program awareness among the eligible             
              population, the determinants of application, enrollment, placement,            
              and long-run labor outcomes of the program.  This study will                   
              present new insights about the effectiveness of the job training               
              program.  The second study will examine the effects of                         
              randomization in evaluating social programs.  Finally, the third               
              part will investigate the sources of wage inequality utilizing new             
              methods for measuring inequality.  This research is important                  
              because it will develop new methods for evaluating social programs,            
              and it will provide new insights about the problem of income                   
              inequality.
