Title       : Collaborative Research: Ecological and Evolutionary Genetics of P-450 Genes in
               Desert Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9111430

Award Number: 9111430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Fogleman fogleman@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Mixed-function oxidases (MFO'S) are enzymes that allow insects to              
              tolerate poisonous chemicals such as insecticides and certain                  
              plant compounds.  Some plants protect themselves from insects                  
              (and other herbivores) by making chemical compounds that are                   
              toxic to the animals which try and feed on them.  The MFO enzymes              
              detoxify chemical compounds, usually by changing their chemical                
              structure.  The study of mixed-function oxidase enzymes,                       
              therefore, will provide information as to how insects become                   
              resistant to insecticides and/or toxic plant chemicals.                        
                                                                                             
              This proposal involves the use of an insect-plant model system.                
              The insects are fruit-flies of the genus Drosophila, and the                   
              plants are columnar cacti which grow in the Sonoran Desert of                  
              Mexico.  A wealth of background information on this model system               
              has already been obtained including data on the ecology and                    
              genetics of the fruit flies and identification and                             
              characterization of the toxic chemicals that the cacti produce.                
              The experiments outlined in this proposal will establish a                     
              connection between the mixed-function oxidase enzymes in these                 
              insects and their tolerance to the poisonous chemicals in the                  
              cactus plants.  This is a necessary first-step in a long-term                  
              study of the ecological and evolutionary genetics of the genes                 
              which produce MFO enzymes in insects.  Understanding this system               
              could be an important contribution to the development of more                  
              effective insecticides.
