Title       : The Evolution of Optimizing Behavior and of Attitudes Toward Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9111518

Award Number: 9111518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96209              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eddie Dekel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne A. Scotchmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is concerned with evolutionary game theory.  It has               
              two objectives: to explore the evolution of optimizing behavior and            
              of attitudes toward risk.  A basic presumption in economics is that            
              agents optimize.  This project examines this presumption by asking             
              whether evolutionary (and other dynamic) forces will lead to the               
              extinction of non-optimizing behavior.  In particular, the authors             
              will search for conditions under which evolutionary forces do                  
              select for optimizing behavior; and they will also explore what                
              form of non-optimizing behavior does survive (in environments which            
              are plausible but not sufficient to guarantee the extinction of                
              non-optimizing behavior).  More specifically, the interaction of               
              learning and evolutionary forces in the selection of rules rather              
              than strategies will be investigated.  With regards to the                     
              evolution of attitudes towards risk it is important to know what               
              forms of strategic interaction lead to what attitudes towards risk.            
              For example, it is known that winner-takes-all games lead to                   
              risking-taking behavior.  This will be useful for investigating,               
              for instance, what forms of market interaction will lead to                    
              excessive risk taking behavior.  This research is important because            
              it will improve our understanding of the evolution of optimizing               
              behavior and of attitudes toward risk.
