Title       : Dissertation Research: Causes of Geographic Variation in Flower Size in
               Nemophila menziesii H. & A. (Hydrophyllaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1991   
File        : a9111994

Award Number: 9111994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Schick  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study is an investigation of the potential biological                
              processes which may maintain differences in the sizes of flowers               
              among populations of an annual wildflower native to California.                
              The species under study, Nemophila menziesii, exhibits extensive               
              variation in flower size among populations, and shows a striking               
              pattern in which those populations native to the interior                      
              mountain ranges surrounding California's central valley are the                
              largest flowered; populations on the cost are intermediate, and                
              those from southern California produce flowers.  Essentially,                  
              this study seeks to determine why this pattern exists.  The study              
              is evaluating whether 1) deterministic, or 2) random biological                
              processes (or both) are important in maintaining these population              
              differences in flower size, and 3) whether or not the variation                
              in flower size among populations is adaptive.                                  
                   Using a large data set collected from  herbarium specimens,               
              this study directly tests for geographic patterns in flower size               
              that would be expected to be generated by natural selection, and               
              patterns that would be expected if random processes were more                  
              important in generating the population differences in flower                   
              size.  To augment the study of natural selection using herbarium               
              specimens, reproductive fitness of plants which differ in flower               
              size are being monitored to determine whether or not natural                   
              selection for flower size currently occurs.  This possibility of               
              differences in flower size being due to inbreeding is being                    
              tested by determining the level of inbreeding (using                           
              electrophoresis) in two populations which differ in the average                
              size of their flowers, and also by experimentally determining the              
              effects of inbreeding by comparing plants from outcrossed and                  
              inbred matings in these same two populations.
