Title       : Research Initiation Award: Local Smooth Stabilization on Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9111643

Award Number: 9111643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla A. Schwartz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The importance of utilizing nonlinear models for                               
              control systems design has become more prevalent as                            
              systems become complex, and simplifying linear model                           
              assumptions are inadequate for purposes of control.                            
              An inherent problem in using nonlinear models is that                          
              properties such as stability are not so easily                                 
              characterized.  Even more difficult is the question of                         
              stabilizability of nonlinear systems.  Here an                                 
              investigation of the problem of local smooth                                   
              stabilization of smooth continuous time nonlinear                              
              systems is proposed.  The main objective of the                                
              proposed research is to obtain a general theory which                          
              may apply toward the local smooth stabilization (or                            
              testing the local smooth stabilizability) of all smooth                        
              nonlinear systems.  This research will culminate in the                        
              construction of algorithms which will systematically                           
              attack the stabilization problem, depending on the                             
              structure of the system involved.  Further extensions of                       
              this research could involve the use of these algorithms                        
              in adaptive control of smooth nonlinear systems.                               
              The main tools involved will be the construction of                            
              Lyapunov functions which test the local smooth                                 
              stabilizability of smooth nonlinear systems through the                        
              use of multivariate power series and the blow-up                               
              method of bifurcation analysis.                                                
              This research will make a significant contribution to the                      
              theory of local stability and stabilizability of nonlinear                     
              systems.  The impact of this research will be far                              
              reaching for applications for applications of control of                       
              nonlinear systems.  Examples of potential applications                         
              of this theory can be found in control of mechanical                           
              systems such as aircraft or robotic applications.
