Title       : The Interaction of Grammar and Discourse in Northern Pomo Conversation and
               Monologue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9111264

Award Number: 9111264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124730             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Catherine O'Connor mco@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  Investigation of grammatical elements functioning within                  
              naturalistic discourse expands our understanding of the workings               
              of grammar.  Moreover, it reveals how discourse genres and                     
              cultural practices are partially constructed through speakers'                 
              use of grammatical resources.                                                  
                                                                                             
                   The grammar of Northern Pomo, a dying American Indian                     
              language of Northern California, displays several grammatical                  
              subsystems (e.g. fluid-S' subject case marking, logophoric                     
              pronouns, so-called switch reference) which interact with                      
              discourse in ways that are of interest to theories of grammar and              
              discourse.  The grammar has been extensively described, but                    
              descriptive and theoretical work on these and other topics has                 
              been limited by the availability of a very small corpus of                     
              extended discourse.                                                            
                                                                                             
                   Now an opportunity has arisen to collect a large corpus of                
              conversational and traditional narrative data from two of the                  
              last fluent and intellectually active Northern Pomo speakers.                  
              The Principal Investigator will collect conversational data, and               
              working with her consultant of the last decade, will transcribe,               
              analyze, gloss, and translate new and existing conversational and              
              monologue data.  This will culminate in a volume of texts, with                
              grammatical and lexical supporting material.  The PI will also                 
              investigate specific linguistic hypotheses about the grammar of                
              Northern Pomo based on the analyzed corpus of connected                        
              discourse.
