Title       : Building Political Culture Again: Unification and the Political Integration of
               Germany's Young
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1991      
File        : a9111674

Award Number: 9111674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29018              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith W. Watts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The reunification of East and West Germany has brought back                    
              together two political cultures which had grown rapidly apart                  
              during the preceding forty years.  The dramatic rejoining of                   
              political cultures provides a rare opportunity to assess the                   
              effects of the different political institutions of east and west               
              on the divergent development of their political cultures.  It also             
              facilitates analyses of the development of a new and democratic                
              political culture among German youth who grew up in the east.  Of              
              particular interest is the development in these youth of attitudes             
              toward democracy and of democratic citizenship.                                
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the support of the first wave of a                   
              national survey of the political attitudes and beliefs of 3500                 
              German youth drawn from both east and west.  The study builds on               
              a long tradition of research on attitudes toward democracy but                 
              provides the first opportunity to study intensively and in a                   
              controlled setting how political attitudes develop in response to              
              different political environments.  In addition to providing                    
              systematic evidence of the effects of the East and West German                 
              political systems on citizen's attitudes, this study will provide              
              important baseline data for tracing changes in the political                   
              attitudes of East German youth as they become reintegrated into a              
              united democratic Germany.                                                     
                                                                                             
              When completed this study will provide a better understanding of               
              the attitudinal underpinnings of democracy and of the prospects for            
              developing democratic values in formerly authoritarian states.
