Title       : Research Initiation Award: Radiation/Turbulence Interactions in Flows with
               Participating Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1991        
File        : a9111116

Award Number: 9111116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Ball kball@burst.me.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research program is to develop                   
              new overall computational schemes which employ spectral                        
              methods for the accurate and efficient solution of fluid flows                 
              with radiative transfer.  This will significantly extend the                   
              class of radiation problems that may be studied numerically.                   
              For example, oscillating or weakly turbulent flows could be                    
              fully resolved in a simulation without approximation, i.e.                     
              numerical solutions to the exact forms of the governing                        
              equations could be obtained.  Specifically, the governing                      
              equations (Navier-Stokes, energy conservation, and radiative                   
              transfer equations) will be discretized and solved by                          
              employing Fourier series and Chebyshev polynomials as basis                    
              expansion functions with efficient pseudospectral collocation                  
              and tau algorithms.  To develop and validate these schemes,                    
              and to evaluate their performance and accuracy, the new models                 
              will be applied to the problem of combined radiation and                       
              natural convection in flows with participating media between                   
              concentric, horizontal cylinders.  Experiments will also be                    
              performed to provide quantitative information for this                         
              purpose.  A holographic interferometer will be used to provide                 
              measurements of the temperature field, and Laser Doppler                       
              Velocimetry (LDV) will be used for measurements of the                         
              fluctuating velocity field.  The concentric cylinder geometry                  
              is chosen due to its relatively simple configuration and the                   
              well-documented existence of oscillating flows and transition                  
              to turbulence in the natural convection case.  Successful                      
              completion of the proposed research program will dramatically                  
              improve our ability to perform engineering radiation heat                      
              transfer analyses.
