Title       : Spinal Control of Micturition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9111207

Award Number: 9111207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Colby                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288196             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Collins william.collins@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan T. Erichsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Bladder function is controlled by spinal reflexes involving               
              spinal motoneurons, which connect to muscles in the periphery,                 
              and interneurons, which make their connections within the central              
              nervous system. The activity of these spinal neurons is                        
              coordinated by higher centers in the brain. The object of the                  
              present work by Drs. Collins and Erichsen is to identify and                   
              characterize these spinal motoneurons, both anatomically and                   
              physiologically. At present, little is known about these neurons,              
              particularly the spinal interneurons; this lack of knowledge is                
              the result of the inability to identfy function-specific spinal                
              interneurons and to establish their connections within the spinal              
              cord. Recently, the investigators of these studies have developed              
              both the electrophysiological and neuroanatomical techniques                   
              which will enable them to achieve this objective. The use of a                 
              multidisciplinary approach in this research will allow a more                  
              comprehensive examination and analysis of individual spinal                    
              neurons than would be possible with any single technique. The                  
              information obtained from these experiments will provide an                    
              essential database of the locations, functional identities, and                
              synaptic connections of spinal interneurons involved in the                    
              control of bladder function.
