Title       : Toward Accurate Inference in Nonlinear Dynamic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1992     
File        : a9111867

Award Number: 9111867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106807             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Ronald Gallant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project develops econometric methods that do not rely on the              
              correct specification of the structure of economic models for                  
              their validity.  This is an extremely important line of research               
              because these methods permit empirical research to concentrate on              
              drawing economic inferences from data without risking potentially              
              large specification errors.  The basic idea is to replace the                  
              structural model with an approximation that sequentially improves              
              as more information becomes available.  The methods developed by               
              this project permit reliable inference at each intermediate stage              
              of model evolution.  The procedures are general enough to                      
              encompass most econometric inference procedures.  Under a                      
              previous grant the investigator succeeded in developing                        
              statistical methods that have certain advantages particularly                  
              relevant to econometric applications: simplicity, ease of                      
              implementation, and ease of extension to nonlinear, multivariate,              
              and time series applications.  Under this grant these methods                  
              will be extended to a dynamic setting and used to analyze                      
              financial markets.  As in the past, algorithms implementing the                
              theoretical and empirical work will be coded and documented to                 
              current standards for professionally written, scientific software              
              and put in the public domain.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The methods developed under this project are termed                            
              seminonparametric (SNP) methods because they are parametric yet                
              have nonparametric properties.  The procedures replace the                     
              structure models with a truncated series expansion, the error                  
              density with a truncated expansion, or both.  By letting the                   
              truncation grow adaptively with sample size, the approximation is              
              accurate enough at each intermediate stage to permit reliable                  
              inference and ultimate convergence to the underlying data                      
              generating mechanism.  Applications are made to conditionally                  
              heterogeneous time series such as occur in finance and                         
              macroeconomics.  Bayesian methods are also studied.
