Title       : Collaborative Research: Life History Tradeoffs: An Integrative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9111498

Award Number: 9111498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen D. Ketterson ketterso@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Val Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One objective of population biology is to understand how the              
              environment leads to differences among species; another is to                  
              explore the behavioral and physiological mechanisms that control               
              life history traits of individual species.  This research is                   
              designed to contribute to this basic knowledge by studying how                 
              hormones shape and direct the life of a small bird, the dark-eyed              
              junco.  The focus is one males and the hormone testosterone,                   
              which is known to have numerous effects on animal behavior,                    
              physiology, and morphology (shape and form).  These effects                    
              include a suppressive effect of testosterone on male parental                  
              behavior and a stimulatory effect on behavior related to mate                  
              attraction, e.g. singing.  Testosterone can also decrease                      
              resistance to disease.  By manipulating the amount of                          
              testosterone in the blood and comparing the behavior and                       
              physiology of the treated birds to that of untreated, control                  
              birds, the changes induced will be examined and related to                     
              correlated of fitness, such as ability to sire offspring, life                 
              span, and survival of offspring.  The birds will be studied in                 
              the field where their survival and success in producing offspring              
              can be monitored.  By tracking the fates of animals whose                      
              physiology and behavior deviates from the normative state, the                 
              research will lead to a more fundamental understanding of how                  
              hormonal systems evolve and what balance of selective factors and              
              organismal responses keeps a particular animal species "on                     
              track" over evolutionary time.
