Title       : Rainforest Fires, Human Disturbance, and Vegetation History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9111588

Award Number: 9111588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally P. Horn shorn@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 Large tracts of rainforests in Central and South America have been          
              considered "virgin," the products almost entirely of natural processes.        
              Significant human impacts on rainforests are thought by many to have           
              been recent occurrences.  Paleoecological and archeological research is        
              providing new evidence that substantial human modifications of forested        
              areas already may have been taking place in centuries before Europeans         
              settled in the Western Hemisphere.  This project will continue research        
              on pre-Columbian forest modification already underway in and near the Le       
              Selva Biological Station in northern Costa Rica.  Pollen grains,               
              charcoal fragments, and diatoms in sediment cores taken from lakes and         
              swamps will be analyzed and used to reconstruct histories of natural           
              vegetation, agricultural plants, and fires in the area.  Among the             
              research questions to be answered in this project are:  How frequent           
              were fires in Pre-Columbian forests?  What crops and weeds associated          
              with farming activity are found in the pollen record, and how does the         
              presence of those crops and weeds relate to records of fires in the            
              charcoal record?  How frequently were forests cleared?  Can climatic           
              shifts be distinguished in the pollen and diatom records?                      
                 This project will contribute new understandings related to the              
              specific questions listed above and to many other related inquiries.           
              Because similar types of inquiries are underway at other sites in Latin        
              America, the results of this project also will contribute to comparative       
              research aimed at identifying the nature and processes associated with         
              human and environmental change on a continental scale.  Methodological         
              advances also will be made, especially the refinement of a new procedure       
              for automated image analysis to identify charcoal fragments.  Finally,         
              the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students as members of the       
              research team will provide excellent opportunities for their education,        
              and collaboration with Costa Rican investigators should stimulate              
              scientific development in that nation.
