Title       : Using National Economic Power to Pursue Economic and Environmental Goals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9111647

Award Number: 9111647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Eaton jeaton@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Economic analysis of trade policy has usually sought to explain                
              trade intervention in terms of domestic objectives.  Tariffs and               
              quotas, for example, have been seen primarily as a response to                 
              protectionist pressures emerging directly from domestic groups                 
              perceiving themselves as benefiting from them.  But trade policy               
              is increasingly seen as a mechanism for enforcing international                
              economic and environmental agreements.  For example, trade                     
              sanctions have been threatened as a means of enforcing                         
              international debt contracts and punishing nations that violate                
              international environmental protocols.  This project rigorously                
              analyzes the ability of national governments to use trade policy               
              as a way of influencing the policies of other sovereign nations.               
                                                                                             
              The ability of a government to exert external influence is                     
              investigated in the context of theories of dynamic strategic                   
              interaction.  The focus is not on the development of theoretical               
              methods per se, but on their application to the international                  
              economic order.  The project assesses the ability of existing                  
              multilateral and unilateral arrangements, such as GATT and U.S.                
              trade law, and alternative arrangements to achieve objectives in               
              global environmental protection, trade policy, protection of                   
              intellectual property, and international banking.  Two specific                
              questions are addressed: (1)  Does the cost, in terms of reduced               
              flexibility, of laws constraining the executive's pursuit of                   
              foreign policy outweigh any improved commitment vis-a-vis foreign              
              governments that such laws might impart?  (2)  In the presence of              
              asymmetric information about the national and global costs and                 
              benefits of environmental protection, should national                          
              environmental protection be rewarded, or should sanctions be                   
              imposed against polluters?
