Title       : Acid-Base Properties of Photoexcited Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9111768

Award Number: 9111768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laren M. Tolbert laren.tolbert@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The phenomenon of enhanced acidity occurring in the excited state              
              of hydroxyarenes will be studied. Through strategic design and                 
              directed synthesis, new molecules with specifically designed                   
              internal proton acceptors or with greatly enhanced photoacidity                
              have been prepared and will be studied. These substrates will                  
              allow the testing of various theories of exited state proton                   
              transfer, provide new methods of studies of proton transfer                    
              initiated reactions, and yield novel structures unattainable by                
              ground state methods. These studies will involve molecular orbital             
              calculations, organic synthesis of target molecules, time-resolved             
              nanosecond fluorescence and other spectroscopic techniques, and                
              structure analysis.                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Laren M. Tolbert at Georgia Tech                  
              University. One of the important properties of organic molecules               
              is their acidity, that is, how readily a proton can be transferred             
              to a substrate. Proton transfers are important in the catalysis of             
              many reactions and this is one of the reasons for the great                    
              interest in the acidity of organic molecules. Molecules that are               
              excited by irradiation with ultraviolet light may display enhanced             
              acidity, compared to their acidity in the absence of irradiation.              
              The origin of this effect is not well understood and previous                  
              explanations may be in error. In the present study, molecules will             
              be specifically designed to test various theories of proton                    
              transfer from molecules that are excited by ultraviolet light                  
              irradiation.
