Title       : Hybrid Task Assignment Strategies for Distributed Computer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9111292

Award Number: 9111292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sub Ramakrishnan rama@cs.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2876,9264,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to design and characterize a new              
              class of algorithms for allocating a set of computer programs to               
              multiple computers in a distributed computer system.  Program                  
              allocation strategies reduce the delay for a single user or maximize           
              the throughput of the distributed system as a whole.                           
                   Part 1:  Static Allocation.  The research will extend the work on         
              throughput optimization and delay minimization strategies for                  
              assigning programs to computers.  These optimization criteria have             
              been studied independently by Stone and by Shen and Tsai but their             
              interactions are not well understood.  The hybrid algorithms will              
              integrate Stone's maximum flow/minimum cut strategy with Shen and              
              Tsai's graph matching and A* strategies.  Because of a specific                
              combination of improvements, the algorithms should outperform those of         
              Shen and Tsai.  The work proposes to use a more realistic system               
              description then the one assumed by Shen and Tsai.                             
                   Part 2:  Dynamic Allocation. The research attempts to integrate           
              sender-initiated with receiver-initiated strategies.  These strategies         
              have been studied separately by many researchers but their                     
              interactions are not well understood.  As with static allocation,              
              hybrid algorithms should perform better than one based solely on any           
              one strategy.  The project will demonstrate this advantage by using            
              specific performance parameters.  Values for model parameters will be          
              taken from actual measurements.
