Title       : Research Initiation Award: Synthesis of Pseudo-Fuzzy Logic Controls for Chemical
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9111244

Award Number: 9111244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas B. Co tbco@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Chemical processing systems are typically nonlinear and                        
              complex.  Control operators in industry tend to rely on their                  
              own experience and heuristics (or simple common sense) to                      
              control a complicated process.  Fuzzy logic control is an                      
              efficient method which can easily incorporate heuristics.                      
              Fuzzy logic controls are based on fuzzy set theory which is                    
              designed to allow quantitative measurements of qualitative                     
              descriptions such as tall, large, small, etc. used frequently                  
              in human reasoning.  A fuzzy set is a set of numbers having                    
              membership values between 0 and 1, where 0 signifies weakest                   
              membership and 1 signifies strong membership.                                  
              This research project will investigate pseudo-fuzzy logic                      
              controllers (PFLC) for the control of complex nonlinear                        
              chemical processes.  PFLC is based on conventional fuzzy logic                 
              controllers  but it translates heuristics into algebraic                       
              equations (fuzzy logic sets use decision tables) with tunable                  
              parameters.  The methodology includes the derivation of                        
              pseudo-fuzzy logic models which incorporate confluence methods                 
              for obtaining model structure and modulating function methods                  
              for system identification.  Heuristics are then translated to                  
              PFLCs.  System performance can be analyzed using modern                        
              control methods such as frequency response, Lyapunov or H                      
              infinity methods.  New rules can be obtained by explicitly                     
              solving for the control variables from pseudo-fuzzy logic                      
              models.  To investigate the practical applications of PFLC, an                 
              experimental study of temperature control of a polymerization                  
              reactor will also be performed.  The system will be the                        
              polymerization of polydimethylsiloxanes.
