Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Quantum Field Theory: Axiomatics,
               Combinatorics and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9111663

Award Number: 9111663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton G. McCrory   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan B. Habegger  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project involves the completion, extension and further               
              development of a purely combinatorial and axiomatic description                
              of new three-dimensional invariants obtained from the Jones                    
              polynomial.  These invariants were first described using ideas                 
              from quantum physics by the mathematical physicist E. Witten and               
              later established by Reshethikin and Turaev, using the                         
              combinatorics of representations of quantum groups.  A purely                  
              combinatorial approach was pioneered by Lickorish in the case of               
              the classical one-variable Jones polynomial, evaluated at roots                
              of unity of the parameter.  This approach was recently extended                
              by Blanchet-Habegger-Masbaum-Vogel to half-integer roots.                      
              They have also given a proof that the combinatorial theory                     
              satisfies the axioms for a topological quantum field theory                    
              first enunciated by Atiyah and Segal.  The proof of the axioms                 
              is purely combinatorial using only the algebra and combinatorics               
              of the Kauffman (skein) module of three-manifolds.  The                        
              investigation of the axiomatics/combinatorics of the other                     
              Jones-Witten invariants may possibly be achieved using more                    
              general skein modules.  Further, the rich supply of invariants                 
              should provide a basis for new approaches to old problems, such                
              as link and three-manifold classification.  Finally, the                       
              combinatorial approach will likely lead to effective methods of                
              computation.                                                                   
                   Knots are rather elementary geometric objects whose                       
              really interesting properties are topological.  By this we mean                
              that two geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if                
              one of them can be transformed to look just like the other                     
              without cutting or untying it, just by pushing its string about                
              to rearrange the crossings.  Topologists say that they are                     
              two different geometric realizations of the same topological                   
              knot. Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to recognize when               
              one complicated geometric knot is topologically different from                 
              another, rather than just a different geometric realization.                   
              This problem can be addressed by computing certain numbers                     
              or polynomials which are called "topological invariants," meaning              
              that they always have the same value for different geometric                   
              realizations of the same topological knot.  The problem would                  
              be reduced to pure algebra if there were one invariant which                   
              also always has different values for geometric realizations                    
              of different topological knots, but life is not so simple--no                  
              single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the known                   
              invariants taken together.  It is therefore valuable to                        
              investigate new invariants, some of the most useful being those                
              inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum physics.  In                    
              particular, applications of knot theory to the biology of long                 
              strands of DNA have drawn upon knowledge of these newer                        
              invariants.
