Title       : Synthesis of Robust Controllers with Structured Real Uncertain Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9111570

Award Number: 9111570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Ross Barmish barmish@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The motivation for this proposal is derived from the                           
              problem of robust control in the presence of structured                        
              real uncertain parameters.  More specifically, it deals                        
              exclusively with linear systems described by a transfer                        
              function or state space model which includes uncertain                         
              parameters entering into various plant coefficients.                           
              The takeoff point for research is the body of literature                       
              motivated by Kharitonov's Theorem.  Given the fact                             
              that this body of literature deals almost exclusively with                     
              robust stability analysis, the first focal point of the                        
              research is synthesis of robust stabilizing controllers.                       
              A spark for this line of work is provided by some                              
              recent extreme point results (involving the PI) on                             
              robust stabilization of an interval plant (ratio of                            
              interval polynomials) with a first order controller.                           
              Additional motivation is also provided by the so-called                        
              value set approach.  Given the widespread use of value                         
              sets in an analysis context, the open question is: To                          
              what extent are value sets useful in a synthesis context?                      
              The second focal point of this proposal is robust                              
              performance.  That is, the objective is to deal with                           
              robust performance specifications over and above                               
              stability.  Analogous to the investigation of robust                           
              stabilization, the intention is to begin the work by                           
              looking at robust performance problems with low order                          
              controllers and then to follow up with the higher order                        
              case.  In this framework, a number of important                                
              research problems are proposed.  The third and final                           
              focal point is described by the words generating                               
              mechanism.  That is, to enlarge the class of                                   
              uncertainties which can be accommodated, it is                                 
              proposed to impose more structure on the "uncertain"                           
              polynomials and rational functions which arise in the                          
              analysis.
