Title       : Protein Quality Control in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9722889

Award Number: 9722889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ardythe A. McCracken mccracke@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722889  McCracken    Eukaryotic cells have an intracellular protein degradation
               process that removes aberrant and unassembled proteins from  the endoplasmic
              reticulum (ER). This ER-Associated protein  Degradation pathway (ERAD) is
              highly selective for specific  soluble and integral membrane proteins, while
              the majority  or ER resident and secreted proteins are quite stable.  Evidence
              that the ER chaperone calnexin has a role in ERAD  indicates that molecular
              chaperones are required for this  remarkable substrate selectivity, yet the
              mechanism of  chaperone action in this context is unclear.  Furthermore, 
              although previous studies suggested that ERAD was a novel  intracellular
              proteolytic process involving unidentified ER-  localized proteases, a recent
              and unexpected finding has  made it clear that the quality control of proteins
              in the ER  includes the export of aberrant and unassembled proteins to  the
              cytosol for degradation.  The mechanism of retrograde  protein transport across
              the ER membrane, and the role of  molecular chaperones in this process, are the
              major  questions addressed by the research proposed here.  The  specific aims
              are to: 1, determine which molecular  chaperones are required for ERAD and
              investigate the  mechanism of substrate selectivity and targeting; 2, verify 
              whether the protein translocation channel, Sec61p, known to  be the route
              through which nascent proteins enter the ER, is  indeed also responsible for
              the retrograde translocation of  a soluble yeast ERAD substrate; and 3, to
              identify new  proteins involved in ERAD through molecular cloning of the 
              wild-type alleles of ERAD-defective genes.  These studies  will be facilitated
              by a cell free system that has been  developed that allows the dissection of
              ERAD at the  molecular level, and by ERAD-defective yeast mutants that  have
              already been isolated.  Together, these advances  provide a unique opportunity
              to combine biochemical and  genetic approaches to elucidate the components and
              the  molecular mechanisms a nd regulation of ERAD.  The first two  aims will be
              accomplished using the reconstituted in vitro  assay and chemical crosslinking
              to reveal direct and  temporal associations between the ERAD substrate, the 
              molecular chaperones, and a protein component of the  translocation complex. 
              It is anticipated that these studies  will raise new questions regarding the
              identity an role of  yet-unidentified factors involved in ERAD.  To accomplish 
              the third aim, the mutants will each by studied by the in  vitro assay to
              determine whether a given mutant strain is  defective in substrate selectivity,
              transport of ERAD  substrate to the cytosol, targeting of substrate to the 
              cytosolic proteasome, or proteolysis.  In addition, the wild  type alleles of
              the defective ERAD genes will be cloned to  identify new proteins involved in
              ERAD.    Cells have quality-control processes in place to ensure that 
              newly-synthesized proteins are structurally correct so that  they will function
              properly.  Many proteins are synthesized  for either export (secretion) or use
              in specialized  intracellular compartments such as the lysosome; such  proteins
              are sequestered early in their synthesis into a  subcellular compartment known
              as the endoplasmic reticulum  (ER).  The quality control system within the ER
              which is  responsible for degradation of ER-associated aberrant  proteins has
              been given the acronym "ERAD."  It has long  been assumed that when proteins in
              the ER are recognized as  aberrant, the degradation of those proteins takes
              place  within the ER. Drs. McCracken and Brodsky, the Principal and 
              co-Principal Investigators of this project, have recently  made the unexpected
              discovery that proteins recognized as  aberrant in the ER are actually
              translocated back into the  cytosol (possibly through the same pore in the
              membrane  through which they were brought in originally) and degraded  via
              proteolytic machinery in the cytosol known as  proteasomes.  The combined
              biochemical and molecular genetic  approach proposed in t his project  will
              lead to an  understanding of how this process actually works.  ***
