Title       : CAREER: A Polymerase Switch in the Synthesis of rRNA in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9722253

Award Number: 9722253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather Conrad-Webb hconradwebb@twu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Woman's University
	      BOX 425619 T W U STATION
	      Denton, TX  762045619    940/898-3375

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722253  Conrad-Webb   As we achieve greater understanding of the molecular
              basis of cellular structure and function, the distinctions among genetics,
              molecular biology and cellular biology fade.  Undergraduate students, who
              usually take separate courses in these disciplines, often compartmentalize
              information to the specific course and do not recognize the interdependence of
              these cellular processes.  Such fragmentation impedes the recognition of basic
              biological principles.  This project includes three educational objectives: a
              three semester course which integrates genetics, molecular and cellular biology
              and emphasizes cellular interactions; a corresponding two semester laboratory
              course to reinforce fundamental principles by conducting basic experiments; and
              exposure of students to the process of discovery through independent research. 
               The independent research will focus on the study of a polymerase switch in the
              synthesis of rRNA.  In respiratory deficient strains of Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae, rRNA is synthesized by both RNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase II.
               In these cells, a cryptic pol II rDNA promoter that overlaps the pol I
              promoter is used to synthesize an equivalent 35S precursor rRNA that can
              alleviate the requirement for pol I.  This novel finding introduces new
              questions in the regulation of rRNA synthesis and is particularly well suited
              to illustrating the role of scientific inquiry in changing perceptions of
              cellular function.  The objectives of this research are to:  1. Define the
              sequence signals for pol II transcription of rDNA.  2. Identify regulatory
              factors required for pol II transcription of rDNA.  3. Investigate the function
              of pol II rRNA.  Dissecting the role of poll II transcription of rRNA presents
              an intriguing problem for the introduction of students to the role of
              scientific discovery in expanding our understanding multiple cellular
              processes.  The switch in rRNA synthesis from pol I to pol II involves the
              interactions of multiple cellular processes including :  interorganellar
              communication, transcriptional activation and silencing, and preferential
              excision and replication of rDNA episomal copies.  Students will be
              investigating these interactions by synthesizing the various cellular processes
              that intertwine to produce pol II synthesis of rRNA.  %%%  As we achieve
              greater understanding of the molecular basis of cellular structure and
              function, the distinctions among genetics, molecular biology and cellular
              biology fade.  This project will include the development of a three semester
              course to integrate the information usually acquired in separate courses in
              genetics, cell and molecular biology.  Emphasis will be placed on the synthesis
              rather than compartmentalization of information, and the interactions of
              cellular processes as a framework for problem solving.  Furthermore, by
              participation in laboratory exercises and in the pursuit of independent
              research, students will witness first hand the process of scientific inquiry. 
              In respiratory deficient strains of yeast is synthesized by both RNA polymerase
              I and RNA polymerase II.  Dissecting the role of pol II transcription of rRNA
              presents an intriguing problem which will be used to introduce students to the
              role of scientific discovery in expanding our understanding multiple cellular
              processes.  Students will be investigating these interactions by synthesizing
              the various cellular processes that intertwine to produce pol II synthesis of
              rRNA.  ***
