Title       : Mechanisms of Integrin Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9722893

Award Number: 9722893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Zusman zusman@sbz.biology.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        9722893  Zusman        This proposal focuses on determining the
              functional significance of the Drosophila Position      Specific (PS) integrin
              cytoplasmic domains. The experiments address the following questions:      1)
              Which morphogenetic and signaling processes require integrin cytoplasmic
              domains? 2)      Which regions of a subunit cytoplasmic domains affect specific
              developmental processes? 3)      Can a subunit cytoplasmic domains function in
              developmental processes without a ( subunit      cytoplasmic domain? 4) How do
              integrin cytoplasmic domains influence extracellular binding      and gene
              expression? 5) What are the molecules that associate and/or are involved with
              the PS      integrins in developmental processes and signaling pathways? These
              questions will be answered      using molecular, genetic and cellular
              techniques that will involve the following: 1) The ability of      integrin
              subunits lacking all or a portion of their cytoplasmic domains or having
              mutated      cytoplasmic domains to function in developmental processes,
              signaling pathways and gene      expression will be assessed. These experiments
              will involve altering cDNAs encoding a      subunits by in vitro mutagenesis
              techniques, inserting them into the Drosophila genome with P-      element
              transformation and expressing them with the Drosophila GAL4 system. Genomic DNA
                   encoding the ,( subunit will also be altered and expressed. 2) The
              requirements for a cytoplasmic      domains in processes requiring PS
              integrins, but not requiring ( subunit cytoplasmic domains      will be
              examined. 3) DNA encoding Drosophila integrin subunits with mutated cytoplasmic
                   domains will be transfected into S2 cells and examined for their ability
              to induce cell spreading      on matrix molecules. 4) A molecular
              characterization of mutations that produce "integrin-like"      phenotypes and
              show genetic interactions with mutations in integrin-encoding genes will be    
               performed. 5) Integrin cytoplasmic ligands and functio nally related molecules
              will be identified      by a genetic screen for suppressors of the dominant
              lethality caused by misexpression of the      cytoplasmic domain of an a
              subunit .
