Title       : Subtilisin-like Plant Protease Cleaving at Multiple Acidic Amino Acid Residues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9722984

Award Number: 9722984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Tan-Wilson annatan@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl A. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722984  Tan-Wilson  Protease C1 catalyzes the initial limited proteolysis of
              the major soy storage globulins during early growth.  Its partial cDNA sequence
              suggests that it belongs to the subtilisin family of serine proteases. This
              merits further study since only seven of the enzymes in this large family of
              proteases are from plants. Moreover, sequences at protease C1's cleavage sites
              show a unique requirement for glutamate or aspartate residues at the P1, Pl',
              and P4' positions. The cleavage specificity of protease C1 mirrors the
              specificity of the subtilisin-related Kex2-1ike protein-processing proteases,
              except that the latter require multiple basic instead of multiple acidic amino
              acid residues.  In this project, the cleavage specificity of protease C1 will
              be further delineated using protein and synthetic peptide substrates gene
              expression will be studied by examining different parts of the plant at
              different developmental stages for activity and by hybridization of
              oligonucleotide probes to northern blots. The project would also determine
              whether other legume species that store seed proteins bearing strings of Glu
              and Asp residues have protease C1-like enzymes to initiate proteolysis during
              germination. Hybridization of oligonucleotide probes to Southern blots would
              reveal whether protease Cl-like genes exist in these species. If positive,
              maturing seeds and seedling cotyledons of these plants would be studied for
              protease Cl-like activity and hybridization of oligonucleotide probes to
              northern blots. Information on this proteolytic enzyme would be of interest to
              research groups attempting to clone commercially important products in legume
              storage proteins, and would contribute to our understanding of enzyme
              evolution.    Legumes constitute important sources of protein and edible oil.
              When genetic transformation of these plants becomes easier, the storage
              proteins are likely targets for manipulation to improve nutritional quality or
              to produce therapeutic peptides. In the latter case, it  will be vital to know
              the cleavage specificities of the proteolytic enzymes that these proteins would
              encounter since these enzymes cleave proteins, thus destroying the intended
              gene product.  This project is a study of protease C1, a proteolytic enzyme in
              soybean that initiates the breakdown of the stored proteins during soybean
              germination and early seedling growth.  The aims of the project are to
              determine what features the enzyme requires in a cleavage site and where in the
              plant and when during the plant's growth cycle this enzyme is present in active
              form so that cloning strategies to avoid its action can be designed. 
              Alternatively, proteolytic enzymes such as soybean protease C1 that is very
              discriminating with regard to clevage site may be put to good use in processing
              protein products for biotechnology.
