Title       : An Audiotactile General Chemistry Course for the Visually Impaired
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9722030

Award Number: 9722030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle L. Lloyd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred E. Lytle  (Principal Investigator former)
              David A. Schleppenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              P I:  Fred E. Lytle    The objective of this project is to create standard
              reference  materials for a freshman-level chemistry course that will be 
              accessible to blind and visually impaired students.  The  reference packet"
              will consist of braille, tactile diagrams,  audiotactile diagrams, and a
              tactile model kit.  Standard  procedures for producing tactile and audiotactile
              diagrams will  be created, refined, and disseminated to educators of visually 
              impaired students.  The project will use the latest advances in  adaptive
              technology for blind and visually impaired people.  Several different tactile
              media will be used, including high-  grade vacuum-molded plastics, the flexible
              tactile imaging paper  produced by Repro-Tronics, and various textured media as
              part of  the model kit.  Hardware such as the NOMAD (TM) touch tablet and  the
              Edmark Touch Window (TM) will be used to display the  information contained in
              audiotactile graphics.  The software to  be used will consist of AudioCAD (R),
              AudioPiCS (R), AutoCAD (R),  and some custom software developed as part of the
              project.  The  project should provide significant assistance to blind students 
              in several areas.  First, blind students at many institutions  will have access
              to standard reference materials that can be used  as a supplement to almost any
              General Chemistry course.  Second,  standards for tactile and audiotactile
              diagrams will be  developed.  Third, a document detailing the process by which 
              these diagrams can be made will be developed and disseminated.
