Title       : Neural Network Observers for Tracking Synchronous Machine Parameters and
               Incipient Failure Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9722844

Award Number: 9722844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Keyhani keyhani.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B L. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Heydt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9722844  Keyhani      The Ohio - State University, Arizona State University
              and Arizona Public Service Company propose to undertake a collaborative
              research effort in development of technology for on-line parameter
              identification and incipient failure detection of synchronous generators. The
              procedure will be based on the development of neural network based observers to
              track the machine damper currents, parameters, field winding to-stator turns
              ratio in dynamic disturbances and identify the signatures of the machine
              parameters, the machine neutral current and torque angle.  The impact of
              on-line parameter tracking and signature identification of the generator key
              indicators will have significant impact on-line incipient failure detection and
              identification of field winding degradation.  For example, the economic cost of
              a forced outage of The Arizona Public Service company Four-Corner unit is
              approximately two hundred thousand dollars a day.  The on-line detection of
              incipient failure will facilitate the orderly shutdown of generators for
              repair.  It is expected that the project will impact the original maintenance
              scheduling, of large synchronous generators.    Furthermore, in the next
              decades, the power systems of the United States will face bottlenecks of bulk
              power transfer capabilities because of the virtual absence of new transmission.
               The increased utilization of existing facilities to cop with growing magnitude
              of bulk power transfers and third-party access will require a closer look at
              system stability requirements.  The tracking of the machine parameters will
              facilitate more accurate stability studies.  Therefore, the economic impact of
              the proposed research is quite significant in permitting operation of power
              systems much closer to the stability limit by increasing the transfer
              capabilities and postponing the need for new construction
