Title       : CAREER: Genetic Investigation of Integrin Function at the Synapse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9722213

Award Number: 9722213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendal S. Broadie broadie@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                BROADIE, KENDAL   IBN - 9722213    Movement, behavior and higher brain
              function all require  nerve cells to transmit information to each other, and to
               muscle cells. Information travels along the nerve cell in  the form of an
              electrical impulse, and is  transmitted to another cell via a special
              communication link  called a synapse. The objective of this research is to 
              understand the mechanisms of synapse formation and function.  One powerful
              approach is to use genetics and molecular  biology in the fruitfly Drosophila 
              melanogaster. Genetic  mutants which lack a particular component of the synapse
              are  studied to determine the normal function of that component  in synaptic
              mechanisms. The fly neuromuscular junction  (NMJ), a synapse formed between a
              motor nerve  cell and a muscle, is well suited for these investigations 
              because it is large and accessible for physiology studies.  Recently, a family
              of four integrin proteins were shown to  be present at the Drosophila NMJ.
              Integrins are proteins  which span cell membranes and are known to be important
              in  adhesion and for relaying information across the membrane.  Integrins are
              always found as pairs: one alpha subunit and  one beta subunit make a
              functional protein. At the  Drosophila NMJ, four of these integrin subunits
              have  intriguing expression domains; one alpha-subunit is present  in the nerve
              cell membrane, two alpha-subunits are present  in the muscle membrane and a
              single beta-subunit is present  on both sides of the synaptic cleft.  Unlike
              other synaptic proteins, these integrins show a  distinctive onset of 
              expression in the NMJ, following  embryonic development and concurrent with the
              onset of overt  synaptic plasticity, the use-dependent modification of 
              synaptic morphology and function. Moreover, a mutation in  one of these
              integrin subunits causes a specific loss of  short-term memory. These results
              suggest that integrins are  playing important, specific roles in the mature
              synapse,  possibly mediating a form of plasticity unde rlying higher  brain
              functions including memory. We propose to investigate  integrin function at the
              synapse by genetically modifying or  removing each integrin subunit in turn and
              in combination  and investigating their mutant  phenotypes with a combination
              of functional  (electrophysiology) and anatomical (light microscopy,  electron
              microscopy) assays at the NMJ. The long-term goal  is to completely
              characterize the function of integrins at  the synapse.
