Title       : Characterization of Spatiotemporal Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9722814

Award Number: 9722814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry S. Greenside hsg@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9722814  Henry Greenside           "CHARACTERIZATION OF SPATIOTEMPORAL CHAOS"   
                   Renewal of support is requested for interdisciplinary research    
              (nonequilibrium physics, nonlinear dynamics, and computational     mathematics)
              concerning the characterization of spatiotemporal     chaos in large
              nonequilibrium systems such as those found in     biological, chemical, fluid,
              and laser systems. The research     will use numerical methods, parallel
              computers, and carefully     chosen mathematical models to explore two
              questions: (1) how     is spatiotemporal chaos related to the mathematical
              structure     of attractors in phase space? and, (2), can the infinite    
              hierarchy of unstable periodic orbits associated with a     strange attractor
              be used to characterize and control     high-dimensional chaos? The proposed
              research will: (a) yield     new methods for analyzing spatiotemporal data
              accumulated by     experimentalists and by computational scientists; (b)
              provide     new information about unstable periodic orbits (UPOs)    
              associated with extensive chaos and suggest new strategies for     their
              stabilization; (c) provide new insights about parallel     numerical algorithms
              for finding unstable periodic orbits of     partial differential equations in
              large spatial domains ; and     (d) give valuable training to students and
              postdocs at Duke in     the numerical analysis, simulation, and theory of
              complex     nonlinear dynamical systems.             Many problems in basic and
              applied science require a deeper     understanding of sustained nonequilibrium
              systems in which     complicated time-dependent behavior is caused by a steady
              flux     of energy and matter into a system. Examples can be found in    
              almost all areas of science but might include fluid     turbulence,
              fibrillation in a heart, epilepsy in a brain, the     design of high-power
              lasers, and instabilities of electrical     power grids. A fundamental question
              of high current interest     for many areas of science is how to re late the
              spatial     structure of a complex nonequilibrium medium to its temporal    
              state, especially when the system varies nonperiodically     (chaotically) in
              time. The proposed research suggests two ways     of addressing this question
              that have yet been incompletely     explored by previous research. This
              research will use applied     mathematics and computer simulation to study
              simplified     mathematical models in which spatial and temporal structure    
              can be examined in detail, and then various insights will be     tested with
              experimental data. Eventually, this research     should improve engineering
              control and design of complex     systems as well as provide a foundation for
              developing a     fundamental theory of sustained nonequilibrium systems.
