Title       : Validation Study of Elementary School Teacher Reports
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9722723

Award Number: 9722723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Hoffer thoffer@norcmail.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Dauber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9722723  Hoffer    Current efforts to improve mathematics and science education
              in American schools are strongly influenced by research based on national
              surveys of schools and their students. Highquality data on curriculum content
              and instructional practice are increasingly seen as crucial to understanding
              the variability in student educational outcomes. This need may well be greatest
              at the elementary school level, where national data are relatively scarce. The
              proposed study seeks to improve the understanding of elementary schooling and
              outcome differences, by assessing the validity of data collected from early
              elementary teachers on what they teach and how they teach it.  The U.S.
              Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics is about to
              embark on an unprecedented data collection effort, titled the Early Childhood
              Longitudinal Study (ECLS). The ECLS will begin in fall 1998 with a
              nationally-representative sample of 23,000 kindergartners drawn from over 1,000
              elementary schools. These students will be followed through the fifth grade,
              and data will be collected from their teachers each year. The teacher
              questionnaires include extensive sets of items asking about curriculum and
              instruction, but little is known about the validity of these measures: To what
              extent do they measure the phenomena of actual interest? As the largest study
              ever conducted of early elementary education in the United States, the ECLS
              data and data-collection instruments will be drawn upon by other studies for
              many years to come, and will greatly influence how curriculum and instruction
              are conceived and studied. Clearly, there are great benefits to making the
              instruments as good as possible.  To address the issues of validity, the
              proposed study will administer field-test versions of the ECLS teacher
              questionnaires to a sample of 60 kindergarten, first-grade, and second-grade
              teachers in 12 schools. These teachers will then complete daily logs of how
              they used their time to teach mathematics and scie nce. The project will
              collect extensive archival records of the texts and materials used in the
              classes, and will code this information to make it comparable with the
              questionnaire items. The daily log and archive-derived data will then be
              systematically compared with the questionnaire data to identify points of
              agreement and disagreement. If the study is conducted in the spring ofthe
              1996-97 school year, cognitive achievement test data for random samples of
              children in the teachers' classes will be available, and will be correlated
              with the curriculum and instruction variables collected from the teachers. The
              analytic efforts will be followed by debriefing sessions and focus groups with
              the participating teachers as a means of further checking the researchers'
              interpretations of the results.  The study will produce technical reports
              documenting the entire project, as well as journal articles focussing on the
              general methodological and substantive implications of the study. These
              documents will be written in close consultation with leading authorities in
              research on mathematics and science education.
