Title       : CAREER: Subcellular Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9722320

Award Number: 9722320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Webb awebb@uribrl.brl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              deseree davisdeseree davis    The proposed research aims to develop
              instrumentation which  will improve the resolution of nuclear magnetic
              resonance  (NMR) microscopy by at least an order of magnitude to the (1-  2 m)3
               range. Since mammalian cells are typically 5-10 m in  diameter, this advance
              would open up a whole range of  subcellular applications which are currently
              precluded.    The intrinsic advantages of NMR over other microscopic 
              techniques include the ability to provide full three-  dimensional information
              and its non-invasive character. NMR  microscopy not only gives spatial
              information, but can also  be used to determine chemical composition, proton
              mobility,  and molecular diffusion, the latter two measurements giving 
              information on the physical environment of the biological  molecules of
              interest. The major innovation in this research  will be the design and
              optimization of radiofrequency (RF)  microcoils of diameter 100-200 m, an order
              of magnitude less  than has previously been used in NMR microimaging 
              applications. In addition to the intrinsic increase in  signal-to-noise ratio
              (SNR) per voxel for a given voxel  size, the use of small RF coils results in a
              lower  acquisition bandwidth and further SNR improvements over  larger coils.
              These RF coils will also allow the design and  construction of very small
              diameter, high strength magnetic  field gradients, which will be necessary to
              overcome  diffusion and susceptibility effects and achieve the desired 
              resolution. An integrated assembly of RF microcoil, magnetic  field gradients,
              and micropositioner will be constructed.  Filtered back projection (FBP)
              techniques will be used to  acquire the data, since these have an intrinsically
              higher  SNR than Fourier techniques, and require smaller gradients  for a given
              resolution.    The first experiments using the optimized imaging system  will
              be to determine experimentally the maximum possible  resolution by comparing
              competing theories of effects of  molecular diffusion, the lowest  detectable
              number of spins,  and the effects of phenomena such as edge enhancement at non-
               permeable boundaries. These have not been rigorously studied  previously since
              the sensitivity of the radiofrequency coils  was not sufficiently high. Two
              major biological applications  of the research are proposed. First, high
              resolution  microimaging of excised spinal cord tissue. Non-invasive MRI  has
              shown that signal intensity changes are produced by both  spinal cord damage
              and subsequent regeneration. In order to  understand these changes fully, it is
              necessary to look at  the small structures within the cord, as opposed to a
              large  volume averaged signal intensity from the whole cord.  Second, we will
              use the microscopic radiofrequency and  gradient coils to determine the
              presently unknown physical  environment of protein-rich vesicles by two
              dimensional  diffusion-ordered spectroscopy, information which should  help to
              elucidate the action of certain neurotransmitters in  mammals.    The
              development of micro-NMR systems is an emerging area in  imaging which should
              be fully integrated into our academic  curriculum. Currently the applicant,
              together with his  colleagues, have developed a unique series of three courses 
              in magnetic resonance within the Department of Electrical  and Computer
              Engineering. The major educational thrust will  be to complete the integration
              of interactive computer based  learning into these three courses, combined with
              the  preparation of a laboratory based course on magnetic  resonance systems to
              accompany a graduate level lecture  series. The proposed research has many
              aspects which are  relevant to electrical engineering: high frequency modelling
               and simulations, electrical circuit characterization, and  design
              optimization, as well as applications which are of  interest to the
              bioengineer. Indeed, since magnetic  resonance is not usually an active area
              for electrical  engineers, we anticipate that significant advances will be 
              made by the inclusion of faculty, underg raduate and graduate  researchers from
              this department. More than twenty students  within the department have already
              chosen this area for  undergraduate research and their Senior Design projects
              with  the applicant in the past two years.
