Title       : "Career" Student Modelers - A study of Technology Enhanced Modeling Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9722235

Award Number: 9722235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Doerr hmdoerr@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary    The primary goal of this research project is to investigate
              the nature of the development of models by students in technology enhanced
              environments in middle school and secondary school settings. Model building
              occurs as students use and create symbolic, graphical, numeric, geometric and
              verbal descriptions of meaningful situations and structurally similar
              situations. Understanding the way learners develop and make sense of
              generalizable models and their underlying structure is the crucial focus of
              this research. This research project should lead to a more refined
              conceptualization of the model building cycles that learners engage in and to a
              characterization of those activities and strategies that support multiple
              stages of successful model building. This work in grounded in
              socioconstructivist learning theory and will significantly extend the extensive
              base of problem solving research in mathematics education by investigating
              multiple cycles of modeling. The results of this research should have
              significant implications for the design of tools and simulations as
              generalizable and re-usable technologies.    Integrated with this research is
              an education plan to develop an undergraduate course that will provide
              pre-service mathematics teachers with the modeling experiences they need as
              learners of mathematics in order to teach from a modeling perspective. In
              addition, the proposed research should lead to the development and refinement
              of principles for the design of sequences of model building activities and
              studies of the associated pedagogical strategies and methods of assessing
              student learning in a technology enhanced modeling environment. These
              principles and studies will lead in turn to the development of guidelines and
              materials for teacher professional development. Careful examination of the
              models that students build will provide powerful new means of assessing student
              learning and insight into the effective use of technological tools. An Advisory
              Committee will be form ed to provide guidance and advice throughout the
              project.
