Title       : Workshop: An International Gene Nomenclature Workshop at the Jackson Laboratory
               in Bar Harbor, Maine, April 30, 1997 - May 3, 1997.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9722752

Award Number: 9722752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18437              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muriel T. Davisson mtd@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This award will partially fund a workshop to be held at The  Jackson
              Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, on April 30 through  May 3, 1997 on the topic of
              reconciling existing systems of  gene nomenclature.  Rapid comparative,
              multi-species genome  mapping and the integration of genetic data derived from 
              various model organisms have become powerful tools in  understanding the
              structure and function of the human  genome.  These various model organism
              communities until now  have developed independent systems for naming genes
              which  has resulted in an abundance of duplicate names and various  other
              nomenclatural inconsistencies which are especially  problematic when genes are
              compared among species. Accurate  gene names are essential for effective
              communication both  in the literature and in online database cross-linking.   
              This workshop will serve as a forum for discussing current  nomenclature issues
              and for the coordination of this  information among nomenclature groups for
              different  species.  Although the mouse and human nomenclature  committees have
              met formally in the past, this will be the  first multi-organism genetic
              nomenclature workshop.  It  will bring together approximately 40 scientists 
              representing various species (vertebrates, invertebrates,  yeast, and plants),
              and databases (MGD, GDB, GSDB, EMBL,  NCBI) to discuss issues such as 1)
              developing systematic  approaches to nomenclature and symbol assignment across 
              species, 2) improving links between databases, 3)  organizing genes into gene
              families and retrieving family  information from databases, 4) fostering
              working  relationships among those involved in nomenclature, and 5) 
              encouraging community curation of gene family designations  across species. A
              summary manuscript will be prepared and  submitted for publication in the
              journal Genomics and for  on-line access.
