Title       : RUI: Investigation of the Ambient pH Signal Transduction Pathway of Aspergillus
               nidulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9722744

Award Number: 9722744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Denison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi College
	      
	      Clinton, MS  39058    601/924-5131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Denison  9722744  All cells respond to signals from the environment. This is
              true of micro-organisms, many of which are composed of only a single cell, and
              of individual cells of multicellular organisms such as humans.  Single-celled
              organisms respond to environmental signals such as the availability of
              nutrients and increases in temperature, acidity or osmotic pressure of the
              environment. The response of micro-organisms to environmental signals is to
              alter cellular processes to ensure survival in the new conditions. For example,
              yeast cells respond to increases in environmental osmotic pressure by
              accumulating certain intracellular substances to balance the change in
              environmental osmotic pressure.  These various responses of cells to
              environmental signals occur as a result of altered activity of genes whose
              products are required for these processes. As genes of these eukaryotic cells
              are located in the nucleus, the environmental signal must be transduced from
              the cell membrane, which separates the cell from the environment, to the
              nucleus. The signals are transduced by mechanisms called signal transduction
              pathways. Components of signal transduction pathways from micro-organisms are
              very similar to those of cells of multicellular organisms.  Aspergillus
              nidulans is a filamentous fungus used as an experimental system to investigate
              a number of important questions in genetics and cell biology. Aspergillus
              possesses an ambient pH signal transduction pathway which ensures that enzymes
              which function extracellularly are produced under conditions of ambient pH at
              which they can function. Extracellular enzymes which function only at certain
              pH values include proteases and phosphatases which are required for nutrient
              acquisition by Aspergillus. The components of this ambient pH signal
              transduction pathway are the products of the pal genes, palA, B, C, F, H and I.
              At alkaline ambient pH, the pal pathway causes the activation of the
              pacC-encoded transcription factor which causes genes whose products fun ction
              in alkaline pH to be transcribed. The goal of this project is to determine how
              the pal pathway transduces the signal of alkaline ambient pH.  The aims of the
              project are to complete the sequence of the palI gene, which will allow
              determination of the protein product that it encodes. Preliminary sequence
              information suggests that the palI-encoded protein, PalI, is a membrane protein
              and may therefore be the pH sensor in the signaling pathway, initiating the
              signal transduction in response to alkaline ambient pH. A strain of Aspergillus
              which is disrupted for the pall gene will also be created to determine the
              effect of a complete absence of PalI. Another goal of the project is to use
              immunofluorescence microscopy to determine if PalI is located in the cell
              membrane which will help determine if it is the ambient pH sensor. New
              mutations (suppressor mutations) in Aspergillus will also be isolated which
              overcome the lack of pH signal transduction in strains with mutations in palI.
              This is to isolate new genes whose products interact with PalI in transducing
              the signal of alkaline pH and new genes whose products function elsewhere in
              the signaling pathway.
