Title       : Mechanisms of Long-Term Transynaptic Regulation of Neurotransmitter Release
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9722785

Award Number: 9722785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Grinnell adg@jlnrc.medsch.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Project Summary: IBN-9722785, Alan D. Grinnell, P.I.  Mechanisms of Long-Term
              Transynaptic Regulation of  Neurotransmitter  Release"    Competitive
              interactions between synapses innervating the  same target cell are critical in
              the establishment and  refinement of connectivity in the nervous system, and in
              the  adjustment of synaptic strength with use or experience. One  of the most
              intriguing forms is known as "Hebbian"  plasticity, in which synaptic inputs
              that are active  simultaneously with postsynaptic activity are retained or 
              strengthened, while synapses that are  not active at the same time as the
              postsynaptic cell are  suppressed or lost.       A particularly clear,
              accessible  instance of such pre-synaptic suppression is that observed  in
              synapses between Xenopus motoneurons and muscle cells in  culture. Transmitter
              release at a synapse is suppressed by  manipulations that elevate the calcium
              concentration in the  muscle cell, simulating activation of another synaptic 
              input. The synapse can be protected from suppression if it  is active during
              the time of calcium-induced feedback.  The mechanisms of suppression and
              protection are unknown.  We have developed techniques for patch-clamping
              synaptic  terminals and postsynaptic cells simultaneously in this  system,
              allowing us to analyze rigorously the magnitude and  time course of ionic
              currents in the terminal and the  associated  neurotransmitter release. With a
              third patch  pipette it is possible to introduce reagents into the  synaptic 
              terminal through the neuronal cell body. Since calcium  influx during a
              presynaptic action potential  is critical to neurotransmitter release, we will
              first (1)  determine whether long-term  suppression of  synaptic function is
              associated with a decrease in calcium-  influx either by  direct modulation of
              calcium channels or  by changes in other ionic currents in the terminal, and 
              what these changes are at the level of single channels. If  suppression of
              release can be explained by changes in ionic   currents, we will determine (2)
              whether the suppression  effects are mediated by G-protein associated
              receptors, and  whether this is by a direct ("membrane delimited") or  indirect
              (second messenger mediated) pathway, and (3)  whether cyclic  nucleotides help
              mediate the effect.   In addition, we will  test (4) whether protection by
              simultaneous synaptic  activity is due to prevention of the suppressive
              influence  or to some compensatory change,  and (5)  what aspect of neuronal
              activity is responsible for  this protection.      The Xenopus
              motoneuron-muscle cell  synapses are robust, characteristic in most respects of
               mature synapses. The Hebbian character of the modulation,  the evidence for
              activity-dependent protection of synapses,  the accessibility of the
              preparation, and above all the  ability to monitor and manipulate pre-synaptic
              events make  this an ideal  preparation in which to obtain insights about
              mechanisms of  long-term synaptic remodeling and plasticity.
