Title       : Whale Sharks in the Sulu Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9722909

Award Number: 9722909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Kooyman gkooyman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
Program Ref : 5927,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9722909  Kooyman                                        This is a 24-month award
              proposed by Drs. Gerald Kooyman and  Scott Eckert, the Scripps Institution of
              Oceanography.  This  is a three-country (U.S., Malaysia and the Philippines) 
              cooperative study on whale sharks, Rhincodon typus, in the  Sulu Sea.  The
              project will be carried out by a team of researchers  from three U.S.
              institutes: the Scripps Institute of  Oceanography, Hubbs Sea World Research
              Institute, and the  University of Florida, and four Malaysian and Philippine 
              institutes: the Universiti of Sabah (Borneo Marine Research  Unit) and Sabah
              Parks (Marine Division) in Malaysia, and the  Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
              Resources and Silliman  University in the Philippines.    Dr. Kooyman, who is
              the U.S.P.I., requests funds for U.S.  components of student support and for
              travel and field costs  for studying the migration and movement patterns of the
               whale shark, Rhincodon typus.  The team of researchers plans  to use satellite
              telemetry and Spaghetti tagging to define  the home range and distribution of
              whale sharks in the Sulu  Sea. There is little information available on whale
              shark in  the Sulu Sea.  This is a very important conservation and  biological
              study of a species, which has been exploited  extensively by humans for its
              meat and fin products.   This  is the first time that satellite telemetry is
              being used to  track whale sharks.  The experience gained from this study  can
              be applied to many other large fish species in other  parts of the ocean.   The
              data collected from this study can  not only provide vital information leading
              to a more precise  estimate of the overall shark population, and on its 
              migration and home range, but also can lead to improvement  in the conservation
              of this species despite increased human  exploitation. This project is jointly
              supported by Sabah  Parks (Marine Division) in Malaysia, the Bureau of
              Fisheries  and Aquatic Resources, Philippine, and NSF.
