Title       : The Impact of Three Dimensional Immersive Virtual Environments on Modern
               Pedagogy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9722906

Award Number: 9722906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39049              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Furness tfurness@hitl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Our research at the University of Washington's Human Interface Technology
              Laboratory (HIT Lab) indicates that three dimensional immersive virtual
              environments such as  virtual reality may be able to help students understand
              concepts and rules in complex content domains better than traditional
              educational delivery methods.  The main goal for this project will be develop a
              research program to fully explore and test hypotheses associated with these
              observations.    In order to accomplish this goal we propose to host a two-day
              meeting of 12 to 15 content specialists, educators, education technology
              specialist and cognitive scientists in Seattle, Washington, during March 1997.
              This workshop will focus on the teaching and learning of complex science
              content. In this regard, we have selected global warming phoenomenon as the
              test content area to analyze because of its complexity and its relevance to
              middle and high school science curriculum.    Expected workshop results
              include: 1) recommendations on the direction of virtual reality (VR) research
              in education; 2) key questions and metrics to assess the goodness of  immersive
              3D interactive virtual environments relative to more traditional methods; 3)
              determination of the curriculum topics wherein 3D, interfaces and interactivity
              may have the greatest impact on learning; 4) organization of a core group of
              interdisciplinary researchers who will be available to advise and collaborate
              on research projects of interest. We plan to disseminate the results of the
              workshop via published reports and via a WWW site.     We feel that the
              research agenda that we develop will be useful to the National Science
              Foundation (NSF) and other government agencies in helping to establish
              priorities in vestments to deploy advanced technologies in the classroom. In
              addition, we anticipate that this workshop will serve as a catalyst for the
              research community to develop into the difficult issues such as the cost versus
              benefits of advanced virtual interfaces versus currently  available lower-cost
              alternatives.
