Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Studies of the Solar Corona Using Simultaneous X-ray and
               Radio Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9722489

Award Number: 9722489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukul R. Kundu kundu@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9722489  Kundu  This award provides funds to support a three-month research
              visit by Dr. Mukul R. Kundu, Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland at
              College Park, for collaboration with Dr. Takashi Sakurai, Narikura Solar
              Observatory, National Astronomical Observatory, Mitaka, Japan.  Their research
              is concerned with studies of the sun's corona and solar flares using
              simultaneously obtained X-ray and radio data from the Japanese Space mission
              Yohkoh and ground based radio telescopes, especially, the Nobeyama
              Radioheliograph in Japan. Three specific projects included in this research,
              covering a broad range of coronal phenomena are (1) a study of radio emission
              associated with coronal X-ray jets discovered by SXT (soft-X-ray brightenings
              which originate in the low corona and then propagate through the corona along
              magnetic loops), using both low-frequency and highfrequency radio data; and (2)
              a study of the evolution of active regions in terms of flare productivity; and
              (3) a survey of the Xray emission above sunspot umbrae, in order to determine
              the nature of the corona directly above sunspots; this will be combined with
              radio data on the magnetic fields above the same spots.  Dr. Kundu has made
              pioneering contributions to the knowledge of the sun's corona using combined
              radio and X-ray imaging data. Dr.Sakurai will bring his theoretical expertise
              to the problem of studying solar active regions and flares from the point of
              view of magnetic energy storage and trigger mechanisms.  Their complementary
              expertise is expected be an asset to their collaborative studies.  The project
              will provide to the U.S. scientist access to unique resources, not available
              elsewhere in the world, for study of the sun's coronal activities.  This
              project is supported under the Science Fellowship Program between the National
              Science Foundation and the Japan Foundation Center for Global Partnership.  ***
