Title       : CAREER: The Research Integrated Curriculum Involving A Molecular Study of
               Retrotransposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9722274

Award Number: 9722274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill B. Keeney keeney@juniata.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Juniata College
	      1700 Moore Street
	      Huntingdon, PA  166522119    814/643-4310

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Keeney  9722274  The educational objectives of this CAREER award are to
              expose students to the excitement of scientific research from the high school
              through the college level. This is being achieved by:  1. Preparing
              undergraduate students for engaging fully in research through development of 
              an investigative laboratory course, Molecular Techniques, based on the research
              in the principal investigator's laboratory.  2. Providing the capstone
              experience of senior research and providing the opportunity for students to
              present their research results.  3. Involving local high school teachers in the
              research project and assisting them in more effectively relating the research
              process to their students through development and implementation of appropriate
              curricular exercises. Developed exercises will be distributed through the
              successful Science in Motion Outreach Project in place at Juniata College.  4.
              Continuing building a strong Biochemistry/Cell and Molecular Biology Program
              through advising and integration of educational activities which expose
              students to the process and complexity of research.  The research involves
              using a genetic system to study the mechanism of reverse transcription in yeast
              retroelements. The reverse transcriptase (RT) enzyme of these elements, like
              the RT enzymes of retroviruses, employ a host-encoded tRNA molecule as a primer
              in the first step of copying their RNA into DNA. The resulting DNA can then be
              incorporated into the host genome, allowing for further replication. The
              research is appropriate for undergraduates due to the relative simplicity of
              techniques required to conduct yeast genetic studies. The research objectives
              are to:  1. Use saturated mutagenesis of the tRNA gene, initiated in the
              Molecular Techniques laboratory, to identify residues important for recognition
              by RT enzyme.  2. Use identified tRNA mutations to screen a panel of RT
              mutations in vivo for the rescue of transposition, thus identifying the amino
              acid residues in the RT enzyme required f or recognition of the tRNA primer. 3.
              Purify mutant RT enzyme for collaborative biochemical studies of interaction
              with primer tRNA.  Implementation of the research objectives relates directly
              to the institutional goal of building a strong  program which includes an
              opportunity for research experience.  The educational objectives will
              strengthen this goal by integrating into the curriculum, beginning in high
              school, the opportunities for students to experience the excitement of
              discovery.   Students choosing to pursue a capstone research project as college
              seniors will be well prepared, assuring a positive and productive experience
              with cutting-edge research.
