Title       : Analysis of Voltage-Induced Structural Changes in Cell Membrane Components with
               Miniature Infrared Waveguide Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9722887

Award Number: 9722887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Braiman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722887  Braiman  The goal of this research is to develop miniature infrared
              wave-guide in order to detect an analyze voltage-induced conformational changes
              in membrane-bound proteins.  The motivation for miniaturization of the sensors,
              using a thickness of 5-50 (m and a width of 0.5-2 mm, is to permit in-situ
              observation of IR spectra from membranes of intact individual cells.  This will
              allow IR spectroscopy to be performed as a function of cell membrane potential,
              which will be controlled using a whole-cell voltage clamp.  Sensitive
              voltage-dependent IR differences spectra should thus reveal how the living
              cell's membrane components respond to transient shifts in transmembrane
              voltage.  A particular goal is to prove experimentally a set of feasibility
              calculations predicting that this approach will allow voltage-induced
              difference spectra to be measured on an ion channel expressed in a frog oocyte,
              or on a small channel peptide reconstituted into a giant liposome.  The cell or
              liposome will be held in contact with a miniature supported planar Ge
              waveguide.  A portion of the IR light energy propagating along the waveguide is
              carried in a evanescent wave that can be absorbed by molecules near its
              surface, including those in the cell or liposome membrane.  Detection of a
              reproducible voltage-dependence of the evanescent-wave absorption spectrum is
              the principal goal of the project, since this voltage-dependent spectrum will
              provide information about the structural changes involved in channel opening.  
                 A kind of biosensor, based on a thin genmanium waveguide that conducts
              infrared light, will be used to detect structural changes in the membranes of
              single cells.  When a cell, or a single-layer biomembrane vesicle resembling a
              cell, is placed in contact with the germanium surface, the light transmitted
              through the waveguide can be absorbed at selective wavelengths, and the
              spectrum measured.  The waveguide concentrates infrared light along a path that
              maximizes the light's interaction with mol ecules in the cell membrane,
              relative to the light's interaction with the strongly-IR-absorbing bulk water
              that must also be present to allow the cell to function normally.  Selective
              absorption of different infrared wavelengths by the cell membrane's components
              will be the basis for spectroscopic analysis of their chemical structures.  A
              particular goal is a basic understanding of how various ion-channel proteins
              function.  However, this research should also advance our national technical
              capabilities in the sensitive chemical analysis of a wide variety of tiny
              samples, which may be of importance for such varied tasks as environmental
              monitoring.  ***
