Title       : The Evolution of Lymphocyte Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9722996

Award Number: 9722996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Warr warrgw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry E. Ledford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9722996  Warr        The bony fish have immune systems which are
              similar to those of  higher vertebrates but seem to be less complex.  The
              channel  catfish is a well developed experimental fish model, and also a 
              commercially important aquacultured species.  This laboratory has  previously
              isolated and mapped the gene that encodes the heavy  chain of the major
              antibody (IgM) of the channel catfish, and the  proposed studies are focused on
              the mechanisms by which this gene  is expressed.  In this grant they will
              investigate the nature of  the enhancer that drives transcription of this gene,
              and the  transcription factors that are essential for the expression of  the
              gene.  In preliminary experiments they have identified the  catfish
              transcription factor that bind to the "octamer: motif  which is characteristic
              of immunoglobulin genes.  This  transcription factor and the octomer motif to
              which it binds  appear to have undergone co-evolution.  The catfish oct 
              transcription factor has a strong functional preference for a  motif that has a
              different sequence from that found in mammals.  They propose to determine the
              basis for this preference by  looking at the binding affinity and other protein
              factors that  bind to DNA. The role of the transcription factor or other 
              possible transcription factors will also be determined.  These  studies will
              not only provide information on the regulation of  the catfish immunoglobulin
              heavy chain gene, but will provide  information on regulation of immunoglobulin
              genes in general, and  will also indicate how immunoglobulin gene expression
              has evolved  in vertebrates.  %%%      Studies of the immune system in fish,
              show similarities and  differences from the immune system of mammals. 
              Understanding the  relation of the immunoglobulin genes of the catfish, will
              provide  information on the general regulation of immunoglobulin genes,  and
              also will enable us to understand how immunoglublin heavy  chain gene
              expression has evolved in vertebrates.    ***
