Title       : Characterization of the Interactions of Eukaryotic Initiation Factors,
               Ribosomes, and mRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9722907

Award Number: 9722907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dixie J. Goss dgoss@hejira.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722907  Goss  The long term goal of this project is to understand the mechanism
              of eukaryotic  protein synthesis.  Eukaryotes initiate translation differently
              in normal cells than in virus infected cells or cells under stress conditions
              such as heat shock. The overall scheme of protein synthesis has been described,
              but the details and particularly the kinetics of this process remain to be
              elucidated.  The equilibrium and kinetics of the interaction of eukaryotic
              initiation factors (eIFs) with mRNA and oligonucleotides will be examined.  The
              effects of eIFs on ribosome binding to several oligonucleotides and mRNA will
              be determined.  Direct fluorescence measurements will be used to elucidate the
              interaction of initiation factors, ribosomes and mRNA or oligonucleotides. 
              These multiple interactions will be analyzed to determine if the binding
              interactions are cooperative, anti-cooperative, or independent.  Kinetic
              results will determine the rate limiting steps and the probable pathway of
              interactions.  Quantitative data will give insight into the effect of mRNA
              secondary structure on ribosome binding, the possible communication between the
              5' and 3' termini of RNA, and the possibility of internal ribosome entry in
              higher plant systems.  These results will aid in formulating a detailed
              molecular mechanism for the assembly of the eukaryotic initiation complex.   
              This project will elucidate the mechanism for protein synthesis in plant  
              systems.  Regulation of protein synthesis is important in regulation of cell
              growth and development as well as in biotechnology applications.  Plants
              provide possible hosts for production of vaccines and other proteins of
              commercial interest without the contaminants that may be present from a
              bacterial or other host used for gene cloning.  It is therefore important to
              understand the regulation of protein synthesis in plants.  These studies will
              determine the rate limiting steps for  interactions that determine the
              production of proteins. By elucidating these steps o ne can then determine the
              possible intervention points to increase or decrease the rate of the overall
              protein synthesis process.
