Title       : Career: Regulation of Virulence Genes in Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9722227

Award Number: 9722227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shouguang Jin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jin  9722227    Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a gram-negative soil bacterium
              which causes tumors on plants by means of natural genetic engineering. The
              organism harbors a large tumor inducing plasmid (Ti-plasmid) which plays an
              important role in plant tumor formation. Upon infection of a plant wound site,
              A. tumefaciens delivers a piece of DNA, called transfer DNA (T-DNA), from its
              Ti-plasmid into plant cells where it becomes integrated into the plant
              chromosome. Another region on the Ti-plasmid, the virulence genes (vir genes),
              is not transferred but required for the transfer of the T-DNA from
              Agrobacterium into plant cells. The expression of these vir genes is
              specifically induced by plant signal molecules, including simple phenolic
              compounds and monosaccharides.    This naturally occurring plant transformation
              system has been modified to genetically engineer a variety of plant species
              with genes of interest. Many studies suggested that the level of vir gene
              expression determines the efficiency of plant transformation as well as the
              range of plant species that can be transformed. This research is intended to
              further analyze the molecular mechanism of the vir gene activation by plant
              signal molecules. Genetic as well as biochemical approaches are being carried
              out to study the structure-function relationship of the VirA protein and to
              characterize the chromosomal genes of Agrobacterium that affect the vir gene
              activation. Based on these studies, we will reconstitute vir gene activation in
              a genetically and biochemically well studied E. coli background. Specifically
              the following objectives are being carried out:   1) Study  the
              structure-function relationship of the VirA sensor protein. Chimeric fusion
              proteins will be generated between VirA and other known phenolic binding
              proteins to localize the phenolic binding domain of the VirA protein. Further,
              the virA mutants that have altered specificity for the phenolic inducers will
              be characterized. Amino acid residues of the VirA protein that are i mportant
              for the recognition of the phenolic compounds will be identified. Finally, the
              binding of VirA protein to the phenolic compounds will be studied in vitro
              using radio-labeled acetosyringone.  2) Characterize chromosomal mutants that
              are defective in the vir gene expression. The transposon insertional mutant
              strains of the Agrobacterium, those defective in the vir gene activation, will
              be analyzed further to identify chromosomal genes that are disrupted. Novel
              loci that affect vir gene activation will be cloned and sequenced.  3)
              Reconstitute vir gene induction in E. coli. The A. tumefaciens chromosomal
              cosmid clone which confers vir gene expression in E. coli in the presence of a
              constitutive virG gene will be characterized. The functional gene will be
              subcloned and sequenced for further studies. Using the newly isolated gene, an
              acetosyringone mediated vir gene activation will be reconstituted in E. coIi. 
              These studies will help us to better understand the molecular mechanism of vir
              gene activation by plant signal molecules and enable us to reconstitute and
              study the T-DNA transport system in a genetically and biochemically well
              studied E. coli background, which will facilitate the studies of the T-DNA
              transport from bacteria into plants.  These studies should eventually
              contribute to the improvement of existing Agrobacterium mediated plant cell
              transformation systems, especially transforming economically and
              environmentally important plant species, including rice, corn and wheat.  The
              educational plan includes (1) Development of advanced teaching materials. The
              plant-microbe interaction topics will be introduced into graduate courses and 
              computer-based self-learning teaching materials will be developed; (2) Support
              of undergraduate student research, especially involving underrepresented
              minority students; and (3) Improvement of teaching materials used in an
              existing outreach project for  local high school teachers.
