Title       : Late Quaternary Paleoecology and Archeology of Alaska's Alexander Archipelago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a9722858

Award Number: 9722858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109975             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. James Dixon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. James Dixon and his collaborators
              will conduct one season of archaeological excavation and associated survey at
              the site of PET-408 which is located on the Prince of Wales Island on the West
              Coast of Alaska. In 1996 human remains and artifacts were discovered in this
              remote cave as a result of paleontological excavations. Two radiocarbon dates
              on the human bone have yielded ages in excess of 9,000 years and make the
              skeleton the oldest reliably dated human in Alaska or western Canada. A series
              of additional dates demonstrate that the cave deposits span the past ca. 40,000
              years. While clearly of great potential significance, work at PET-408 to date
              has been limited and it is not known how the skeleton is associated with the
              surrounding deposits. Until this is determined is unclear how much further
              excavation is required. With one season of support Dr. Dixon and his
              collaborators will conduct further evaluation of the site and survey
              surrounding areas for other such occurrences.  Human remains dating to the end
              of the last Ice age are extremely rare in North America. Organic artifacts of
              this age are virtually unknown from Southeast Alaska. PET-408 provides the
              first opportunity to understand and describe the physical characteristics of
              early Northwest Coast peoples and their material culture. It will also help to
              trace the path of the original inhabitants from Asia into the New World. Two
              alternative hypotheses have been proposed. Many archaeologists believe that
              humans moved south through central western Canada after the melting of
              continental glaciers. Others have suggested that the earliest human migration
              may have occurred with the use of watercraft along the southern margin of
              Beringia and the southward along the Northwest Coast of North America. This may
              have enabled humans to enter southern areas of the Americas prior to melting of
              the continental glaciers. It is important to address these hypotheses because
              each requires a different type of cultural adaptation by the New World founding
              population and the nature of this adaptation set the stage for subsequent New
              World cultural development. The caves of Prince of Wales Island are ideally
              suited for evaluating the coastal migration theory because they were ice free
              during the late Pleistocene, they were the foci of human activity, and they
              contain preserved datable organic remains.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
