Title       : Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium Japonicum/Soybean Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9722974

Award Number: 9722974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. O'Brian mrobrian@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722974  O 'Brian  Bradyrhizobium japonicum is the bacterial endosymbiont of
              soybean that fixes nitrogen within cells of a specialized plant organ called a
              root nodule. The broad objective of the research is to understand the
              regulation and coordination of processes necessary for symbiotic development
              and function. Nitrogen fixation is energy-intensive, and thus changes in the
              plant and bacterial heme profile are concomitant with nodule ontogeny to
              accommodate this demand. The project addresses the hypothesis that heme
              biosynthesis is a regulated, interactive process in B. japonicum, and that it
              is coordinated with cell differentiation and function. In addition, this system
              is excellent for studies of heme synthesis and heme protein function, and
              serves as a paradigm for both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. (-aminolevulinic acid
              (ALA) is the first universal committed heme precursor, and work from the P.I.
              's laboratory indicates that B. japonicum heme can be synthesized by
              host-derived ALA. This model requires a mechanism for acquiring exogenous ALA,
              and suggests regulation of bacterial heme biosynthesis at steps other than, or
              in addition to, ALA synthesis. Indeed, data show that B. japonicum hemB is a
              highly regulated gene. A novel protein called IRR has been identified that
              mediates iron control of heme synthesis directly by repressing hemB expression
              and indirectly by activating iron transport; hemB and IRR function and
              regulation will be studied.  The ALA uptake system of B. japonicum has been
              partially characterized, and shown to be controlled by a homolog of the
              transcriptional regulator Lrp.  Finally, recent findings question the long-held
              view that plant nodule hemoglobin heme is derived by the rhizobial symbiont,
              and that problem will be revisited.    Certain bacteria that live in the soil
              can form a beneficial relationship with soybeans and other related plants of
              agricultural interest. The relationship confers on the plant the ability to
              grow in soil in the absence of applied nitrogen fe rtilizer, thus it has
              economic and environmental importance.  In addition, the symbiosis has become a
              good model for understanding other biological phenomena that appear to differ
              from the one under study, but in fact are very similar at the molecular level.
              The research focuses on understanding how the bacterium Bradyrhizobium
              japonicum changes during its interaction with soybean to adapt to its role in
              symbiosis, and how formation of heme, a compound important in energy
              metabolism, is controlled.
