Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Performance Studies of the EM-X Distributed-Memory
               Multiprocessor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9722187

Award Number: 9722187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85456              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sohn sohn@cis.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 5921,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9722187  Sohn    This award provides funds to support two research visits,  for
              a total of nine months, by Dr. Andrew Sohn, Department  of Computer and
              Information Science, New Jersey Institute of  Technology, for collaboration
              with Dr. Yoshinori Yamaguchi,  Computer Science Division, Electrotechnical
              Laboratory,  Tsukuba, Japan.  Their research is concerned with developing 
              algorithms to investigate when, where, and how  multithreading and
              multithreaded architecture can reduce  communication time between parallel
              processors in high  performance computers.  To achieve their objectives, the 
              collaborators have a technical plan consisting of the  following five steps:
              (1) design single-threaded and  multithreaded algorithms for selected benchmark
              problems;  (2) develop data and workload distribution strategies with  varying
              thread granularity; (3) implement the algorithms to  compare the performance of
              three multiprocessors, the  multithreaded EM-X (designed and built by the 
              Electrotechnical Laboratory, Japan), and the single-thread  IBM SP-2, and Cray
              T3E; (4) analyze parameters that  characterize the performance of
              single-threaded and  multithreaded machines; and (5) formulate a model to
              predict  the performance achieved by single threading and  multithreading.   
              The principle result of this research will be a set of tools  and methodologies
              which enable the identification of the  performance of multithreading and
              multithreaded parallel  machines against single-threaded machines.  This set of
               tools and methodologies will help algorithm designers to  convert
              single-threaded algorithms to a multithreaded  version.  The results also will
              help future supercomputer  architects develop multithreaded machines for
              reducing  communication time towards high performance computing.  The  Dr. Sohn
              and his Japanese collaborator are highly regarded  investigators in this field
              of research.  This project is  supported under the Science Fellowship Program
              between the  National Science Foundation and the Japan  Foundation Center  for
              Global Partnership.  ***
