Title       : Squirrel Monkeys: A Test of Primate Social Evolution Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9722840

Award Number: 9722840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Boinski boinski@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The 200 species that comprise the Order Primates exhibit extreme diversity in
              social organization compared to other mammalian orders. Current theory suggests
              that the extent of competition for food within a primate species is the single
              best predictor of that species' social organization. With greater food
              competition, for example, more rigid dominance hierarchies, greater female
              versus male dominance, closer affiliations among females, and little female
              dispersal are expected..  Squirrel monkeys, a species distributed throughout
              the Neotropics, offer a uniquely powerful test of the importance of food
              competition in the evolution of primate social organization. No other primate
              taxon has such widely divergent population differences in social organization.
              Two previous field studies were entirely consistent with predictions. Costa
              Rican squirrel monkeys, with negligible within-troop food competition, exhibit
              almost non-existent female social bonds and females emigrate. In contrast, food
              competition is high among Peruvian squirrel monkeys, females form close social
              bonds, and females have never been known to emigrate. My preliminary
              observations in Suriname indicate yet a third form of social organization with
              strong male dominance of other troop members, and little female affiliation.
              Yet the extremely intense food competition that exists in this population is in
              apparent contradiction to theory.  If confirmed, the squirrel monkey social
              system of Suriname provides a powerful test of the hypothesis of close linkage
              between food competition an social behavior in primates, and provides an
              important window to our understanding of the mechanisms that affect and
              structure primate social systems.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
