Title       : Problems in Numerical Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9722068

Award Number: 9722068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Matzner richard@helmholtz.ph.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Choptuik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A variety of general relativistic systems will be studied  using computational
              techniques: research will focus on  critical phenomena in gravitational
              collapse, black hole  dynamics, and development of software infrastructure to 
              support general large-scale computations in numerical  relativity and other
              fields.  The studies of black-hole critical phenomena will involve 
              time-dependent computations in l, 2 and 3 spatial  dimensions.  The 1-d
              calculations will be used to  investigate the nature of critical phenomena in
              perfect  fluid and multi-scalar collapse as well as the stability of  various
              spherically-symmetric critical solutions in the  presence of other matter
              fields.  A new adaptive,  axisymmetric general relativistic code (including
              rotation)  will be constructed and used to study critical phenomena in 
              axisymmetry.  The code will incorporate couplings to scalar  and
              electromagnetic fields and will be used to search for  new critical solutions,
              to answer important questions  concerning the stability of
              spherically-symmetric critical  solutions to non-spherical perturbations, and
              to investigate  the role of angular momentum in critical collapse.  Preliminary
              studies of critical behaviour in a fully 3-  dimensional context will also be
              undertaken in collaboration  with other researchers involved in the Binary
              Black Hole  Grand Challenge effort.  Research on black hole dynamics will focus
              on the issue of  determining coordinate systems appropriate for the  simulation
              of general black hole encounters.  Black hole  excising techniques, in which
              the computational domain is  constructed to roughly coincide with those regions
              of  spacetime which lie outside of event horizons, will be  further developed
              and used in conjunction with these  coordinate systems.  Adaptive mesh
              algorithms for use on massively parallel  hardware will be implemented and
              rigorously tested.  This  work will be initially performed in the context of
              the  relatively simple model of non-relativistic boson stars  interacting
              through the Newtonian gravitational field.  Work  will also continue on the
              construction of rapid prototyping  environments for the solution of general
              time-dependent  finite-difference systems, and on the development of  software
              for the analysis and visualization of the output  from large scale
              computations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
