Title       : Problems in Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9722022

Award Number: 9722022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John W. Lightbody, Jr.                  
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1506861            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sugar sugar@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Zee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Srednicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Polchinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in theoretical elementary particle physics  will include work on
              string theory, the interface between  particle physics and cosmology,
              fundamental problems in  quantum theory, the application of quantum field
              theory to  phenomena in particle physics and statistical mechanics,  random
              matrix theory and lattice gauge theory.       Research in string theory will
              focus on the search for  a nonperturbative formulation.  This includes study of
               physics at the shortest distance scales and of the quantum  mechanics of black
              holes.  Work on astroparticle physics  will focus on problems related to matter
              production in the  early universe, and properties of dark matter and its 
              possible detection.  Research on fundamental problems in  quantum theory will
              concentrate on the role of classical  chaos in various quantum systems,
              including quantum field  theories.  Work on the applications of quantum field
              theory  will include the study of various phenomena in random matrix  theory,
              in particle physics, and in statistical physics.  Work in lattice gauge theory
              will be directed at the  calculation of masses of strongly interacting
              particles, the  weak decays of these particles, and the behavior of strongly 
              interacting matter at high temperatures.       The topics to be covered include
              some of the most  interesting and centrally important questions in present-day 
              elementary particle physics.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
