Title       : Nuclear Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9722050

Award Number: 9722050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilding S. Kohler kohler@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   There are many examples of systems in a state of non-  equilibrium in the
              world around us.  Physicists study such  systems in the laboratory and observe
              processes that lead to  equilibration. The theoretical studies of such
              processes led  to the discipline of Statistical Mechanics.  Early on  (1870's)
              Boltzmann gave us the H-theorem and his famous  transport-equation.  Though
              tremendously important this  equation is unsatisfactory for some applications,
              especially  for quantum mechanical systems.  Using Green's function  methods
              Kadanoff and Baym (1962) developed a set of  equations applicable to such
              systems with the potential of  application to numerous technological systems. 
              They reduce  in a classical limit to Boltzmann's equation, but are even  more
              complicated.  Although frequently referred to, they  have in the past been
              regarded as impractical for numerical  solutions.  Numerous approximations have
              however been  suggested with applications in plasma-physics,  semiconductors
              and nuclear heavy-ion collisions.       Not until recently with the
              availability of high-speed  and large memory computers have exact solutions
              been  possible in certain cases.  I have  developed computer-  programs for the
              numerical solutions of these equations and  am applying them to the study of
              collisions between heavy  ions with emphasis on memory- and correlation-
              effects.  these effects are not included in the Boltzmann-like  equations
              previously applied to these problems.  This  proposal includes a further study
              of these effects as well  as pionic, relativistic and collective phenomena. 
              The  problem of equilibration of a quark-gluon plasma is also  included in our
              studies.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
