Title       : Molecular and Functional Investigations of Gonadotropin and Gonadotropin
               Releasing Hormone in Lamprey Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9722765

Award Number: 9722765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacia A. Sower sasower@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Condon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9722765  Condon         This proposal will investigate the control of 
              reproduction by the brain and pituitary in an ancient fish,  the lamprey. 
              Lampreys are important because they are  members of the oldest lineage of
              vertebrates, the Agnathans  or jawless fish, and raise interesting questions on
               evolution.  This laboratory has focused on the structure and  function of two
              brain hormones involved in the brain-  pituitary gonadal axis in lampreys.  The
              primary structures  of two brain hormones, gonadotropin-releasing hormone
              (GnRH-  I and GnRH-III) have been determined in lampreys.  This  information
              combined with immunocytochemical and  physiological studies provides strong
              evidence for the  regulatory influence of the brain on the pituitary-gonadal 
              axis in lampreys. In addition, lampreys are the first  vertebrates to clearly
              demonstrate a dual role for GnRH  molecules as neurohormones mediating the
              pituitary-gonadal  axis.  However, the investigations on the role of GnRHs in 
              reproductive processes have been impeded by the lack of an  identified
              gonadotropin that could be used in assays as a  measure of pituitary
              responsiveness to GnRH.  The  purification and identification of lamprey
              pituitary  gonadotropin, GTH, is critical to examine the hypothalamic- 
              pituitary-gonadal relations in lampreys.  Thus  identification of GTH and
              verification of the ways in which  the hypothalamus affects the pituitary
              gonadal axis are  needed in the lamprey, and are part of this project.  The 
              experiments will incorporate a variety of approaches to  further define the
              relationship of the brain and pituitary  in Agnathans.  The ongoing and
              proposed studies are focused  on molecular, biochemical and functional studies
              of GnRHs in  lampreys to test the hypothesis that multiple forms of GnRH 
              released from the brain influence the synthesis and  secretion of a
              gonadotropin-like molecule which regulated  the function of the gonads. 
              Results fsrom these studies in  lampreys will provide better understanding of 
              the molecular  evolution from invertebrates to later evolved vertebrates.  %%% 
                This research is looking to see if there is regulation  from the hypothalamus
              to the pituitary and the gonads in the  lamprey. The lamprey belongs to one of
              the oldest lineage's  of vertebrates and is used to look at the origin of
              various  vertebrate signaling systems.  This laboratory has  identified and
              sequenced the gonadotropin releasing hormone  from the hypothalamus of the
              lamprey, and now wants to  identify the hormone released from the pituitary in
              response  to GnRH. Also the effects of environmental factors on this  hormonal
              pathway will be determined.  This research will  provide a better understanding
              of molecular evolution of the  reproductive system.        ***
