Title       : Research on Plio-Pleistocene Hominid Activities at Kanjera, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9722834

Award Number: 9722834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25463              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Plummer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Thomas Plummer and his
              collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological and associated
              paleontological and geological fieldwork at the site of Kanjera which is
              located on the Homa Peninsula in southwestern Kenya.  Previous work at the site
              has indicated the widespread presence of stone tools as well as abundant faunal
              remains. Biostratigraphic dating indicates an age of 1.7 to 2.3 years and the
              site thus documents the same time period as Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania as well
              as a series of important Kenyan Lake Turkana sites. The research team will
              carry out both excavation and geological trenching. They will examine
              horizontal and vertical patterns in the distribution of archaeological
              materials and relate this to lateral paleohabitat variability. Major site
              formation processes will be diagnosed through analysis of fossil bone surface
              damage and detailed stratigraphic observations. Faunal analysis as well as
              isotopic studies of pedogenic carbonates and tooth enamel will address
              questions of hominid and faunal paleoecology. Analyses of artifact raw material
              will be conducted to distinguish between local and distant raw material sources
              to elucidate early human ranging behavior. The depositional history of the site
              will be interpreted through examination of microstratigraphy within individual
              excavations and in geological trenches between them. The results will provide
              insight into the behavior of early human ancestors and the environment in which
              they functioned.  This research is important because it documents an extremely
              early period in hominid development. While extensive work has been conducted
              for many years both at Olduvai Gorge and at Lake Turkana sites in northern
              Kenya, both of these areas are located in the Rift Valley and because of
              similar geological setting, share a number of ecological characteristics.
              Kanjera is not in the Rift and faunal analysis indicates an environment which
              was much more open and more characteristic of a grassland setting than either
              of the other two regions. Behavioral adaptability is a basic characteristic of
              the human species and it is important for paleoanthropologists to understand
              how far back this extends in time. Because of the unique environmental
              challenge posed by Kanjera's grassland setting the site provides an excellent
              opportunity to examine this issue.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
