Title       : Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9722821

Award Number: 9722821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Morrison damorris@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Morrison  9722821  Pneumococcal transformation is a naturally occurring,
              inducible gene replacement mechanism that is relatively simple and very
              efficient. Competence for genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus
              pneumoniae) occurs during a brief period of highly specialized protein
              synthesis, coordinated among all cells of an actively growing culture by a
              secreted peptide pheromone. During a period of approximately 10-20 minutes, the
              competent cells can transport DNA into the cytoplasm and replace homologous
              genes in the chromosome very efficiently. Central elements of the coordination
              mechanism are a secreted 17-amino-acid peptide inducer and a two-component
              regulatory system. In identifying and cloning genes involved in the
              quorum-sensing and DNA-processing mechanisms, and in determining their roles,
              this research relies on standard genetic techniques and the efficient gene
              replacement provided by the natural transformation process itself, in
              combination with molecular methods in vitro, and recombinant DNA cloning using
              new vectors in pneumococcus and in E. coli, to establish the molecular genetics
              of the system. Gene disruption mutations are made by insertion of a drug
              resistance marker that is expressed both in pneumococcus and in E. coli.
              Induced genes are identified by insertion of a lacZ reporter gene. These
              studies identify, map, clone, and sequence genes of this natural transformation
              system in two broad areas: (a) genes regulating the induction of this pathway
              in response to a population density signal, and (b) genes of the pathway that
              transports DNA into the cell and processes it for genetic recombination.  This
              study of competence regulation focusses on cell-to-cell communications that
              control transformation and on genes required for transformation. Success will
              offer new approaches to understanding gene replacement as a natural process.
              Eventually, characterization of this system will make it possible to
              reconstitute the component reactions in a pure system, and to def ine the set
              of genes necessary to reconstruct the system in other species.
