Title       : CAREER: DNA Replication and Telomere Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a9722408

Award Number: 9722408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356206             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Scott Samuels samuels@mso.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Samuels  9722408  Bacterial replicons are primarily circular DNA molecules, but
              linear plasmids and chromosomes have been identified in various prokaryotes.
              Telomeres, the physical ends of linear DNA molecules, are essential for the
              stability of these molecules. Distinct proteins and DNA sequences are required
              for replicating DNA and maintaining telomeres. The mechanisms of linear DNA
              replication and telomere maintenance in bacteria remain largely unknown. The
              replication and stability of prokaryotic linear DNA with hairpin telomeres has
              not been previously investigated. A model system for studying this class of
              linear DNA is the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. The genome of B. burgdorferi
              consists of a linear chromosome, linear plasmids ranging from 16 to over 50 kb,
              and several circular plasmids. The research project focuses on trans-acting
              proteins and cis-acting DNA sequences required for DNA replication and telomere
              maintenance in B. burgdorferi. Several telomeres from B. burgdorferi linear
              plasmids have been cloned and sequenced. The nucleotide sequence, predicted
              structure, and phasing of certain sequence motifs suggest that proteins bind at
              the telomeres. These putative trans-acting factors include the small
              DNA-binding protein HBb. HBb will be purified to homogeneity and its
              interaction with telomeres will be studied. In addition, other DNA-binding
              proteins will be purified by assaying their ability to recognize telomere
              sequence or structure. The DNA-binding properties of these proteins will be
              characterized. Sequences on the 16 kb linear plasmid that are required for
              replication and segregation will be analyzed by manipulating recombinant
              plasmids. These plasmids will be constructed using coumermycin A1-resistant
              gyrB, the only available antibiotic resistant marker in B. burgdorferi. The
              cis-acting sequences involved in the replication of circular plasmids from this
              unusual genome will also be analyzed. Student training, teaching biochemistry
              and molecular genetics courses, and devel oping new courses are important
              aspects of this CAREER award. Innovations include training high school
              teachers, undergraduates, and high school students, introducing computer
              modeling into the classroom, and designing courses to teach students to present
              and critically evaluate research seminars.  Life involves the passing of traits
              from parents to offspring; the genetic information encoding these traits is
              stored in the macromolecule DNA. Parental DNA must be accurately and precisely
              copied for transmitting genetic information to the offspring. The copying of
              DNA, and its segregation into offspring cells, requires the interaction of
              specific regions of the DNA molecule with specific protein molecules. In
              bacteria DNA is often circular, which solves a problem caused by a fundamental
              limitation in the DNA copying mechanism. A few bacteria, including the
              spirochete B. burgdorferi, have linear, rather than circular, DNA as their
              genetic material. This research project will address how linear DNA is copied
              in B. burgdorferi. Specific regions of DNA involved in the copying mechanism,
              including the ends of the linear DNA molecules, and the proteins that interact
              with these regions of DNA will be studied. This will be the first elucidation
              of the mechanism by which genetic information is transmitted utilizing this
              type of DNA. The teaching aspect of this project seeks to improve and expand
              the transmission of advanced knowledge to students and teachers from the high
              school to the graduate level.
