Title       : International Conference - Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9722686

Award Number: 9722686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4889               (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaneer Bar-Yam yaneer@necsi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Complex System
	      24 Mt. Auburt Street
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A major international conference on the study of  complex systems will be
              organized.  There is a new and  growing effort to understand systems formed out
              of many  interacting parts that display complex dynamic behaviors.  These
              include physical, chemical, biological, social and  economic systems as well as
              artificial (engineered) systems.  Researchers from diverse disciplines and
              different  perspectives are sharing knowledge, mathematical methods and 
              insights in order to advance the effort in all areas.       The new scientific
              effort to understand complex systems  has attracted significant public
              attention because it  addresses issues that include individual psychology, 
              dynamics of social and economic change, and ecology that are  of current
              concern.  Thus it can serve as a vehicle for  public awareness of the
              importance of science in society.       Various conferences have addressed
              aspects of these  growing efforts. However, this is the first major 
              international conference to bring the wide diversity of  researchers together,
              demonstrating the interdisciplinary  but coherent nature of these efforts.     
               The conference will be organized under the aegis of the  New England Complex
              Systems Institute -- a new educational  institution with participation of
              faculty from major  academic institutions in New England.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
