Title       : Relaxation Dynamics in Glassy Systems and Pattern Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9722646

Award Number: 9722646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney R. Nagel s-nagel@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9722646  Nagel    This renewal project contains a series of experiments
              concerning the  dynamics  in  supercooled  liquids.  In particular,  an 
              extension  of  dielectric  spectroscopy will be implemented so that an
              investigation of  "strong"  glass  formers  can be made possible.  A study of
              ordered materials  will  be  carried  out to see if they have the same complex
              response as has been observed  in  their disordered counterparts.  Finally,
              there will be a study of the  low-angle scattering from glass-forming liquids
              in order to search for  clustering effects.  In addition, experiments on
              pattern formation are proposed.  There  will  be a continuation of earlier
              photographic and simulation studies  that  probe the interface near where a
              single drop of liquid splits into two  separate  pieces.  In addition there
              will be an investigation  of  the  shape  of  the  fluid in the presence of an
              intense electric field.   Finally  there  will  be  a  study  of  the problem
              of contact line  sedimentation,  a  phenomenon  which  occurs whenever a
              partially wetting drop of liquid dries  on  a  surface.  %%%  This renewal
              project contains a series of experiments concerning the  mechanism  by  which a
              liquid becomes increasingly more  resistant  to  flow as  it is cooled.  If
              cooled sufficiently, it will form a glass where the  molecular  motion is
              highly constrained.  We will study the  molecular  motion  in a variety of
              liquids and disordered solids to understand this  glass-formation  phenomenon. 
              These studies  will  include  electronic  probes of  the behavior as well as
              the use of neutron and synchrotron sources.  In addition, experiments are
              proposed to investigate how pattern  formation  occurs in technologically
              important situations using  high-  speed  photography  and numerical
              simulations.  One situation  that  will  be  studied  is  how a drop of liquid
              splits into more than one piece.  There  will  also  be  an  investigation of
              the shape of the fluid in the presence of  an  intense  electr ic field. 
              Finally there will be a study of the problem of  contact-line sedimentation, a
              phenomenon occurring whenever a drop of  liquid dries on a surface.  ***
