Title       : RUI: An Investigation of the Mechanism Producing Rhythmic Beating in Cilia and
               Flagella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a9722822

Award Number: 9722822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Lindemann lindeman@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9181,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9722822  Lindemann    The aim of this project is to understand the mechanism 
              that is responsible for the rhythmic beating of eukaryotic  cilia and flagella.
               The working hypothesis was developed in  the previous grant period.  It is
              called the Geometric  Clutch model of axonemic functioning and will provide the
               framework for the proposed experimental investigations.  This hypothesis
              contends that forces (strains) produced  within the axoneme, transverse to the
              axis of the outer  doublets (termed t-forces), are responsible for squeezing 
              the doublets together or pulling them apart and thereby  acting to engage and
              disengage the dynein motor proteins.  When dynein motors are engaged, they
              generate motive force  between the doublets.  Stretched elastic elements
              between  the doublets also contribute force to the doublets.  The  accumulated
              strain on each doublet multiplied by the local  curvature of the flagellum is
              the major determinant of the t-  force.  This concept has been formulated into
              a computer  model and the model has been remarkably successful at  simulating
              the movements of living cilia and flagella.  In  the current proposal, key
              predictions of the Geometric  Clutch hypothesis will be compared to the
              behavior of real  cilia and flagella in controlled experiments.  Tests are 
              planned using bull sperm, mouse sperm, respiratory cilia  from newt lung and
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  Dr. Lindemann  has developed versions of the
              computer model which mimic the  behavior of Chlamydomonas and newt lung cilia. 
              A special  version has also been produced which incorporates the unique 
              feature of a bull sperm flagellum and can produce good  simulations of bull
              sperm beating.  Experimental tests will  assess the validity of the t-force
              concept and the role it  plays in the beat cycle.  The role of calcium ions in 
              biasing the flagellar beat will be examined, and also the  roles of cAMP and
              ADP in regulating switching and power  output of the beat cycle.  Then,
              specific modification of  the Geometri c Clutch working mechanism will be
              determined  that must be implemented to produced calcium ion-, cAMP- and  ADP-
              like changes in the beat of the computer simulated  flagella.  Structural
              mutants of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii  will be used to explore the role of
              specific structures in  the functioning of the beat cycle.  Outer arm deficient
               mutants will be used to better define the role of the inner  and outer row
              dynein arms.  Spoke deficient mutants will be  used to explore the role of the
              spokes and dynein regulatory  complex in dynein bridge switching.  Information
              gained from  experiments will be used to improve the theoretical model  and
              refine the concepts of the Geometric Clutch hypothesis.    The ability of a
              cell to move relative to its environment is  a critical attribute for
              essentially all living species.  The specialized eukaryotic structures known as
              flagella  and/or cilia endow cells with such motile ability in aqueous 
              environments.  These long slender structures, fully enclosed  by the cell
              membrane, extend from the cell surface and move  back and forth with a
              characteristic and cell type-specific  wave form and beat frequency, resulting
              in the movement of  the surrounding fluid relative to the cell.  If the cells 
              are unencumbered, as in the case of protozoa or sperm, the  result is that the
              cell swims; if the cells are attached to  a substratum, the result is a
              sweeping of the fluid over the  cell surface, as in the case of epithelial
              cells that line  the respiratory tract.  The organelle at the core of the 
              flagellum that is responsible for this beating is a highly  organized complex
              of microtubules and motor proteins  (dyneins) termed the axoneme.  It is known
              that flagellar  beating is the result of some of the microtubules of the 
              axoneme sliding past the others within the confines of the  membrane, and that
              this sliding is catalyzed by the dyneins  using the energy derived from ATP
              hydrolysis.  There is a  large (although still incomplete) body of knowledge 
              available co ncerning the protein composition and arrangement  within the
              axoneme, as a result of electron microscopic  observations, analysis of genetic
              mutants, and biochemical  analyses.  However, exactly how all these proteins
              interact  in real time to result in the complex behavior of beating  remains
              unknown.  This project represents a unique  opportunity to test a well defined
              theoretical construct  which may explain the inner workings of the eukaryotic 
              flagellum.  If this project is successful, the working  mechanism of the
              eukaryotic axoneme will be understood for  the first time at a level of detail
              sufficient to explain  most of the behaviors seen in nature.  ***
