Title       : Dissertation Research: Ontogenetic Ecomorphology of Escape Performance in
               Threespine Stickleback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9722134

Award Number: 9722134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bell mabell@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine A. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bell 9722134        Lake populations of the threespine stickleback fish 
              (Gasterosteus aculeatus) are believed to be derived from  marine populations
              that migrate to fresh water to breed. Lake  populations have diverged
              morphologically and behaviorally  from the marine condition. Stickleback in
              some lakes feed on  plankton in open water and are often exposed to predators. 
              Stickleback in other lakes feed on bottom-living  invertebrates and frequent
              vegetated habitats that provide  refuge from predators. Adults that differ in
              feeding mode  show body-shape variation that is probably related to the 
              swimming styles favored by different foraging behaviors and  predation risks.
              Little is known of foraging mode,  locomotion, and body shape in larval and
              juvenile  stickleback. The proposed study will quantify variation in  (1)
              morphological features that affect predator evasion and  foraging locomotion
              (using new methods involving  morphological landmarks) and (2) swimming ability
              (by  measuring steady and evasive swimming performance) in larvae,  juveniles,
              and adults from different lake populations in  Alaska. Variation in vertebral
              number, which may affect  evasive swimming, will also be analyzed. Lake
              populations  will be compared with a migratory population (the putative 
              ancestral form). Field observations and stomach-content  analyses will be
              conducted to assess variation through  development and among populations in
              diet, foraging behavior,  and microhabitat use.
