Title       : Nuclear Force and Nucleon Structure Studies at Intermediate Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9722519

Award Number: 9722519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryon D. Anderson anderson@hpacq.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Mark Manley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This three-year grant will support the research of three  faculty members, two
              post-doctoral fellows, and three  graduate students to perform a variety of
              experiments in  medium-energy nuclear physics.  Much of the activity of the 
              group is focused around measurements of the neutron  polarization.  These
              experiments include studies of the  complete set of spin observables in the
              reaction of  polarized protons with a variety of targets at the neutron 
              polarization facility at the Indiana University Cyclotron  Facility.  These
              experiments use specialized detectors  developed by Kent State to measure
              normal and sideways  polarizations of the neutron simultaneously.  Measurements
               with 2H 3He, and 4He targets would study the nucleon-nucleon  interaction part
              that is mediated by a single pion or rho  meson.  Other experiments would study
              the isovector response  of the nuclear continuum and the isovector giant dipole
               resonance.  The determination of the electric form factor of  the neutron
              would be obtained from neutron polarization  measurements using polarized
              electron beams at the MIT-Bates  Laboratory and the Thomas Jefferson National
              Accelerator  Facility (TJNAF).  Other experiments include a search for 
              three-body forces and a search for pion-field effects.  This  grant would also
              support experiments with the Crystal Ball  at the Brookhaven National
              Laboratory AGS and the CLAS  detector at Hall B at TJNAF in order to study
              neutral baryon  resonances and nucleon resonances, respectively.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
