Title       : Studies of Luminescence, Degradation, and Defects in II-VI Laser Diodes by
               Cathodoluminescence and X-Ray Microdiffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9722761

Award Number: 9722761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21623              (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Cargill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9722761 Cargill This GOALI proposal addresses basic materials science issues in
              a collaborative program between Columbia University and Philips Laboratories to
              understand fundamental phenomena and interactions between electron-hole pair
              recombination, atomic displacements and defect generation in ZnSe-based
              heterostructures. Research at Columbia will involve T-dependent CL microscopy,
              spectroscopy, and x-ray microbeam mapping of microstructure and strain. Philips
              Laboratories will provide state-of-the-art MBE-grown samples and devices
              characterized electrically and optically. The joint activities include staff
              exchange with the PI and graduate students spending time at Philips, and with
              the co-PI, T. M. Marshall from Philips spending time at Columbia. Additionally,
              an on-going collaboration with Brookhaven NL will continue in connection with
              the x-ray microbeam work. The proposed research emphasizes understanding of
              fundamental mechanisms and processes along with some the practical aspects of
              electronic/photonic materials technology. This project is supported by the
              DMR/EM program and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). %%%
              The project addresses forefront materials science research issues in a topical
              area of materials science having high technological relevance.  The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important aspects of electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry, in
              general.  Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing improved materials.  An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
