Title       : Coenzyme A Analogs as Probes of Enzymatic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9722936

Award Number: 9722936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale G. Drueckhammer dale.drueckhammer@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722936  Drueckhammer  The objective of this project is to study the mechanisms
              of catalysis by Coenzyme A (CoA) ester-utilizing enzymes using synthetic CoA
              analogs as probes.  Further studies will be directed at investigation of the
              mechanism and the nature of the intermediate in the reaction of citrate
              synthase.  Additional acetyl-CoA enol and enolate analogs will be prepared and
              studied as probes of citrate synthase, including analogs designed to permit
              direct observation of a stable enzyme-enol or enzyme-enolate complex.  Further
              studies will be conducted on the mechanism of acetyl-CoA dependent
              acetyltransferases using newly prepared electrophilic ketone analogs of
              acetyl-CoA.  These studies may provide new insights into the structure of the
              enzyme-intermediate and enzyme-transition state complexes and the means by
              which the acetyltransferases stabilize these species.  Analogs of CoA will be
              prepared having the amide bond nearest the thiol group altered. These analogs
              will be used in initial investigations of the role of functional groups remote
              from the thiol group of CoA in stabilization and destabilization of ground
              state and transition state complexes in enzymatic reactions.    Enzymes
              catalyze almost all of the biochemical reactions that occur in living organisms
              and it is estimated that about 4% of all enzymes require coenzyme A (CoA) or a
              derivative of CoA in their reactions.  These include enzymes of industrial,
              biotechnological, and biomedical importance.  This project is directed at
              understanding the underlying chemistry involved in the function of these
              enzymes.  This work will provide new insights into how enzymes work, the basis
              for their malfunction, and the means by which their function may be modulated
              or altered.
