Title       : Career: Evolution of Insect Flight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a9722196

Award Number: 9722196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304934             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Marden jhm10@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Marden   9722196         Insects constitute roughly two thirds of all known 
              species. Their unparalleled evolutionary success, as well  as their economic
              impact, appears to derive from their  ability to move rapidly over large
              distances in three  dimensional space, i.e. their ability to fly. This proposal
               will investigate how flight evolved in insects. One of the  primary challenges
              for evolutionary biology is to determine  how complex traits, such as flight,
              evolved through a  series of intermediate stages. Without evidence for 
              advantageous intermediate stages, the only alternative  explanation is that
              some form of macro-mutation produced a  flight-capable animal de nova. Such an
              explanation strains  credulity given that flight depends on an exceedingly 
              complex interplay of wings, nerves, and muscles that simply  could not arise by
              chance. Thus, the critical task is to  identify possible intermediate stages of
              wing-propelled  locomotion that serve a beneficial purpose and present an 
              opportunity for progressive natural selection. Such a  system has been
              identified in stoneflies (Plecoptera), a  primitive group of insects that use
              wing propelled  locomotion to sail or flap their way across water surfaces. 
              This project will construct a DNA based phylogeny (a  "family tree") to
              determine how surface skimming, flight,  and wing structure in stoneflies has
              changed over their  evolutionary history.      Preliminary work on this project
              has been widely  publicized in print, radio, and television media, as its 
              significance and implications are readily grasped by the  general public. An
              episode of the public television series,  Scientific American Frontiers,
              presented this work to an  audience of over 1 million school children, followed
              by an  email question/answer forum with the scientists involved.  The ongoing
              work will continue to provide a highly visible  example of how modern
              biologists ask questions and seek  answers regarding evolutionary riddles that
              are central to  the history of life on  earth.
