Title       : Japan STA Program: Building Regional Innovation Systems: A Comparative Study of
               Kanagawa and Osaka, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9722544

Award Number: 9722544
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Collins swcollin@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Collins  9722544    This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology Agency
               of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Steven W.  Collins at the
              Kanagawa Industrial Technology Research  Institute, Ebina, Japan.  Dr. Collins
              will work with Dr.  Hikoji Wakoh, Chief Scientist, on a research project 
              entitled "Building Regional Innovation Systems: A  Comparative Study of
              Kanagawa and Osaka, Japan."    The proposed research will study the role of
              regional  science and technology transfer policies in promoting local  economic
              development in two Japanese prefectures, Kanagawa  and Osaka.  Recently in
              Japan, a major goal of science and  technology policy has been to stimulate
              regional economies  by promoting technological innovation that uses resources 
              found in abundance locally.  Such policies are based on a  growing body of
              research showing that a richly endowed  science and technology infrastructure,
              coupled with  appropriate mechanisms for diffusing and transferring new 
              knowledge, contributes to an entrepreneurial business  environment.  Notable
              examples are California's Silicon  Valley and North Carolina's Research
              Triangle, which many  local governments in Japan wish to emulate.  This study
              will  examine two such regions in Japan, comparing activities and  policies of
              prefectural governments and research institutes  aimed at leveraging regional
              and national resources to  promote sustainable development.  The results will
              shed  light on the geography of technological innovation, as well  as provide
              insight into differences in regional policies  across Japan.  Finally, the
              project will contribute to the  Kanagawa Prefectural government's goal of
              understanding  technological innovation in the region and situating it in  the
              broader context of both regional and local science and  technology policy
              across the nation.  ***
