Title       : Structure-Function Relationships in the Photoactive Yellow Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9722781

Award Number: 9722781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Cusanovich cusanovi@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Tollin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrance E. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722781  Cusanovich  Photoactive Yellow Protein (PYP) is a small soluble protein
              whose three-dimensional structure has been determined to high resolution. It
              appears to function as a blue light biosensor in the negative photoactic
              response of halopilic photosynthetic bacteria. It has a photocycle remarkably
              similar to those of bacteriorhodopsin and its homologs, although PYP is
              unrelated in structure to these membrane-spanning proteins.  The long-term goal
              of this project is to elucidate the molecular details of the PYP photocycle as
              they relate to protein and chromophore structure.  To accomplish this goal
              three general lines of study will be pursued: (1) Active site mutant proteins
              having altered spectra and photocycle kinetics will be prepared; (2)
              Structurally modified chromophores will be incorporated into wild type and
              mutant proteins in place of natural ones; (3) These two approaches will be
              combined by engineering an active site which will accommodate larger
              chromophores.  The structural, thermodynamic, kinetic, and optical properties
              of the native and altered proteins will be investigated to understand the
              absorption and subsequent structural changes driven by light.    As a light
              sensory system PYP has many properties in common with other less easily studied
              systems, such as bacteriorhodopsin and the visual pigment rhodopsin found in
              animals.  In biological sensory systems responsive to light the protein portion
              of the molecule interacts with a pigment (for example, retinol in the human
              visual system) to define the wavelength or color of light which results in a
              biological response.  The proposed studies with PYP will determine how the
              protein modulates the color of light detected.  In addition, following the
              absorption of light by a photoactive sensory protein a series of events are
              initiated which lead to the biological response (for example the transmission
              of a signal to the brain in the visual process).  PYP offers the opportunity to
              understand the light-induced structural changes  which lead to biological
              recognition.  Finally PYP has properties that make it a candidate as a
              biomaterial for use as bioelectronic devices (for example, a switch or computer
              memory) which may have applications in the next generation of electronic
              devices.  ***
