Title       : Bridging Arithmatic and Algebra: Exploring How Children Understand Changes on
               Equal Amounts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9722732

Award Number: 9722732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97672              (Estimated)
Investigator: Analucia D. Schliemann aschliem@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                  PROJECT SUMMARY            Bridging Arithmetic to Algebra:  
                       Exploring how children understand equal changes to equal amounts      
                   When, after years of arithmetic problem solving, students are introduced
              to      algebra, the meaning of equivalence, operations, and equations
              undergoes a      paradigm shift. Instead of one-way transformations to find an
              answer,      mathematical operations are meant to describe logical relations
              among elements      (quantities or variables). Given the gulf between
              arithmetic and algebra, it is no      surprise that students have enmrmous
              difficulties in algebraic problem solving.      Such difficulties seem to
              justify that instruction on algebra should only start when      children are
              about 12 years old. Only then are they required to leave aside the      direct
              arithmetical path and to focus, instead, on the extraction and representation  
                 of relevant mathematical relations.            The contrast between
              children's difficulties with algebra in high school and      some successful
              attempts to teach algebra at earlier grades suggest that it is time to     
              consider deep changes in the elementary mathematics curriculum including the   
                possibility of having children discussing, understanding, and dealing with   
                algebraic concepts and relations much earlier than usual. But such changes   
                demand careful analysis of children's understanding about the logico-     
              mathematical relations implicit in algebraic rules, of their own ways of     
              approaching and representing algebra problems in different contexts, and of the
                   most adequate instructional models for initiating algebra instruction.    
                     This project is a preliminary investigation of seven to eleven year-old 
                  children's understanding of basic relations involved in dealing with
              equations in      different contexts. A total of 120 upper middle-class 7 to 11
              year-old Brazilian      children participated in the study. Each child
              individually participated  in two of a      total of four tasks, each one
              containing 16 different items. Each task referred to one      of the four
              following contexts: (a) equivalence between weights on a two-pan      balance
              scale, (b) equivalence between quantities of discrete concrete objects, (c)    
               equivalence between quantities expressed in verbal problems, and (d)
              equivalence      between the two sides of written equations. For each item an
              equality was      established and the child was asked whether or not the
              equality would remain if      similar or dissimilar transformations were to
              take place on each of the two      compared amounts. They were also asked to
              justifty their answers and to use      whatever tools and representations they
              judged necessary to solve the problems.            The analysis of data already
              collected will provide a starting point for a      future analysis of how
              American children from different backgrounds understand      and deal with
              similar problems. With this study we hope raise new questions and      to frame
              new hypotheses for research concerning the development of algebra     
              activities in the elementary mathematics curriculum.            NSF FORM 1358
              (1/94)
