Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Cooperative Geometric Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9722728

Award Number: 9722728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fuhua Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9200,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9722728  Cheng    This award supports a three-year program in geometric 
              modeling for engineering design. A cooperative project  between the University
              of Kentucky and Tsinghua University,  the program seeks to advance the state of
              the art in  geometric modeling, give U.S. students experience in China  through
              participation in the research project, and improve  methods for collaboration
              remotely via the world wide web.    The proposal adds an international
              dimension to DDM 9400823.    Geometric design and modeling is a major research
              and  development area in computer aided design.  The automobile,  aerospace,
              and shipbuilding industries rely heavily on  applications of many techniques
              developed in this area.  Geometric modeling for engineering design, however, is
              a  difficult field and many unanswered question remain that  inhibit use of
              computers in engineering design.     Research on new computational and
              visualization techniques  seeks to facilitate further modeling and design. 
              This  project proposes to develop and deliver CAD/CAM software  systems which
              support such methodologies.  This requires  development of network CAD/CAM
              interfaces and collaborative  design paradigms for a number of components of an
              object-  oriented geometric modeling tool kit. These will be  implemented as
              platform-independent applications which can  be accessed from anywhere over the
              Web.    Project personnel will include faculty level scientists from  Tsinghua
              University's Computer Aided Design Center which is  one of the largest
              geometric modeling research teams in the  world.  US participants include
              faculty of the University of  California, Berkeley, and the University of
              Kentucky.  Two  undergraduate students from the University of Kentucky will 
              participate each year, and will be chosen from groups  underrepresented in
              computer science and engineering fields.  The students will participate in the
              research fully,  including in research visits to Tsinghua University,  Beijing,
              China.    Support on the Chinese  side is provided by the National  Natural
              Science Foundation.  This project is supported under  the US-China Protocol on
              Cooperation in Basic Sciences.
