Title       : Energetics of CRP Activation of Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9722884

Award Number: 9722884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick P. Schwarz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722884  Schwarz  In E. coli. the transcription of over 20 genes for enzymes
              involved in sugar metabolism is activated by cAMP receptor protein (CRP) which
              has undergone a conformational change induced by the binding of cyclic
              adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) to CRP.  Amino-acid substitutions in CRP,
              however, dramatically alter the level of its transcriptional activity.  To
              elucidate how mutations alter the level of transcriptional activation and
              ultimately the mechanism for transcriptional activation, the research will
              consist of (1) determining  the thermodynamic linkages between the binding
              reactions of CRP/mutants with cNMP, DNA, and RNA polymerase from calorimetry
              measurements and (2) determining the structures of the cNMP-ligated complexes
              from x-ray crystallography measurements.  Small angle neutron scattering
              measurements, differential scanning calorimetry, and protease probes will be
              employed to substantiate these structural differences in solution.  The level
              of transcription by the cNMP-ligated CRP/mutant complexes will be
              quantitatively determined by a well-defined in vitro assay. Correlations
              between the conformational changes and the thermodynamic linkages will
              ascertain how conformational changes control the thermodynamics of
              transcription. Comparison of the levels of in vitro and in vivo transcriptional
              activation may lead to the discovery of secondary events which also influence
              the level of transcriptional activation in the cell.  Many biological processes
              are initiated by conformational changes in proteins induced by specific
              protein-ligand interactions.  The goal of this research is to provide a better
              understanding of how ligand binding at sites far removed from the active site
              of a protein control its level of activity through conformational changes
              induced by binding of the ligand.  In addition, it will elucidate how small
              structural alterations in the DNA binding site of proteins control the high
              specificity of  DNA-binding proteins which exhibit similar topologies at the D
              NA binding site, e.g. the eukaryotic homolog of CRP, the cAMP-dependent protein
              kinase.  Ultimately, this knowledge will lead to a better understanding of the
              relationship between structure and function in biological systems.  ***
