Title       : Research in Elementary Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9722706

Award Number: 9722706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6678000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry J. Frisch frisch@hep.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Pilcher  (Principal Investigator former)
              Frank S. Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The NSF-supported experimental Elementary Particle  Physics (EPP) group at
              the University of Chicago consists of  several research teams which involve
              themselves in the four  experiments discussed below:       The `Kaon at the
              Tevatron` (KTEV) experiment is now  running at Fermilab.  Its intent is to
              study CP violation  and the rare decays of long-lived K-mesons.  CP violation
              is  thought to be the origin of the a symmetry between matter  and antimatter
              in the universe.  KTEV is an experiment of  fundamental importance to our
              understanding of the origins  and evolution of the universe.       At the
              `Collider Detector at Fermilab` (CDF)  experiment, the focus is to study high
              momentum transfer  events in proton-antiproton collisions at 1.8 TeV (the 
              highest energy available in the world today).  The Chicago  group has the
              responsibility of constructing the electronic  systems for the first level
              calorimeter trigger and the  silicon tracker processor.  The CDF experiment is
              being  upgraded so that it can exploit the higher luminosity to be  provided by
              the new main injector ring now under  construction.  The CDF experiment was one
              of the co-  discoverers of the top quark.       The
              `Omni-Purpose-Apparatus-at-LEP` (OPAL)  collaboration at the Large
              Electron-Positron collider (LEP)  at CERN has completed a program that uses Z
              boson decays to  conduct several important tests of the `Standard Model` of 
              particle physics: a measurement of the Weinberg angle, a  study of various
              B-meson decays, and a search for exotic  particles that would indicate physics
              beyond the `Standard  Model`.  The collaboration is now taking data at
              `LEP200`,  where with double its present energy, the accelerator can  make W
              meson pairs and hence obtain direct measurements of  the W mass.  Searches for
              new particles are also being  conducted at these higher energies.       ATLAS
              (A Toroidal Large Angle Spectrometer) will be a  general-purpose detector
              designed to exploit the potential  of the future LHC proton-proton collider. 
              LHC will provide  10 times higher center-of-mass energy and 100 times higher 
              proton-proton collision rates than previous colliders, thus  opening up a new
              frontier of physics.  Discovery of the mass-  generating mechanism or
              spontaneous symmetry breaking, which  predicts the existence of a scalar
              particle, the Higgs boson  is a primary objective of ATLAS.       The Chicago
              group is the leading group in the EPP  program in its education and outreach
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
