Title       : CAREER: Song and Plumage in the House Finch: A Study of Signal Content in a
               Multiple-Signal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9722171

Award Number: 9722171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey E. Hill ghill@acesag.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9722171    Hill    Bright colors and beautiful song are among the most 
              conspicuous features of birds, but these traits pose a  paradox for
              evolutionary biologists.  How could such gaudy  traits, which seem to waste
              energy and expose individuals to  predators, have evolved by natural selection,
              a process that  should promote survivorship and reproduction?  The generally 
              accepted answer to this question is that such ornamental  traits arose through
              sexual selection, a process that  promotes access to mates either through mate
              attraction or  mate defense.  Female mate choice has been shown to be an 
              important selective agent in the evolution of ornamental  traits, but why
              should females choose such traits?  One  explanation for this riddle is that
              ornamental traits serve  as honest signals of male quality.  By choosing males
              with  well-developed ornaments, females choose better-than-average  males.  The
              plot thickens further, though, in that most  species of animals have not one
              but multiple ornamental  traits.  For instance, most species of songbirds have
              both  colorful plumage and song.  This research will study the  function of
              song and colorful plumage in the House Finch, a  common backyard bird found
              throughout the contintental U.S.  Studies will test the idea that female House
              Finches gain  different information about male quality from different 
              ornamental traits.  Colorful plumage in the House Finch is a  result of
              carotenoid pigments, which birds must obtain from  their diet.  Thus, plumage
              brightness is a function of the  nutritional condition of males at the time
              when feathers are  grown.  The control of song development is less well 
              understood, but it may also be dependent on nutrition.  The  focus of this work
              is on two measures of male quality:  disease resistance and parental effort.
              Using a combination  of experiments conducted with captive birds and
              observations  of wild birds, the study will determine how song and  ornamental
              plumage coloration of male House Finches relate   to two different types of
              disease: coccidia, a chronic  intestinal parasite, and conjunctivitis, a
              bacterial  infection of the eye and upper respiratory system with rapid  onset.
                The prediction is that song, which is produced at  the time of display, will
              be a better indicator of fast-  acting disease of short duration.  In contrast,
              plumage,  which is grown over a six-week period, months before it is  used in
              display, will be a better predictor of chronic  infection.  Song and plumage
              may also convey different  information about the ability of males to provision
              young.  This research will be among the first to simultaneously  investigate
              the function of multiple ornamental traits, and  will provide new insight into
              the process of sexual  selection and the evolution of ornamental traits in
              animals.    The idea that conspicuous ornamental traits in male animals  might
              convey information about prospective mates to females  is an intuitively
              appealing hypothesis that many students  (in the broad sense - including high
              school students,  science teachers, undergraduates and adult education 
              students) find compelling. The research project will  incorporate an
              educational focus involving participation by  the previously-mentioned student
              populations. The House  Finch is an ideal species for studies intended to
              introduce  students to field biology - they are small, docile, easy to  catch,
              have bright colors that are easy to quantify, are  habituated to people, and
              nest in conspicuous locations on  campus. In addition, House Finches are found
              in nearly every  schoolyard in the U.S., and part of this study will also 
              develop science exercises with  high school teachers, and  allow students to
              experience the challenge and excitement of  real scientific investigation.
