Title       : CAREER: New Approaches to the Structure and Function of Higher-Order Protein-DNA
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9722371

Award Number: 9722371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason D. Kahn kahn@adnadn.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722371  Kahn  DNA transactions such as replication, recombination, and
              transcription are all performed by large, organized multi-protein DNA
              complexes.  The three-dimensional pathway of the DNA and the arrangement of
              proteins within these higher-order complexes are fundamental to their
              functions.  The higher-order complexes that mediate gene regulation often
              include "architectural" proteins that bend DNA, thereby apposing other factors
              which otherwise would be separated, and presumably changing their interactions
              with each other or with RNA polymerase.  Understanding these combinatorial
              patterns of regulation is of great interest, especially as knowledge of the
              structures of the critical multi-protein DNA intermediates will be essential
              for controlling their functions, with attendant biomedical implications.  This
              research will focus on putative DNA wrapping around E. coli RNA polymerase
              during transcription initiation and elongation.  This wrapping may be
              mechanistically important and may have consequences for the large-scale
              organization of DNA in the cell.  The existing methods for probing this
              large-scale structure, including biochemical methods, gel electrophoresis, and
              microscopy, all have limitations.  A new methodology will be developed based on
              the enhanced cyclization or ring-closure of DNA whose ends have been brought
              together and aligned by bending or wrapping and on selection-amplification
              methods based on ligation of DNA fragments to form minicircles.  The starting
              population will be a large collection of DNA molecules bearing the specific DNA
              sites of interest and a segment with random length and curvature, synthesized
              by ligation of a mixture of curved and straight oligonucleotides of known
              solution structure.  Molecules which cyclize rapidly will be selected and
              amplified using the polymerase chain reaction, and the process repeated.  The
              selected DNA molecules will be cloned and sequenced, and based on known
              properties of the components used in the random synthesis and on kine tic
              measurements of DNA cyclization, three-dimensional models for the higher-order
              complex will be obtained.  This procedure will be applied to the E. coil RNA
              polymerase DNA open complex, to complexes including the CAP protein, and to
              later intermediates in the transcription cycle.  This work will be pursued in
              the context of an integrated career, involving undergraduates as well as
              graduate students in the research.  Teaching in undergraduate and graduate
              courses will be pursued concurrently.  Computer-based methods for involving
              students in the course work and for encouraging them to explore on their own
              will be developed.  A departmental hardware and software resource center for
              teaching undergraduate and graduate biochemistry also will be created.  %%% 
              DNA transactions such as replication, recombination, and transcription are all
              performed by large, organized multi-protein DNA complexes.  The
              three-dimensional pathway of the DNA and the arrangement of proteins within
              these higher-order complexes are fundamental to their functions.  This research
              is specifically directed toward understanding large scale structures involved
              in gene expression and will be pursued in the context of an integrated career,
              involving undergraduates as well as graduate students in the research. 
              Computer-based methods for involving students in course work and for
              encouraging them to explore on their own as well as a departmental hardware and
              software resource center for teaching undergraduate and graduate biochemistry
              will be developed.  ***
