Title       : FASEB Conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology on July 6-11, 1997 in Copper
               Mountain, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9722054

Award Number: 9722054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn Price   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy E. Shippen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722054  Price  Partial support is requested for the "Seventh International on
              Ciliate Molecular Biology".  This meeting will be held as a FASEB Conference at
              Copper Mountain Colorado, July 6-11, 1997.  The meeting is intended to bring
              together researchers who are employing molecular techniques to investigate
              diverse biological problems using ciliated protozoa as a model system.  In
              recent years, an invigorating number of young researchers have chosen to use
              ciliated protozoa in the labs.  This renewed interest directly reflects the
              important discoveries that have been with ciliates; eg. self-splicing RNA,
              telomerase, telomere structure, extensive DNA rearrangements, unusual use of
              the genetic code and behavioral mutants.  The great value of ciliates for
              studying difficult biological problems stems from their unusual geomic
              organization and life cycle.  However, these same unusual features make it
              extremely important for researchers to attend not only meetings in their own
              research area (eg. DNA replication, signal transduction, etc.) but also
              meetings where they can share information about the molecular biology of their
              experimental system.  The Ciliate Molecular Biology Meeting fills this critical
              niche.  Approximately 170 foreign and domestic scientists will attend the
              meeting and many of the conferees will be graduate students or postdocs.  The
              session chairs and speakers have been chosen based on the quality of their work
              and many are either female or junior investigators.  ***
