Title       : The Role of Prolactin in Mediating Parental and AlloparentalCare
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1999    
File        : a9722823

Award Number: 9722823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74566              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan J. Schoech   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Mumme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen D. Ketterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9722823  Schoech  The primary goal of this project is to determine the  hormonal
               mechanisms that mediate parental and alloparental behavior  in a social 
              species, the Florida scrub-jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens).  Because  prolactin
              is associated with parental behavior in many  species, including  Florida
              scrub-jays, the thrust of the project will address  the role of  prolactin in
              promoting helping behavior by nonbreeders.  Previous  correlative studies have
              linked helping and prolactin in  this species. This  proposal uses a protocol
              whereby manipulations of hormone  levels allow  more definitive assessment of
              hormone function.  It has long  been known that  until a hormone is removed and
              replaced experimentally, the  causal nature of the  compound can only be
              inferred. Recent advances in our  understanding of the  compounds 'upstream'
              from the pituitary that control the  secretion of prolactin  make it possible
              to remove prolactin with biological  elements. Using a prolactin  releasing
              agent, and by treating Florida scrub-jays with  anti-bodies against  this
              agent, prolactin can be immunoneutralized. Following  removal of the hormone of
              interest (prolactin), focal  observations of treated  individuals will allow
              the determination of whether  prolactin is responsible for  helping behavior. 
              Similarly, modern field endocrine  techniques allow  enhancement of an
              organism's endogenous hormone titres. By  removing and then  supplementing
              prolactin in free-living cooperatively  breeding Florida  scrub-jays, this
              proposal will pioneer the use of these  valuable  techniques under field
              conditions. In addition to greatly  enhancing our  understanding of hormonal
              mechanisms that mediate social  behavior, the  methods used in this proposal
              may prove to be useful in  manipulating behavior,  and may set the stage for
              future research in a variety of  species.
