Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Dorsal-Ventral Gastrula- Stage Patterning in
               Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9722949

Award Number: 9722949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Kimelman kimelman@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Kimelman  9722949    Gastrulation is a pivotal time in the development of the
              vertebrate embryo, when major aspects of cell fate are decided. Earlier views
              of vertebrate development focused on the dorsal organizer (the Spemann
              organizer in frogs) as the center of these patterning decision. Recent studies
              have shown that the entire embryo actively participates in cell fate
              specification, through the use of signals and genes expressed both within and
              outside of the organizer.    This proposal is focused on genes that regulate
              the formation of the embryo during the gastrula stages. One of these genes is
              the novel Xenopus homeobox gene, Vox, which was isolated and studied in this
              laboratory. Vox is expressed in the ventral and lateral regions of the embryo,
              and is proposed to interact with the Centralizing signal BMP-4 during the
              process of establishing the non-organizer regions of the embryo. Using both
              Xenopus and zebrafish, the role of the Vox genes in vertebrate development will
              be examined. Xenopus will be used to ask specific questions about the
              interactions between Vox and BMP-4, whereas zebrafish mutants that perturb
              early ventral development will be used to understand where the Vox genes fit in
              the hierarchy that regulates non-organizer development.    To broaden the
              understanding of early vertebrate development, an in situ hybridization-based
              genetic screen will be used to identify new mutations that regulate early
              dorsal-ventral development. Finally, 7 new zebrafish homeobox genes will be
              analyzed to define new regulators of early embryonic patterning. Since many
              aspects of embryogenesis are conserved among all vertebrates, including the
              expression of related homeobox genes, these studies will have broad
              implications for understanding fundamental processes in vertebrate development.
