Title       : Gravity Waves and Binary Neutron Star Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9722086

Award Number: 9722086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant J. Mathews gmathews@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal shall study gravity waves from binary neutron  stars near
              coalescence.  We will solve the relativistic  hydrodynamic and field equations
              in three spatial dimensions  employing both a conformally flat condition on the
              metric  and in the post-Newtonian approximation.  The gravity-wave  signal will
              be extracted via a multipole expansion including  up to l = 4 the mass moment
              and l = 3 in the current moments  as well as the leading slow-motion
              correction.  By applying  both numerical schemes we expect to gain better
              intuitive  insight into the relevant physical processes as the stars  approach
              and the effect of these processes on the emergent  gravity-wave signal.  An
              important feature of the proposed  calculations is the use of a realistic
              neutron star equation  of state which reproduces available constraints and is 
              amenable to a study of parameter sensitivity.  From these  studies we expect to
              obtain illustrative profiles of the  gravity wave forms during final orbits of
              a neutron star-  binary as a function of mass, spin, mass asymmetry and the 
              neutron star equation of state.  We will also study  compression and shock
              heating effects as the stars approach  coalescence and the effects of the
              linear and angular  momentum loss from radiated neutrinos on the emitted
              gravity  waves.  The coupling between the gravity wave signal and a  possible
              electromagnetic burst can also be analyzed.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
