Title       : Aggressive Chemical Mimicry of Prey Pheromones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9722828

Award Number: 9722828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Haynes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth V. Yeargan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9722828  Aggressive Chemical Mimicry of Prey Pheromones  Evolutionary
              specialization of a predator on a few prey  species has potential advantages
              and disadvantages.  Such a predator can evolve to become highly efficient  at
              finding, handling, and utilizing its prey, but the  predator becomes dependent
              on availability of these  particular prey, which could be costly in years of
              prey  scarcity. The bolas spider Mastophora hutchinsoni is an  extremely
              specialized predator. The adult female emits  chemical attractants that mimic
              the sex pheromones of  its moth prey, a form of aggressive chemical mimicry. 
              The spider exploits the inherent mate-finding behavior  of its victims, which
              are male moths. When prey  approach the spider, it strikes them with a sticky
              ball  at the end of a short thread. This capture device,  called a bolas,
              represents a highly reduced web that  the spider swings with one of its
              forelegs. Two moth  species, one active early at night and the other late  at
              night, account for more than 90% of this predator's  prey; only two other moth
              species are ever captured. To  attract mates, female moths of the two principal
              prey  species release blends of chemical compounds that do  not overlap in
              their components. The spider could  produce a master blend of all these
              components, but  preliminary results indicate this would make the  attractant
              much less efficient in luring one of the  spider's two principal prey species.
              If the spider  could adjust its attractant blend to predictable and 
              unpredictable variation in prey abundance, it would be  a much more efficient
              predator and could minimize a  major disadvantage of prey specialization. In
              this  research, we propose to use a combination of chemical, 
              electrophysiological, and behavioral approaches to  determine if this bolas
              spider shows flexibility in its  behavior or mimetic signal to improve its
              hunting  effectiveness. Specific questions to be addressed  include the
              following: (1) Does the spider's emitted  signal change over the cou rse of a
              night to correspond  with the predictably different diel patterns of sexual 
              activity of its principal prey species? (2) Does the  emitted signal vary
              seasonally to correspond with  predictable changes in abundance of its prey
              species?  (3) Do hunting tactics and the emitted signal vary  plastically with
              unpredictable prey availability?  Studies of this system will lead to an
              understanding of  tradeoffs involved in the evolution of exploitaiton of 
              chemical communication and the role of behavioral  plasticity in minimizing the
              costs of specialization.
