Title       : CAREER: Connecting Phenomenological Models to First Principles Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9722367

Award Number: 9722367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reggie Brown brown@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed career development plan provides the PI  with the means to
              develop a complete and balanced career  that includes both research and
              education.       Traditionally, models for dynamical systems are  developed
              from first principles considerations which yield  physical meaning to
              variables, parameters, and results of  the model.  In contrast,
              phenomenological models are  developed directly from experimentally measured
              data.  The  objective of the research plan is to reconcile these  approaches by
              developing analytic coordinate transformations  between the two
              representations.  The path from experimental  data to physical model is a new
              method for understanding  nonlinear systems when the physical model contains
              terms  that are unknown, or not easily determined.  The proposed  research will
              add to our understanding of all nonlinear  systems including mechanical, fluid,
              optical, and chemical  systems.  It also has engineering applications related
              to  control, monitoring, and maintenance of experimental  systems.       The
              objectives of the education plan are curriculum  development, supervision,
              outreach, and mentoring of  students.  The plan is designed to give students
              the  educational background necessary for careers in industry  and/or academia.
               To achieve this I will develop and teach  new cross-disciplinary courses at
              the undergraduate and  graduate level.  In addition, students will participate
              in  conferences, academic research, and research applicable to  industry.  The
              latter will grow out of a visiting scientist  program involving scientists from
              industry and national  laboratories.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
