Title       : Studies of Electronic Excitations in Low-Dimensional Systems by Optically
               Detected Resource Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9722625

Award Number: 9722625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. McCombe mccombe@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Athos Petrou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9722625  McCombe    This is a new project in which optically Detected
              Resonance (ODR)  spectroscopy,  which combines the sensitivity of near 
              IR/visible  photon  detection  with  far  IR  excitation,  will  be  used  to 
              investigate  basic  issues related to many-body  interactions  of  electrons 
              and  holes  in low-dimensional semiconductor  systems.  Intraband  electronic 
              excitations  of  very  low  densities   of  photoexcited  carriers and carrier
              complexes can be  investigated  in  this  way.   Specific projects include: 
              internal  states  of  neutral and charged excitons in high magnetic fields;
              effects  of  excess  electrons and holes on excitonic states  and  the  metal- 
              insulator  transition;  many  body effects  in  the  integer  and  fractional 
              quantum hall effect regimes through the influence  of  donor  impurities on the
              far IR excitations; and  ODR  echanisms.  This  research  will  yield  unique
              information  about  excitons,  effects  of  excess carriers on their internal
              states, mechanisms  of  energy  ransfer to the ground state recombination
              paths,  and  insight  into  the  any-body ground states of  electrons  at  low 
              temperatures and high magnetic fields.  %%%  This  is  a new project in which a
              novel technique that  combines  sensitive   near   infrared/visible   detection
                with   resonant  absorption in the far infrared region of the spectrum, 
              Optically  Detected   Resonance  (ODR)  spectroscopy,  will   be   used   to 
              investigate the allowed energy states of charge carriers in small  (tens  of 
              nanometers)  man-made semiconductor  structures.   The  unique electronic and
              optical properties of these structures  are  determined  by  quantum  mechanics
              and the  interactions  of  the  charge  carriers, electrons or holes.  This
              research  will  yield  unique information about and improved understanding of
              the energy  states  of  electrons  and  holes bound together  (the  so-called 
              exciton), the effects of excess free electrons and holes on these  states,  and
               how  e nergy absorbed in exciting the  electron-hole  system  is  transferred 
              back to the  lowest  energy  states  and  subsequently  leads  to recombination
              and light  emission.   This  work will also provide insight into the
              interesting many-electron  states  that exist at low temperature and in high
              magnetic field,  the Quantum Hall and Fractional Quantum Hall states.  ***
