Title       : Hormones, Programmed Cell Death and DNA Breakdown in Aleurone Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9722956

Award Number: 9722956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Jones rjones@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722956  Jones     The goals of this project are to characterize the  cellular
              events that accompany programmed cell death (PCD)  in the barley aleurone cell.
              PCD in aleurone cells is  controlled by the hormones gibberellic acid (GA) and 
              abscisic acid (ABA). GA induces PCD in barley aleurone and  ABA prevents cell
              death. Experiments are proposed to  characterize DNA breakdown, to ask how DNA
              is degraded, and  to identify the enzymes that are involved in this process. 
              Apoptosis in animal cells is accompanied by intranucleosomal  cleavage of
              nuclear DNA resulting in the formation of  characteristic DNA ladders.
              Previously published work by  others has suggested that DNA laddering is a
              feature of PCD  in the barley aleurone cell.  Preliminary data from the 
              Principal Investigator's laboratory show that whereas PCD is  accompanied by
              DNA breakdown in GA-treated aleurone cells,  formation of DNA ladders does not
              occur.  A detailed study  is planned of DNA degradation from barley aleurone
              layers  and protoplasts treated with hormones that regulate PCD to 
              characterize the mechanism of DNA breakdown.  The nucleases  in aleurone cells
              will be characterized to determine whether  these enzymes only possess
              exonuclease activity, which would  account for the absence of DNA laddering in
              the aleurone  cell. Experiments will also be carried out to determine when  DNA
              breakdown occurs in aleurone cells. The Principal  Investigator has established
              that DNA breakdown occurs after  GA but not following ABA treatment.  Is DNA
              degraded in  living cells or does DNA degradation only occur after PCD?  Is the
              absence of DNA degradation in ABA treated cells a  result of the low levels of
              nuclease activity in these  cells, or is DNA modified to be less rapidly
              degraded in ABA  treated cells?  Fluorescent dyes that stain DNA in living 
              aleurone cells will be used to monitor DNA degradation and  to correlate
              changes in DNA with PCD.  If DNA breakdown  occurs after aleurone cells die,
              dead cells will be purified  from prot oplasts to monitor how the DNA is
              degraded.      In the barley seed, there is a starch-rich tissue called the 
              endosperm, which serves as a reservoir for nourishment of  the developing plant
              embryo inside the seed.  The aleurone  layer is a cellular tissue surrounding
              the endosperm, which  produces and secretes hydrolytic enzymes that digest the 
              starchy endosperm into monosaccharides that are can be used  directly as food
              by the developing embryo.  The aleurone can  thus be thought of as the
              digestive organ of the developing  embryo within the germinating seed.  When
              the aleurone has  finished producing the enzymes, it has no further purpose 
              and the cells of the tissue undergo a programmed cell death.  The
              developmentally regulated life and death of the cells of  the aleurone are
              under the control of two major plant  hormones, gibberellic acid and abscisic
              acid. The results of  this work will provide valuable insights into the process
              of  developmentally regulated PCD in plants and the roles that  hormones play
              in regulating this process.  ***
