Title       : Mechanism of Protein Import into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9722914

Award Number: 9722914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny J. Schnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722914  Schnell    The mechanism by which cytoplasmically synthesized proteins
              are targeted and assembled into their   proper subcellular compartment remains
              a major unsolved problem in cell biology.  The cells of higher   plants contain
              a unique organelle, the chloroplast, which offers an excellent model system for
              studying   this problem.  The majority of the protein components of the
              chloroplast are encoded in the nucleus,   synthesized as precursors on
              cytoplasmic ribosomes, and posttranslationally imported into the organelle  
              across the double membrane of the chloroplast envelope.  The long-term goal of
              this research is to   understand the mechanism of protein import into
              chloroplasts.  In recent years, the signals responsible for   targeting
              proteins to the chloroplast have been determined, and a number of components of
              the protein   import apparatus at the chloroplast envelope have been
              identified.  The major challenges to a more   detailed understanding of the
              import process are determining the supramolecular structure and dynamics   of
              the import apparatus and defining how the import components interact with
              precursor proteins during   the import process.  This proposal addresses both
              of these challenges.  The first aim of this proposal is to   investigate the
              structure and dynamics of membrane complexes that mediate protein import at the
              outer   and inner envelope membranes.  This strategy will use immunochemical
              and biochemical techniques to   investigate the composition and regulation of
              import complexes within and between the two envelope   membranes.  These
              studies will indicate the supramolecular structure of the import apparatus and
              provide   information on how the outer and inner membranes cooperate to
              facilitate transport of proteins across the   envelope.  The second aim of this
              proposal is to determine the sequence and specificity of the interaction   of
              the import components with precursor proteins during the complete time course
              of protein import.  This   strategy will em ploy chemical cross-linking of
              precursor proteins to import components at intermediate   stages in import
              ranging from initial binding of the precursor at the outer membrane to the
              completion of   translocation at the inner membrane.   The third aim is to
              characterize two newly discovered import   components, IAP21 and IAP25, whose
              molecular properties have not been investigated.  To this end,   cDNA clones
              for each of the putative components will be isolated and sequenced, and
              antibodies specific   for each component will be generated to localize the
              putative import components within the envelope.    These reagents will provide
              the basic tools for functional studies aimed at determining the roles of each  
              protein in envelope translocation.  The sum of these studies will provide a
              considerable advancement in   our goal of understanding the mechanism of
              protein import into chloroplasts. These studies are significant   for several
              reasons.  First, protein translocation plays a central role in chloroplast
              biogenesis.  Therefore,   definition of this process is essential to obtaining
              an understanding of the mechanism by which the   photosynthetic and metabolic
              machinery of the organelle are targeted and assembled.  Second,   understanding
              the import process is important for applications directed at optimizing the
              metabolic and   photosynthetic capabilities of genetically engineered plants by
              directing foreign or altered proteins to   chloroplasts.  Finally, the
              parameters governing the chloroplast protein import undoubtedly will contribute
                to the formulation of broader principles concerning the mechanism of protein
              targeting and membrane   translocation in all cells.    Chloroplasts are
              complex subcellular structures that support the photosynthetic metabolism of
              plants and   algae. The interior of the chloroplasts contains many different
              proteins and a complex of membranes that   mediate the photosynthetic process.
              Most of the proteins that support the photosynthetic metabolism are   made in
              the  cell outside of the chloroplast and are translocated into the chloroplast
              as precursors.   Chloroplasts are enveloped by a double unit membrane that must
              be bridged in order to deposit proteins   within its interior. This award will
              support detailed studies to examine the process by which proteins are  
              translocated through the double membrane that bounds the chloroplast. The
              information gained from   these studies will greatly advance the understanding
              of how the chloroplast is assembled.      ***
