Title       : Determinants of Mating Type in Phytophthora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9722947

Award Number: 9722947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard S. Judelson howard.judelson@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Judelson  9722947  The goal of this research is to understand the regulation and
              evolution of mating systems in oomycete fungi. Using the heterothallic species
              Phytophthora infestans as a model system, the basis of mating type (sexual
              compatibility) will be determined by cloning the mating type locus and
              determining its function. This is expected to lead to studies of other
              heterothallic and homothallic species of Phytophthora, of mating type loci in
              other oomyceteous genera, and of other genes involved in the mating response. 
              During previous studies by this laboratory DNA markers flanking the mating type
              locus were isolated and used to develop a genetic model to explain the
              determination of mating type; those markers are now being used to isolate the
              mating type locus by chromosome walking using cosmid and bacterial artificial
              chromosome libraries. In addition, the prior studies indicated that the
              chromosomal region containing the mating type determinants of P. infestans
              displayed several unusual genetic and physical characteristics. These included
              a non-Mendelian pattern of inheritance equivalent to that observed in systems
              of balanced lethal loci, and instability of the region as evidenced by its
              propensity to rearrange; these phenomena will continue to be addressed in this
              project.   The oomycetes are an important but under-studied group of diploid
              lower eukaryotes that include many economically and environmentally significant
              species. These include pathogens of plants and animals, biocontrol agents of
              other pathogens, and saprophytes. P. infestans is a natural first choice for
              these studies due to the well-developed molecular and classical genetic
              techniques available for the species.  P. infestans is also a widespread and
              enormously important pathogen of several food crops. Consequently, the
              importance of developing expertise in the molecular manipulation of this
              pathogen can not be over-stressed. Furthermore, the analysis of mating type in
              P. infestans represents an opportunity to study  an important aspect of its
              biology. Mating systems are significant since they regulate the flow of genes
              through populations; for plant pathogens such as P. infestans, such genes
              include those determining pathogenicity, host preference, race specificity, and
              fungicide resistance. The mating cycle is also significant since the sexual
              spores (oospores) are long-lived and serve as an important source of inoculum
              for outbreaks of plant disease.    Much will be learned from these studies
              including information about the regulation of mating type in diploids and the
              evolution of an unusual chromosomal region. This research will also illuminate
              fundamental aspects of oomycete biology, including those concerning gene
              regulation, cellular communication, signal transduction, and development. It is
              likely that mating in oomycetes is regulated by mechanisms very different from
              those of ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, which lack taxonomic affinity to the
              oomycetes and in which mating is controlled by different genetic and
              biochemical mechanisms. In the long term, these studies may have significant
              practical applications as well. If the factors which control mating can be
              identified, it might be possible to control plant diseases by manipulating or
              exploiting portions of the mating cycle. Studies in P. infestans will naturally
              lead to an understanding and ultimately control of other oomycete plant
              pathogens as well.
