Title       : Mathematical Aspects of Einstein's Theory of General Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9722049

Award Number: 9722049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Berley                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezra T. Newman newman@phyast.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An investigation of several physical and mathematical issues  concerning the
              structure of Einstein's General Theory of  Relativity, (GR) will be undertaken.
               GR can be understood  by its analogy with the more familiar ideas of
              electricity  and magnetism.  Most often it has been useful to study 
              gravitational phenomena as just another classical field and  use the analogies
              with electro-magnetic theory for the  understanding of different physical
              phenomena or as a guide  to the problems of a quantum theory of gravity. 
              Recently, there has been developed a new point of view  towards general
              relativity, where the analogy with electro-  magnetic fields completely breaks
              down.  The primary  variables are no longer conventional fields but are instead
               non-local structures; in particular, they are three  dimensional surfaces in
              space-time with the special property  that light can travel along these
              surfaces, i.e., the  surfaces are null or characteristic surfaces.  It has been
               possible (though it was not at all obvious how to do so) to  give a
              formulation of GR where the basic equations are for  the determination of these
              surfaces.  In turn, when these  surfaces are determined the geometry of the
              space-time turns  out to be identical with the conventional view derived from 
              Einstein's general relativity.  In other words, general  relativity has been
              reformulated as a theory of three  dimensional surfaces.  The major portion of
              this project involves the study of the  properties of these surface equations. 
              We have been  interested in both their classical aspects - (their  geometric
              meaning, their consequences and methods of  integration and approximation) and
              what relationship they  might have with the difficulties associated with the 
              construction of a quantum theory of gravity.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
