Title       : Vesicle Pool Modulation by Serotonin and Long-Term Facilitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9722826

Award Number: 9722826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Zucker zucker@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Synapses are the points of communication between neurons.  Alterations in their
              strength can critically affect the  operations and functions of neural circuits
              in the brain.  Many hormones and drugs affect synaptic strength.  Sometimes 
              they act by altering presynaptic calcium channels through  which calcium ions
              enter to trigger the secretion of  neurotransmitter, the substance one neuron
              releases in order  to communicate with another at a synapse.  But often 
              neuromodulators act without affecting calcium channels in  ways still not
              understood.  Serotonin is a circulating  hormone in crustaceans which strongly
              enhances transmission  at neuromuscular synapses.  Serotonin increases
              transmitter  release without altering presynaptic levels of calcium 
              concentration or increasing the influx of calcium into nerve  terminals during
              action potentials.  Just how serotonin  regulates transmitter release is not
              known.  Long-term  facilitation (LTF) is a form of synaptic plasticity observed
               at crayfish neuromuscular junctions where prolonged neural  activity results
              in an increase in transmitter release per  action potential.  It is not
              associated with any change in  presynaptic resting calcium level or calcium
              influx during  action potentials, and like serotonin's action, its effects  are
              mediated by the presynaptic biochemical intermediate  cyclic adenosine
              monophosphate (cAMP).  It is not known what  aspect of the secretory process is
              altered in LTF.  Transmitter is stored in vesicles and released by their 
              fusion with the presynaptic membrane during action  potentials.  Preliminary
              results suggest that serotonin acts  at crayfish neuromuscular junctions to
              increase the supply  of vesicles available for release.  This preparation will
              be  used to test this hypothesis, and also to develop procedures  that could be
              used to assay other drugs that might enhance  the size of the vesicle pool. It
              will also be determined  whether vesicle pool size is altered during (LTF).  In
              this  project, a membrane labelin g fluorescent dye (FM1-43) will  be used to
              label presynaptic vesicles and determine whether  serotonin and LTF increase
              the number of available vesicles  or the probability they are released by
              action potentials.  A slowly developing depression of synaptic transmission due
               to exhaustion of the vesicles available for release will  also be used to
              estimate the number of vesicles in the  releasable pool and whether their
              number or their  probability of release is increased by serotonin and LTF. 
              Other experiments will test for changes in the rate of  recovery of released
              vesicle membrane in serotonin and LTF,  and for involvement of cytoskeletal
              proteins in vesicle  availability and release during serotonin action and LTF. 
              Finally, new cAMP-sensitive indicators will be used to  measure changes in
              presynaptic levels of cAMP during  serotonin action and LTF.
