Title       : Improved Aequorin for Monitoring Ca and Superoxide in Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9722982

Award Number: 9722982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Shimomura shimomur@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9722982  Shimomura    The photoprotein aequorin has been used in monitoring
              intracellular calcium for many years, and the   functional group of this
              protein, coelenterazine, and its analogues are sensitive probes for measuring  
              superoxide anion.  The main objective of this project is to design and prepare
              optimally improved forms of   aequorin and coelenterazine for studying various
              biological events that involve free calcium and   superoxide anion.    Aequorin
              was discovered in a jellyfish by the PI in 1962.   It emits blue light in the  
              presence of ionized calcium by an intramolecular reaction, decomposing itself
              into apoaequorin,   coelenteramide and carbon dioxide.  Apoaequorin can be
              regenerated into the original aequorin by   incubation with coelenterazine in
              the presence of oxygen.  In the past several years, about 50 kinds of  
              coelenterazine analogue were synthesized and incorporated into apoaequorin. 
              Many of the products,   which are called semisynthetic aequorins, showed
              excellent properties for measuring cellular calcium.    Some had a very high
              sensitivity, others had a very low sensitivity, and some had a very fast
              response,   thus making possible the monitoring of rapid, transient changes of
              calcium ions in a wide concentration   range (1 nM - 1 mM).  A recent trend is
              to express recombinant apoaequorin in cells, which is followed by   the in situ
              reconstitution of aequorin by the addition of a coelenterazine.  In this
              procedure, the choice of   coelenterazine analogue is critical for the success
              of the reconstitution of an aequorin. The significance of   superoxide radical
              generation in biological systems has long been recognized, but the technique of
                measuring it lags far behind that of measuring calcium.  This is largely due
              to the unavailability of the   superoxide probes that are sufficiently
              sensitive for the purpose.  In the past two years, more than 20 kinds   of
              coelenterazine analogues were prepared and tested at the PI's lab.  Some of
              them showed significantly    improved responses to superoxide, and the
              structure- sensitivity relationships of the analogues provided   useful
              information for further improvement of superoxide probes. The research plan for
              the next three   years includes: (1)  Preparation of the semisynthetic
              aequorins that emit red light (550-650 nm), by   extending the conjugation
              system of coelenterazine at the position 8 of its imidazopyrazinone ring.  The 
               products will be useful in monitoring calcium in colored and opaque cells and
              tissues, and also in certain   two-wavelength techniques. (2)  Identification
              of suitable coelenterazine analogues for the reconstitution   of the
              recombinant apoaequorin that is expressed in cells. This information should
              significantly contribute   to the work in progress at many laboratories.  (3) 
              New, improved superoxide probes will be designed and   prepared based on the
              information now available; the probes will have at least 100 times higher
              sensitivity   than MCLA, the most sensitive probe currently available, with a
              very low background luminescence. (4)    The PI's laboratory will continue to
              supply various aequorin preparations and  coelenterazine analogues to   cell
              biologists to aid their studies.  The supersensitive superoxide-probes, when
              prepared, will also be   provided.    The perception of extrinsic environmental
              effects such as light, temperature and chemicals influences cells   and
              organisms to exert a multitude of overt changes in physiology and development.
              The initial perception   of environmental changes is detected by specific
              proteins that transmit the signal downstream in the cell   through mechanisms
              that often involve rapid changes or fluxes of intracellular calcium. The PI
              discovered   a protein, apoaequorin with coelenterazine, is used for
              bioluminescence in jelly fish is highly sensitive to   calcium. The gene for
              apoaequarin can be expressed in cells to provide an intrinsic visual probe for 
               calcium with the addition of coelenterazine. To be able to visualize the
              changes a nd fluxes of calcium   within cells in response to signals is
              extremely useful in the study of cellular reactions to environmental   and
              developmental changes. With this award, Dr. Shimomura will continue to refine
              the use of aequorin   by producing new analogs of coelenterazine that will emit
              light in the red instead of blue and to be   sensitive to oxidative burst that
              accompanies many stress reactions. Attaining these goals will provide the  
              scientific community with extremely valuable tools to explore many types of
              reactions to changes in the   physiology of animal, plant and fungal cells. 
              ***
