Title       : A Regulatory Cascade for Entry into Anaphase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9722920

Award Number: 9722920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Wolniak sw36@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9722920  Wolniak             Mitosis is the process that facilitates
              the orderly  separation and apportionment of replicated chromosomes so  that
              each daughter cell possesses an entire complement of  the genetic material. 
              The regulation of mitotic progression  is now known to involve a number of
              signal transduction  events at specific time point during the process where 
              enzymatically induced modifications of proteins have  profound effects on  the
              occurrence and timing of subsequent  events.  The research of this grant is
              focused on the  regulatory states that trigger sister chromatid separation  at
              the onset of anaphase, in stamen hairs of the spiderwort  plant, Tradescantia
              virginiana.  Stamen hair cells exhibit a  remarkable predictable rate of
              progression through  metaphase, and thus, are uniquely suited for the analysis
              of  regulatory events that affect the timing of sister chromatid  separation. 
              Kinases and phosphatases are enzymes that add  or remove phosphate,
              respectively, from substrate proteins,  and thereby affect their behavior,
              activity and  distribution.  As a consequence of these phosphoylation  events,
              the altered substrate proteins affect the rate of  mitotic progression.  By
              microinjecting small quantities of  peptides that represent phosphorylation
              domains of substrate  proteins into stamen hair cells at know time points after
               nuclear envelope breakdown, this laboratory found that the  regulation of
              progression through metaphase is under the  control of a multifaceted
              phosphorylation cascade.  The  current project expands on this approach and
              findings, and  utilizes the screening of a cDNA library made from stamen  hair
              cells to isolate cDNAs that encode bone fide protein  kinases and kinase
              substrates from stamen hair cells.  These  cDNAs will enable them to make
              peptides that represent  legitimate stamen hair cell gene products for 
              microinjections designed to determine how and when their  phosphoylation
              affects mitotic progression.  This research  will furthe r our understanding of
              the biochemical mechanisms  involved in mitosis.  %%%     This research is
              using the stamen hair cells of the  spiderwort plant to examine the regulatory
              processes  involved in cell division.  The research is using  recombinant DNA
              techniques to determine the protein kinases,  phosphatases and the proteins
              they modify, and how they  regulate mitosis.              ***
