Title       : MEF2 Function in Neuronal Cell Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9722863

Award Number: 9722863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Schulz sa08371@odin.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722863 SCHULZ    Proteins that act as transcription factors, which control the
              expression of one or more other genes, are very important in determining how
              different cell types take on different characteristics during development.  One
              small family of transcription factors, called the myocyte enhancer factor-2
              (MEF2) family, is expressed in muscle cells and is highly conserved at the
              genetic level across a wide range of animals.  The analysis of MEF2 function
              has been greatly facilitated by the study of D-mef2, the single mef2 gene of
              the laboratory fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster.  Embryos lacking a normal
              D-mef2 gene fail to form normal muscles.  The gene controls differentiation in
              all muscle cell types, and its absence results in lethality during embryonic
              development.  Mef2 genes are also expressed in non-muscle cell types.  For
              example, the mouse and human versions of this genes are expressed in neurons of
              the brain.  Throughout development, mef2 gene expression appears to follow
              gradients of neuronal maturation and the initiation of neuronal cell
              differentiation.  D-mef2 is also expressed in the Drosophila central nervous
              system in Kenyon cells, which are the intrinsic neurons of the mushroom bodies
              of the brain.  Very little is known about the development of these neural
              centers, which are required for associative learning in flies.  Given the
              mushroom body-enriched expression of D-mef2, and the known function of the gene
              in muscle differentiation, it is likely that this transcription factor also
              functions in this neuronal cell.  Because of the expected difficulties in
              elucidating the functions of the vertebrate genes in the mouse or human brains,
              studies conducted using the Drosophila model system should yield the first
              insights into the functions of a MEF2 family member in complex neural
              developmental processes.  The overall goal of this project is to build upon
              previous genetic and molecular discoveries to investigate the function of the
              D-mef2 gene in neurons.  The specific aims a re to characterize the regulatory
              factors controlling D-mef2 expression in Kenyon neurons and to determine the
              function of D-mef2 in these cells.  Since the genetic programs controlling
              brain development in flies and higher eukaryotes are believed to be highly
              conserved, these experiments should be important to the understanding of neuron
              differentiation during central nervous system development.
