Title       : Identification Problems in the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a9722846

Award Number: 9722846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Manski cfmanski@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Econometricians have long found it useful to separate inferential problems into
              statistical and identification components. Studies of identification seek to
              characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the researcher had
              available a sample of unlimited size. Studies of statistical inference seek to
              characterize the generally weaker conclusions that can be drawn given a sample
              of positive but finite size. Statistical and identification problems limit in
              distinct ways the conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
              Statistical problems are most severe when the available sample is small.
              Identification problems are most severe when the researcher knows little about
              the population under study and the sampling process yields only weak data on
              the population. This research continues the investigator's program of work on
              identification problems in the social sciences. Four projects combining
              methodological research and empirical analysis are planned:  Nonparametric
              Regression When Outcomes and/or Regressors are Censored  Whereas there is a
              voluminous literature on regression analysis when outcomes are censored,
              surprisingly little attention has been given to the inferential problems that
              arise when regressors are censored. This project examines regressor censoring
              from the same nonparametric perspective used earlier by the investigator to
              analyze outcome censoring and other non identifying sampling processes. The
              findings are used to characterize the possible implications for survey research
              of item and interview nonresponse.  Monotone Treatment Response  The standard
              formalization of the analysis of treatment effects assumes that each member of
              a population of interest receives one of a set of mutually exclusive and
              exhaustive treatments, and that the outcome under the realized treatment is
              observable. Outcomes under the non realized treatments are necessarily
              unobservable; hence these outcomes are censored. In earlier work, the
              investigator has studied the nonparametric identification of treatment effects
              in the classical case where there are two treatments and the objective is to
              compare distributions of outcomes under these treatments. This project examines
              the identifiability of treatment effects when treatments are ordered and
              response functions are known to be monotone or concave monotone. The findings
              have application to the econometric analysis of market demand and of
              production.  Empirical Analysis of Sentencing and Recidivism  The question of
              how judges should sentence convicted juvenile offenders has long concerned
              policy makers and criminologists. The investigator is using nonparametric
              methods to compare the effects on recidivism of the two main sentencing options
              available to judges: confinement in residential treatment facilities and
              diversion to nonresidential treatment. This project seeks to illuminate the
              basic ideas of nonparametric analysis of treatment effects through a serious
              empirical case study, to add new methodological findings, and to contribute
              substantively to the field of criminology.  Analyses of the Survey of Economic
              Expectations  The nature of subjective expectations is a shared concern of
              researchers who study human behavior. The investigator has recently designed
              and implemented the Survey of Economic Expectations (SEE). SEE is an ongoing
              national survey initiated in an effort to learn how Americans perceive their
              near term economic prospects. Probabilistic questions are used to elicit
              expectations about income, employment, health insurance coverage, and crime
              victimization one year into the future. Recently completed analyses of SEE data
              examine respondents' income expectations and their perceptions of economic
              insecurity. This project would continue collection of SEE data at the present
              rate of about 1500 interviews per year and would perform a set of special
              studies that should enhance the value of the survey.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
