Title       : CAREER: Steroid Regulation of Development in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9722205

Award Number: 9722205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig T. Woodard cwoodard@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722205  Woodard    Technical section  steroid hormones control a wide range of
              developmental processes in higher organisms, acting in conjunction with
              receptor proteins to regulate the stage- and tissue-specific transcription of
              target genes. Little is understood about how these effects on gene expression
              result in the dramatic developmental changes associated with steroid function
              in the fly, Drosophila melanogaster. The goal of the proposed research is to
              answer the question of how a single hormonal signal can elicit different
              responses at different times during development. The proposed study will
              examine the regulatory hierarchies triggered by 20-hydroxyecdysone
              (ecdysone)during the onset of Drosophila metamorphosis.  Previously isolated as
              well as newly isolated loss-of-function mutations in a mutant, BFTZ-F1 will be
              analyzed with a focus on salivary gland histolysis, pupal cuticle formation,
              and head eversion. The mutations will also be characterized at the molecular
              level.  Non-technical  Understanding biological processes at the molecular
              level has led to rapid, major advances in our understanding of mechanisms
              underlying biological processes and that understanding has had a major impact
              in the everyday world. Thus it is critical for students to gain a solid
              understanding of molecular biology, whether they wish to become scientists, or
              informed citizens who are well-equipped to deal with personal and societal
              decisions regarding use of scientific knowledge. In this study, undergraduate
              students will be involved in the analysis of the mechanism(s) involved in the
              function of the steroid hormone in triggering developmental processes in the
              fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.  The plan to integrate molecular biology
              into the curriculum is an effective way of teaching scientific principles of
              biology.   ***
