Title       : CAA: Chemical Synthesis of Affinity Tagged Flavonols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9722774

Award Number: 9722774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52437              (Estimated)
Investigator: Loverine P. Taylor ltaylor@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722774  Taylor      Using mutants that are unable to synthesize flavonols
              preliminary research has established an essential role of flavanols in
              reproduction. Although mutant, flavanol-deficient maize and petunia pollen is
              unable to germinate or produce a functional pollen tube, the defect can be
              corrected by the exogenous application of low concentrations of kaempferol, a
              flavonol aglycone to an in vitro suspension of pollen. This results in a rapid
              (2-5 min) pollen tube outgrowth that is indistinguishable from that of
              wild-type pollen. The rapid response of pollen to low doses of kaempferol
              indicates that this flavanol has a role in signal transduction. In order to
              understand how flavanols signal pollen germination it is essential to identify
              the proteins that interact with kaempferol. By using highly specific affinity
              probes it is feasible to identify the proteins that bind to kaempferol and
              thereby elucidate the downstream components of the signal transduction pathway.
              To gain new expertise in the synthesis and use of labeled flavanols as tools
              the following objectives will be accomplished as career advancement activities;
              1, To synthesize and evaluate radiolabeled photoaffinity probes for flavonol
              (kaempferol) receptors. 2, To prepare kaempferol-polymer conjugates for
              affinity chromatography. 3, To make caged kaempferol to study the intracellular
              sites of action. 4, To adapt the existing yeast two-hybrid system to detect
              protein-protein interactions mediated by kaempferol. In order to become
              proficient in use of bioactive small molecule chemistry in biological research
              I will conduct sabbatical research and training in the laboratory of Dr. Thomas
              Wandless of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University. As a
              consequence of the sabbatical research and training I will have expanded
              opportunities to investigate biological problems involving the signaling and
              regulation of pathways by small bioactive molecules.    Many small molecules
              signal the onset of biological processes. How variou s molecules induce new
              physiological and developmental activity remains some of the most important
              biological processes that must be elucidated. Flavanols are essential to growth
              of pollen tubes and reproductive activity in plants. Mutants unable to produce
              flavanols are arrested in pollen growth that can be almost immediately restored
              with the exposure of the mutant pollen to low doses of the flavanol kaempferol.
              This grant will fund sabbatical training and research devoted toward developing
              tools and techniques that will allow the PI to investigate how flavanols
              interact with specific cellular proteins that result in signaling reproductive
              growth in pollen.  ***
