Title       : Nucleotide-Dependent Signal Transduction in Nitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9722937

Award Number: 9722937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance C. Seefeldt seefeldt@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722937  Seefeldt  Nitrogenase is the metalloenzyme responsible for biological
              nitrogen fixation, thereby occupying a central position in the global nitrogen
              cycle.  The reduction of all substrates by nitrogenase requires the hydrolysis
              of a minimum of two MgATP molecules for each electron transferred to
              substrates.  The long range objective of this research program is to provide a
              detailed understanding of the functions of nucleotides in the nitrogenase
              reaction mechanism.  The studies in the current project period focus on (i)
              defining the mechanisms of nucleotide induced protein conformational changes
              within the nitrogenase iron (Fe) protein and the roles that these
              conformational changes play in regulating the affinity of the nitrogenase Fe
              protein for binding to the molybdenum-iron (MoFe) protein and (ii) defining the
              functions of MgATP hydrolysis within the Fe protein-MoFe protein complex in
              gating and accelerating electron transfer, promoting substrate reduction, and
              triggering protein-protein dissociation.  The approach will be to utilize the
              X-ray crystal structures of the individual nitrogenase component proteins and
              the structure of a nitrogenase Fe protein-MoFe protein complex, in conjunction
              with site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical and spectroscopic methods to
              unravel details of the functions of nucleotides at each step in the nitrogenase
              mechanism.  It is expected that the results from this project will contribute
              to a detailed understanding of the functions of nucleotides in the nitrogenase
              reaction mechanism and will have broader implications in understanding the
              mechanisms of other nucleotide-coupled energy transduction proteins.    Reduced
              forms of nitrogen are essential to all life on earth.  The need for reduced
              nitrogen is especially limiting in modern agriculture where it must be supplied
              in the form of fertilizers.  The nitrogen in fertilizers is prepared by a
              chemical reaction that requires high temperatures and pressures.  In contrast
              to this chemical process, many  soil bacteria can make reduced forms of
              nitrogen by conversion of atmospheric N2, a gas that constitutes 80% of the air
              that we breath, into ammonia without the requirements for high temperature or
              pressure.  This bacterial process, called nitrogen fixation, is catalyzed by an
              enzyme called nitrogenase.  Nitrogenase catalyzed ammonia production presently
              accounts for the largest total input of fixed nitrogen into the environment and
              represents a very attractive alternative to industrially prepared fertilizers
              for agriculture.  The research team is investigating the mechanism of this
              biological process at the molecular level, especially the requirement for the
              cellular energy source MgATP.  The approach will be to combine modern genetic
              cloning techniques with biochemical and biophysical techniques to define the
              mechanism of energy utilization by nitrogenase.  It is anticipated that the
              results of these investigations will provide a detailed understanding of the
              mechanism of nitrogenase and will provide the foundation knowledge that will be
              required to initiate protein engineering of nitrogenase.  Such studies will be
              vital to the utilization of nitrogenase as a potential source of nitrogen in
              agriculture.
