Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Many-Body Effects in the Photoionization Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9722750

Award Number: 9722750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Manson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Steven
              Manson of the Physics Department at Georgia State University in Atlanta and Dr.
              Altun Zikry of the Physics Department at Marmara University in Istanbul,
              Turkey.  The project focuses on photoionization of open-shell atoms using
              many-body perturbation theory (MBPT), with particular emphasis on the very
              difficult transition metals and rare earth elements, and photoionization with
              excitation of closed-shell atoms.    With the advent of the new powerful
              synchrotron light sources, these kinds of systems will be more readily explored
              in the laboratory, thus rendering this study quite timely.  The further
              development of the MBPT codes will engender the possibilities of applying this
              very powerful methodology to systems where the amount of work was previously
              unmanageable and take full advantage of the revolution in computer hardware.   
              Scope:  This research project will be useful in promoting the scientific
              knowledge on the electron and photon interactions with atoms.  It involves US
              and Turkish scientists with complementary expertise.  Dr. Manson is an expert
              at extracting physical insights from conceptually simple and well-designed
              calculations of photoionization processes and the ionization of atoms by
              high-energy, charged particles.  Dr. Altun is most familiar with the use of the
              codes developed earlier for many-body perturbation theory.   This proposal
              meets INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that
              benefit both sides.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
