Title       : Japan JSPS Program: An Investigation of Interesting Minor Bioactive Constituents
               from Nonconspicuous Okinawan Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1997  
File        : a9722430

Award Number: 9722430
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Leif M. Abrell abrell@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abrell  9722430    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Leif Abrell at the
              Department of Marine Sciences, University  of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.  Dr.
              Abrell will work with  Dr. Tatsuo Higa, Professor of Marine Chemistry, on a 
              research project entitled, "An Investigation of Interesting  Minor Bioactive
              Constituents from Nonconspicuous Okinawan  Marine Organisms."    Biomedicine
              has recently been the major driving force for  the chemical inveqtigation of
              marine sponges and  invertebrates.  Pharmacologists, physiologists, and 
              biochemists have shown that many of these natural products  posses properties
              that modify fundamental life processes in  ways that have important biomedical
              applications.  These  molecules are the leads that the pharmaceutical and
              chemical  industries have begun to focus on as templates for  development of
              the drugs for the future.  The first  compounds reported from these organisms
              were usually the  major constituents and were isolated in yields large enough 
              to provide sufficient sample size for nuclear magnetic  resonance (NMR).  The
              evolution of tools available to  natural products chemists including molecule
              separation  technologies and high field NMR instruments for solving the 
              structures of miniature samples now warrants a deeper and  more meticulous look
              at sample extracts for bioactive  constituents.  The proposed research will: 1)
              collect bioactive extracts  from various marine invertebrate species (sponges, 
              tunicates, and coelenterates); 2) subject the extracts to  bioassay guided
              solvent partitioning and chromatographic  fractionation to purify active
              components, and; 3)  characterize the structures and stereochemistry of
              bioactive  compounds.  Emphasis in the proposed research will be placed  on
              compounds which posses potency in bioactivity screens  such as cancer cell
              lines, viruses including HIV-1, and  cancer cell enzymes such as topoisomerase
              I and II and DNA  polymerase.  * **
