Title       : Cellular Signals Mediating Symbiosis in Vibrio fischeri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9722972

Award Number: 9722972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Dunlap dunlap@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722972  DUNLAP  This project will test the hypotheses that the signal molecules
              3' :5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (autoinducers) play key
              roles in the bioluminescent mutualism of Vibrio fischeri with the sepiolid
              squid Euprymna scolopes. Two classes of mutants will be used in colonization
              assays with aposymbiotic hatchling squid to test the cAMP-CRP hypothesis,
              mutants defective in adenylate cyclase and CRP, constructed using the suicide
              vector pSMC300, and mutants defective in cAMP-CRP-regulated proteins,
              identified and isolated by 2-D gel electrophoresis and through
              transposon-mediated lacZ insertional mutagenesis. Preliminary evidence suggests
              that the periplasmic 3' :5'-CNP of V.fischeri also plays a key role in its
              symbiosis with E. scolopes. The enzyme is hypothesized to mediate bacterial
              metabolism of extracellular, host-produced cAMP in the animal's light organ,
              and diminished symbiosis competency of the mutant would imply that cAMP is a
              growth substrate or key signal for the bacteria in the light organ. To address
              3' :5 ' -CNP hypothesis, colonization initiation capability and retention of
              the cpdP mutant will be examined and levels of 3' :5 ' -CNP activity, CpdP
              protein, and cpdP mRNA will be quantified at several points during development
              of the animal. To test the autoinducer hypothesis, two classes of mutants will
              be used in squid colonization assays, an autoinducer-deficient mutant defective
              in the two V. fischeri autoinducer synthases, LuxI and AinS, constructed using
              the suicide vector pSMC300 and transposon mutagenesis, and mutants defective in
              production of autoinducer-dependent proteins, identified and isolated by 2-D
              gel electrophoresis and through transposon-mediated lacZ insertional
              mutagenesis. This research will form a foundation for understanding the complex
              network of inter- and intra-cellular signals and responses through which a
              bacterium senses and adapts to mutualistic host association.    The mutually
              beneficial symbiosis between the marine b acterium Vibrio fischeri and the 
              squid Euprymna scolopes serves as an important model system for determining how
              a  bacterium colonizes and persists in an animal host.  Symbiosis between
              bacteria and animals is common in terrestrial and marine habitats and has a
              substantial environmental importance, in some cases providing the biological
              foundation for an ecosystem. Consequently, knowledge gained from detailed study
              of one assocation is likely to provide widely significant ecological insight. 
              Knowledge of the bacterial signals and the bacterium-animal biochemical
              communication is of fundamental importance for understanding how mutualisms are
              successfully established and maintained and how biologically different
              organisms cooperate to survive and reproduce. This project consequently focuses
              on key bacterial intracellular and intercellular signals, because of their
              central importance in gene expression and their likely importance for
              host-association.
