Title       : GOALI: Thermodynamics of Fluid-Solid Equilibria in Solutions of Crystallizable
               Aromatic-Ring Containing Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0049004

Award Number: 0049004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej Radosz radosz@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9908610
Maciej Radosz


Crystallallizable polymers can
              precipitate from solution in the form of a structure solid phase by cooling or
              compression.  The overall goal of the proposed research is to understand the
              solid-phase behavior of crystallizable aromatic-ring containing polymers in
              compressible-fluid streams, such as near critical- and supercritical-fluid
              solutions.  Such understanding is needed not only to develop new polymeric
              materials, but also to develop new and improve existing manufacturing
              processes; to make then less energy intensive and more environmentally
              acceptable.  For example, such understanding is needed to accomplish desirable
              phase transitions and to avoid undesirable phase transitions that cause fouling
              phenomena in pipelines, reactors and separators.

The proposed approach is to
              (1) characterize aromatic-containing model polymers, such as
              poly(ethylene-co-styrene) and poly (1,3-cyclohezadine) derivatives, upon
              fluid-solid  transition in high-pressure experiments, and (2) develop an
              equation-of-state-based thermodynamic model that can account for and predict
              the crystallizable solid-phase transitions.  The basis for this approach is a
              series of preliminary but promising experimental results and computational
              results with recent versions of an equation of state referred to as SAFT
              (statistical associating fluid theory).  SAFT can explicitly account for the
              effects of microstructure and aromaticity on the thermodynamic properties of
              polymers and copolymers.  This has never been done before and will impact the
              way we characterize very large, structured molecules.

Specifically, the
              knowledge generated in this project will seed future research on more
              predictive thermodynamic models and on the other polymer structures, for
              example, structures with different branch lengths, shapes (e. g. graft polymers
              and stars), increasing degree of the backbone rigidity (all the way to the
              liquid-crystalline polymers), and varying degree of inter- and intra-molecular
              association.  This is because the proposed model polymers with aromatic rings
              in the backbone and side branches can be the basic building block for numerous
              more complicated macromolecular and supremolecular structures, which will be
              the target of future research.

In addition to seeding future research, this
              project will have an immediate and long-term impact on the existing and future
              polymer technologies.  For example, the SAFT model will allow for predicting
              the undesirable phase transition that lead to fouling of real heat-exchanger
              and reactor systems in real commercial polyolefin processes, such as the
              existing solution poly(ethylene-co-styrene) process and future polyphenylene
              processes.  

