Title       : Dynamical Terahertz Spectroscopy of Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  2000   
File        : a0049024

Award Number: 0049024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213884             (Estimated)
Investigator: Junichiro Kono kono@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9970962
Kono

This project explores linear and nonlinear terahertz (THz)
              dynamics in semiconductor nanostructures. The objective is to study the
              behavior of quantum-confined carriers in semiconductor nanostructures that are
              strongly driven by intense THz laser radiation.  The focus of the research is
              to explore strong light-matter interactions in non-perturbative regimes that
              are inaccessible in atomic spectroscopy. Such research provides new insight
              into the complicated dynamics of many-body systems, but equally important, it
              is useful for developing novel semiconductor devices that operate in the
              technologically little explored THz frequency range (0.1 -10 THz).  Particular
              attention will be placed on how we can control such dynamics by "dressing" the
              quantum-confined states with strong THz oscillating fields.  Because of the
              rarity of sources for intense, coherent, and tunable THz radiation, research in
              this direction has not been well explored.  The experiments will be performed
              using the Stanford Free-Electron Laser, which has been recently extended to
              this frequency regime.
%%%
This project deals with the non-equilibrium
              dynamics of carriers in semiconductors.  The main emphasis is in probing
              many-body effects in quantum-confined systems in strong magnetic fields using
              terahertz/far-infrared spectroscopic techniques.  Such research provides
              insight into the fundamental physics of correlated confined carriers, but
              equally important, it is useful for developing novel semiconductor devices that
              operate in the terahertz (THz) frequency range.  This frequency range, lying
              between electronic (< 100 GHz) and photonic (> 10 THz) frequencies, is
              scientifically rich but technologically poor.
***

