Title       : POWRE: Laboratory Experiments of Wind-Raindrop Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a0049054

Award Number: 0049054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana P. Barros barros@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9753093  Barros     The objective of this project is to improve upon existing
              empirical techniques to quantify rainfall impact by investigating the basic
              mechanisms of wind-raindrop interactions in the atmospheric boundary-layer over
              surfaces of varying slope, aspect and roughness. Rainfall impact on exposed
              surfaces is one of the most critical agents of deterioration of buildings and
              infrastructure, and a trigger mechanism of extended soil erosion. The research
              approach is to assess rainfall impact based on the kinetic energy and angle of
              impact of raindrops, which are determined by atmospheric conditions (average
              wind conditions and dynamic stability parameters such as buoyancy and turbulent
              shear) and the intrinsic properties of rainfall (intensity and raindrop size
              distribution).   For this purpose, acoustic emission testing of rainfall impact
              will be conducted in the presence and absence of wind, while high-resolution
              photography will be used to study the pathways and transformations of raindrops
              moving through turbulent boundary-layers simulated in a large-scale wind
              tunnel. Ultimately, the goal is to establish a conceptual framework of the
              physics of wind-raindrop interactions to address a wide range of science and
              engineering problems, such as to estimate soil erodibility indices as a
              function of climate, or to define design criteria for building facades.   The
              support provided by the POWRE program will be used for the acquisition of an
              acoustic measurement unit suitable to monitor the impact of rainfall at various
              locations simultaneously, and to conduct exploratory wind-tunnel experiments at
              the Saint Anthony Falls Hydraulic Laboratory, University of Minnesota. These
              experiments are essential to obtain the data necessary to perform an evaluation
              of the feasibility and potential success of the proposed research, before a
              comprehensive investigation to characterize the fate of raindrops in the
              atmospheric boundary layer can be pursued.
