Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Reproductive Success of Endemic Birds in
               South-Temperate Fragmented Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0049083

Award Number: 0049083
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Willson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Toni L. De Santo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn E. Sieving  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9602917  Willson    This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative 
              research project between Dr. Mary Willson, Pacific Northwest  Research Station,
              Portland and Dr. Juan Armesto, Universidad  de Chile , to examine the effects
              of forest fragmentation on  density and reproductive success of two endemic
              bird species  in the Chilean forest, the chucao and the huet-huet.  The 
              fundamental working hypothesis of this study is that  population densities
              and/or reproductive success of the  species are lower in smaller, more
              disturbed forest  fragments.  After documenting these patterns in relation to 
              forest size, the focus will be on the possible ecological  mechanisms by which
              fragmentation affects the breeding of  the birds.    The south-temperate
              rainforests of southern Chile and far-  western Argentina are being cut at a
              very rapid rate and are  rapidly disappearing.  Conservation planning requires
              an  understanding of the ecological mechanisms that influence  population
              viability in order to determine the most  effective measure for minimizing the
              risks of regional  extinction.  The long-term goal of this work includes the 
              development of a landscape-level model for biodiversity  conservation in an
              agricultural landscape.  ***
