Title       : Acquisition of Reflex Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0049031

Award Number: 0049031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 6,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan T. Richtsmeier jta1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joan Richtsmeier will purchase a
              Reflex Microscope that will be used in data collection for specific research
              projects and in the training of undergraduate and graduate students. The Reflex
              Microscope represents a fusion between a small coordinate measuring machine and
              a surface profiler, and it is ideal for measuring locations, distances and
              angles in three dimensions on small irregular surfaces. The microscope uses the
              stereoscopic ability of the observer to pinpoint the surface of an image to
              within a few microns along the "Z" axis. This enables a researcher to find
              biologically relevant landmarks by precisely locating a tiny illuminated spot
              over the landmark and demarcating that point by writing the three-dimensional
              coordinates of the spot to a computer file. Dr. Richtsmeier and colleagues have
              developed a set of morphometric methods known as Euclidean Distance Matrix
              Analysis which allow quantitative description and comparison of form, shape and
              growth of biological objects in three dimensions as well as the clustering and
              classification of specimens. In conjunction with the Reflex Microscope these
              techniques will permit quantitative analysis of small biological forms, both
              extant and extinct in three dimensions. A number of projects will be conducted
              by a range of scientists. One of the first will focus on the development and
              evolution of the mammalian skull, using a murine model. Employing genetically
              modified mice, it will be possible to determine the effect of single genes on
              the expression of morphological form. This research is basic since the
              mechanisms involved will, presumably, apply across a wide range of species.
              Other projects for which the microscope will be employed involve the evolution
              of early Eocene mammals, the quantitative analysis of teeth and tooth ware and
              bone sectional geometry and biomechanics. The instrument will also be made
              available to students who will be instructed in its use.
