Title       : Cladistics of Orchidaceae and Critical Anther Characters: Evidence from
               Molecular, Developmental and Morphological Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2000   
File        : a0049039

Award Number: 0049039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170198             (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. Freudenstein freudenstein.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9615437  Freudenstein   The Orchidaceae is the largest family of flowering
              plants with an estimated 25,000 species. It exhibits a high degree of diversity
              in floral appearance, yet this diversity is the result of change in a
              comparatively small number of features.  It appears that several
              characteristics have evolved repeatedly, leading to similar floral morphologies
              in unrelated groups.  Hence, although scientists have been working on
              classifications of the family for nearly 200 years, there is still a great deal
              of uncertainty about relationships within and among the major orchid groups
              (subfamilies and tribes).  This study examines the relationships of 163
              representative genera from across the family, emphasizing the large and poorly
              resolved subfamily Epidendroideae, and brings a fresh perspective to the
              question of relationships within the family in two ways: (1) by utilizing DNA
              sequence data from three genomes (plastid, nuclear, and mitochondrial) that are
              presumably not under the same selective forces as are morphological characters;
              and (2) by re-evaluating the traditionally emphasized floral characters with
              developmental studies of the anther and pollen structures. Dr. John
              Freudenstein of Kent State University is collaborating with Dr. Mark Chase at
              England's Royal Botanic Gardens-Kew in the first project and with Dr. Finn
              Rasmussen at the University of Copenhagen in the second.   The significance of
              this study is several-fold.  It will provide several data sets for the same set
              of genera representing the diversity in the family, yielding by far the maximal
              amount of information to date on which to build a classification for the
              family.  Some groups, such as the economically important Vanilla, have been
              difficult to place because they share few advanced characters with other
              groups; the molecular data will be especially important in understanding their
              relationships.  The pattern of relationships will form a much-needed framework
              for further studies at lower levels in the family, and  will make it possible
              to address the following questions:  How reliable are the traditionally used
              floral characters?  What are presumed "key" innovations that mark species-rich
              lineages?  Do different species-rich lineages share the same innovations that
              were derived independently, or have they achieved success in different ways? 
              How many times has epiphytism evolved in the family?  In addition to
              elucidating evolutionary patterns among orchids, answers to these questions are
              relevant to studies of evolution in other plant groups. Also of more general
              relevance will be the comparison of patterns among data sets from three genomes
              at the family level and the development of mitochondrial DNA sequences as a
              tool for phylogenetic studies in flowering plants.
