Title       : CAREER: African American Mothers' School Involvement at the Kindergarten
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0049036

Award Number: 0049036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie J. Rowley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract
PI:  Rowley

CAREER:  African American Mothers' School
              Involvement at the 
Kindergarten Transition

As the number of people from
              ethnic minority backgrounds in the United States is rapidly increasing, it is
              important that researchers improve the research methods used to address
              development in minority children.  Much of the current research on ethnic
              minority children is fraught with theoretical, methodological, and conceptual
              problems.  Some issues that are prevalent in current studies are the equation
              of race and social class, the overuse of designs that compare people of color
              with Whites, and the negative focus on social class as an explanation for
              school failure. This project will address these issues through a research
              project, the teaching of a graduate course on research methods with minorities,
              and the training and mentoring of African-American undergraduate students with
              minimal access to research opportunities. 

For the research project, one
              hundred African-American children and their mothers will be followed from just
              before kindergarten begins through the end of their second grade year.  The
              study will employ a multi-method, longitudinal strategy to examine the way that
              African-American mothers' memories of school experiences, current beliefs about
              school, sense of parenting efficacy, racial identity, perceptions of
              discrimination, and interactions with their children influence that child's
              social and academic adjustment to kindergarten and beyond by way of mothers'
              involvement in the child's schooling.  It is assumed that mothers' memories of
              their experiences in school will frame the way they socialize their children
              for school, the activities they engage in, the discussions they share, and
              their modeling of school-related behaviors and attitudes.  There will be
              considerable emphasis placed on the mothers' experiences as African Americans,
              including their perceptions of discrimination occurring currently and when they
              were in school.  The study is aimed at further examining the strong
              relationship between social class and children's school adjustment and at
              further explicating the complex beginnings of home-school interactions. 
              

The teaching aspect of the project will be fully integrated with the
              research program and entails a mentoring component and a curriculum development
              component.  For the mentoring component, six undergraduate students, two from
              the host institution and four from North Carolina Central University, a local
              Historically Black University (HBU), will be involved in each stage of the
              research process, much like graduate students.  For the curriculum development
              component, the principal investigator will design and teach a graduate level
              course on research methods with populations of color.


