Title       : Structure-Reactivity Studies of Diamond Electrochemical Interfaces: New
               Applications in Electroanalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0049090

Award Number: 0049090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg M. Swain swain@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9187,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research, which is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, is focused on developing a more fundamental understanding of the
              structure-reactivity relationships at diamond electrode interfaces. The
              research, being conducted by Professor Greg M. Swain and his group in the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State University,  will also
              result in extending the potential applications of conductive diamond film
              electrode materials. Previously, conductive diamond thin films have been shown
              to meet several  requirements that are needed for electrode materials that are
              used as sensors in severe service environments. Such requirements include
              chemical inertness, corrosion resistance, stability and reactivity.  The
              current research will increase the understanding of structure-reactivity of
              conductive microcrystalline, nanocrystalline, and single crystal diamond. Much
              of the effort will concentrate on synthesis and structural characterization of
              thin film conductive diamond electrodes. This will likely lead to significant
              improvement in the  electrochemical detection of analytes such as metal ions,
              hydrazine derivatives, alkanolamine, and organic sulfur compounds. 

This
              research will lead to a better understanding of diamond electrodes. The
              capability to use these electrodes to detect metals and organic species in
              severe (e.g. highly corrosive) service environments will be improved.  This in
              turn has the potential to reduce environmental pollution.  
              
















