Title       : Western Deep Levels Gold Mine, South Africa, As A Natural Laboratory For
               Studying Rock Deformation Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0049042

Award Number: 0049042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leigh S. House                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : April 1,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Jordan tjordan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to study active rock deformation at depths of 2-4 km in
              the Western Deep Levels gold mines of the Witwatersrand basin, South Africa. 
              The principal investigator will have wide access to data sets from AngloGold
              Ltd., the mine operator.  The geological structure of the mines is well
              characterized and the mine operators monitor the details of the mining
              activities--hence, the mechanism that drives the seismic activity is known as a
              function of space and time.  Monitoring the seismic response will allow
              examination of the deformation process (e.g., frictional healing), which may
              yield important information about the applicability of rate-state and other
              formulations of constitutive relationships.  The mining seismologists collect
              seismic data comprising more than 70 digital, three-component stations, and
              they process thousands of individual seismic events daily using software
              (determining seismic moment, corner frequency, radiated energy, as well as
              location and magnitude).  This project will investigate the accuracy of the
              cataloged parameters, extend the catalogs to include moment tensors, and
              incorporate algorithms for relative event location and relative moment-tensor
              determination.  These data will be used to a) distinguish events generated by
              fresh fracturing from those associated with slip on preexisting faults, b)
              study event sequences, and c) investigate frequency-magnitude distributions and
              scaling relationships among moment, energy, and corner frequency.
