Title       : Development of Learning and Memory in Aplysia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0049013

Award Number: 0049013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 31,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Carew   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During the last 16 years of this NSF-funded project, considerable progress has
              been made in using development as a powerful analytic tool for dissociating
              different forms of learning and memory in Aplysia on behavioral and cellular
              levels. These dissociations have in turn provided insights into both the
              similarities and differences in the mechanisms subserving different forms of
              learning and memory in this simple model system. In the present cycle period,
              we will continue to use this research strategy to investigate a fundamental
              question that has driven the project from the outset: the relationship between
              short-term and long-term memory. In addition, we will extend the project into a
              novel domain, examining the role of growth factors in development and learning
              in Aplysia.
Development of multiple memory phases in Aplysia
In this phase of
              the project we will examine the developmental assembly of several phases of
              memory: short-term, intermediate-term and long-term. This work will be carried
              out in both adult and developing animals on several interactive levels of
              analysis, including behavioral, synaptic and molecular levels. There are two
              primary objectives in this phase of the work: (i) to fully characterize the
              final adult phenotype in terms of memory processing capacity, and (ii) to
              analyze in detail the mechanistic assembly of memory processing during
              development.
The role of growth factors in development and learning
Many
              families of growth factors contribute importantly to developmental processes in
              vertebrate systems, and some of these factors are now clearly implicated in
              several forms of synaptic plasticity thought to contribute to learning and
              memory. We have recently found that specific growth factors can induce
              long-term synaptic changes in Aplysia sensory neurons and can regulate
              structural events in different types of Aplysia neurons in unique and
              cell-specific fashion. Thus in this phase if the project, using cellular,
              molecular and structural levels of analysis, we will examine the role of
              specific growth factors both in the developmental assembly of the central
              nervous system and in regulating memory formation in adult animals. A
              significant strength of this new direction is that the mechanistic roles of the
              growth factors in both development and learning can be directly analyzed and
              compared in the same experimental system.
The overall project will have a
              significant impact on advancing knowledge from two different perspectives.
              First, from a basic scientific perspective the project will elucidate
              fundamental cellular and molecular mechanisms used to induce lasting plasticity
              in both development and learning. Second, from an educational perspective
              insights derived from this project may be of basic utility in understanding (on
              a mechanistic level) the way in which our ability to learn and remember is
              influenced by critical developmental factors, and thus could be of considerable
              importance to the general field of education, considered in its broadest
              terms.

