Title       : CAREER: Computation Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0049092

Award Number: 0049092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Schulman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9876172
Schulman

This project pursues research in two main arenas.

1.
               Randomized algorithms for important problem domains.  These include
 
1. 
              Geometric pattern matching
2. Finding optimal clusterings of data points with
              respect to a simple quadratic-penalty cost function.
3. Statistical inference
              of high of dimensional mixture models, as a formulation of hard clustering
              problems.  Potential applications include analysis of behavior modes of large
              dynamical systems.
4. Property testing.

Highly efficient algorithms for
              geometric pattern matching will be useful for searching in compressed images,
              as well as in geometric models produced in CAD/CAM systems.  Good clustering
              algorithms will be applied when large columns of data need to be analyzed and
              categorized, as is the case in disciplines including Statistics.  Demographics,
              Economics, Agriculture, Psychology, Machine Vision.  Biology (both for taxonomy
              and for protein classification), and citation pattern analysis (for the
              scientific literature or the hyperlink structure of the world wide web). 
              

2. Quantum computation.  Problems pursued are

1. Feasibility of
              large-scale quantum computation.  Existing designs for quantum computers
              provide small systems with carefully controllable Hamiltonians, but these do
              not scale to devices with enough degrees of freedom to carry out interesting
              computations.  Research will be conducted in order to surmount this
              obstacle.

2. Quantum algorithms.  Certain problems, including factorization,
              can be solved on a quantum computer exponentially more rapidly than in the best
              known classical methods.  Work is pursued exploring the capabilities of quantum
              algorithms.

3. Quantum cryptographic primitives.  The flip side of the
              computational power of quantum computers is their ability to defeat the current
              leading crytographic methods.  Work is pursued on devising candidates for
              quantum one-way functions and other cryptographic primitives.

The
              educational component includes

An emphasis on open-ended assignments calling
              for student creativity.

Extension of the algorithms curriculum to cover
              important methods in coding and data compression.

Narrowing the curricular
              divide between theory and practice.

Use of new technologies in the
              classroom.

Initiation of undergraduate research.


