Title       : REU SITE: Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Random Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0049015

Award Number: 0049015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant P. Godbole godbolea@etsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Tennessee State Univ
	      P O Box 23 980A
	      Johnson City, TN  376140121    615/929-4112

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  Discrete Random Structures  The five-year project "Discrete
              Random Structures" will enable  the Principal Investigator to further
              consolidate his deep  involvement with undergraduate research.  He will lead
              eight  students each year in a series of meaningful mathematical  research
              endeavours, each designed to convince the participants  that there are
              undeniable links between several  sub-disciplines,  and that these bonds need
              to be recognized and exploited.  The  team-members' problems will emanate in
              areas such as  combinatorics, number theory, geometry, algorithms, and
              molecular  biology, but contemporary probabilistic methods and classical 
              analytic techniques will be used as integral tools in their  solution.  We
              expect that most participants will study recently  developed probabilistic
              techniques such as Janson's inequality;  the method of bounded and unbounded
              martingale differences;  Talagrand's isoperimetric inequalities; and the
              Stein-Chen method  of Poisson approximation in their effort to understand the 
              concentration in measure of a wide range of discrete structures.   The
              participants will be selected after a nationwide search, and  will spend two
              months at Michigan Tech University during the  Summers of 1997--2001. Based on
              the PI's track record over the  last seven years, it can be predicted that the
              student    researchers will work on an average of three problems, either 
              individually or in teams of two or more, and be able to make  significant
              progress on about two of these endeavours.  The  students' findings will be
              presented at national meetings such as  the Annual AMS/MAA Meeting, or at a
              carefully selected  Probability/Combinatorics conference.  As in the past,
              every  effort will be made to submit the students' papers to high-level 
              journals for possible publication.  We shall select students from  a broad
              range of colleges and universities, and are totally  committed to the vigorous
              recruitment of women, minorities and  disabled students.
