Title       : Connections between Space-Bounded Molecular Computation and Classical Complexity
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0049019

Award Number: 0049019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Beigel beigel@cis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With its exponential parallelism, molecular computing offers  the hope of
              solving important problems that have resisted  solution on conventional
              computers. Various molecular  operations have been proposed as feasible;
              because it is  unclear which operations will be usefully implementable, 
              algorithms that use the simplest operations are to be  preferred. In
              particular, communication between processes  may be impossible. Parallelism and
              running time are  resources to be exploited efficiently. It is known that 
              molecular computers with limited operations sets, polynomial  time, and
              exponential parallelism can solve any problem in  the class NP. By further
              limiting the parallelism, various  bounded-nondeterminism subclasses of NP are
              obtained. This  project investigates the relationships among molecular 
              computation classes and these NP subclasses. While many  molecular algorithms
              for important problems use 2n  parallelism, this severely limits the size of
              problems that  those algorithms can solve.  In the last two decades there  has
              been an improvement from 2n to 2cn for various c<1 in  the running time of
              classical serial algorithms for  important NP-complete problems like 3-SAT,
              graph coloring,  and independent set. Using bounded nondeterminism as an 
              algorithm design technique, this project will develop more  efficient molecular
              algorithms for important NP-complete  problems, such as 3-SAT, graph coloring,
              and independent  set.  ***
