Title       : Paired-Watershed Study of Water and Solute Budgets in a Tropical Rainforest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0049047

Award Number: 0049047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Genereux genereux@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1325,1389,5926,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903243
Genereux 

The proposed project is a paired-watershed study of the
              hydrogeology of lowland tropical rainforest in Costa Rica.  The proposed
              project will use hydrologic and geochemical measurements:
1 to determine
              annual and monthly water and solute budgets for the Arboleda and Taconazo
              watersheds, and
2 to evaluate our conceptual model for streamflow generation
              at the study site:  that high solute concentrations found in the Arboleda are
              due to interbasin transfer of geothermally-modified groundwater, and streamflow
              represents a mixture of this groundwater and low-solute local water from
              hillslpes adjacent to the study streams.

Water and solute budgets will be
              constructed for the two adjacent watersheds by measuring inputs (from the
              atmosphere, and local/regional groundwater systems) and outputs (via streams
              and the groundwater systems).  The solutes to be studied are CL,
              SO4,Na,K,Mg,Ca, and total phosphorus.  The proposed 30-month project will give
              2 full years (24 months) of water and chemical budget data.

The proposed
              study will utilize and build on unique, newly-constructed hydrologic
              infrastructure at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica (perhaps the best
              at any rainforest research site), enabling the study to avoid the large
              uncertainty (found in many previous studies) caused by inadequate measurement
              of the hydrologic cycle.  Results will be among the first high-quality water
              and chemical budgets for lowland rainforest watersheds.  These budgets will
              explicitly include the significant Subsurface interbasin transfer (groundwater
              flow beneath surface topographic divides) that occurs at La Selva; the paired
              watershed approach proposed is well suited for this.  While interbasin transfer
              is often assumed not to exist or is considered a "problem" to be avoided,
              experience at many field sites shows that it is probably the rule rather than
              the exception and therefore should be directly addressed.  The proposed project
              will serve as an example of how this can be done at other study sites.  The
              proposed study will also provide critical hydrologic and chemical background
              information needed for larger, interdisciplinary projects with ecologists on
              the rates of carbon cycling in the rainforest and the effects on rainforest
              stream ecology from groundwater discharge to the stream.

