Title       : Submicron Wave-Pipelined VLSI Architecture of a Reconfigurable Router
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0049064

Award Number: 0049064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose G. Delgado-Frias   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A critical component in the new class of computing and communication systems
              that facilitate smart interconnects and adaptability is the router which
              receives, forwards, and delivers messages. Given the reconfiguring
              requirements, many routing algorithms and network topologies need be supported.
              Thus, a flexible router is needed for these applications. A novel highly
              flexible router that uses a wave-pipelined architecture/organization in
              combination with submicron technologies is proposed. Wave-pipelining offers the
              potential of achieving an extremely high performance; it requires no latches
              between stages and its maximum clock frequencies are limited only by the path
              delay differences. This study is the first that involves the following three
              major technologies/techniques: wave-pipelining, submicron technology, and
              computer architecture. A comprehensive model for the architecture will be
              developed and verified. This model will incorporate an analysis of the system
              including: timing, logic signal propagation, wiring, and technology
              constraints. Timing constraints deal with the safe time to start computations
              and read results. Logic signal propagation and wiring delays are due to logic
              circuitry and paths between gates, respectively. Technology constraints come
              from the target technology. Also, a comprehensive study of the proposed router
              capabilities and comparison to other routers will be included in this
              research.


