Title       : Algebraic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0049063

Award Number: 0049063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Fomin fomin@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                          Fomin  9700927   The research project is devoted to exploring new
              relations between combinatorics and algebra, in particular representation
              theory and algebraic geometry.  An approach to total positivity  based on
              generalized pseudo-line arrangements  suggests new developments and
              applications ranging from  combinatorics of canonical bases in quantum groups
              to numerical and symbolic algorithms of linear algebra.  The combinatorial
              problems arising  in the theory of quantum cohomology  provide another
              promising direction of research. The proposal outlines a plan for a detailed
              study of quantum Schubert polynomials.         This research concerns the
              interplay between combinatorics and algebraic geometry. One of the goals of 
              combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
               of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely 
              important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
              such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in 
              computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of 
              combinatorial research. Algebraic  geometry is one of the oldest parts of
              modern mathematics, but  one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the
              past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that could be defined 
              in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the field
              makes use of methods not only from algebra,  but from analysis, topology, and
              combinatorics, and conversely is finding  application in those fields as well
              as in physics, theoretical  computer science, and robotics.
