Title       : Self-Assembled Structures in Mixtures of Charged Amphiphiles and Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0049076

Award Number: 0049076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nily R. Dan dan@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9814398
Dan Nily
U. of  Delaware	

Self-assembled structures
              formed by mixtures of amphiphiles with solid particles are currently used in a
              variety of technologies such as drug delivery, paints or mesoporous sieves. 
              Yet, while the phase behavior of either amphiphiles or colloids has been
              extensively investigated, our understanding of mixed system is, to date,
              incomplete.

The aim of this study is to derive a systematic phase diagram of
              two general amphiphile-particle systems (i) Aggregates formed by uncharged,
              hydrophobic, particles with non-ionic ampphiphiles, and (ii) Mixtures of
              charged colloids wit oppositely charged amphiphiles.

A model for the phase
              diagram will de developed which will predict the type of aggregate formed as a
              function of the amphiphile molecular characteristics, particle geometry
              (spherical or rod-like), particle size, the concentrations of the different
              components and, in that case systems, the solution ionic strength.  Scaling and
              self-consistent field models for the amphiphiles will be combined with the
              Debye Hukel or Poisson-Boltzmann equation and Monte-Carlo simulations for the
              electrostatics.  This approach has been found to be quite successful in several
              preliminary studies (Dan, Biophys. J., 1996, 1997, Biophysica et Biochimica
              Acta, 1998, Dan and Safran, Biophys. J. 1998).

Experiments on model
              amphiphile-particle mixtures will be conducted in collaborations with E.  Kaler
              of the University of Delaware, D. Weitz of the University of Pennsylvania, and
              Y. Talmon from the Technion, IIT in Haifa, Israel.  All three groups specialize
              in the study of complex fluids in general, and the phase behavior of colloids
              and amphiphiles in particular. The techniques used include electron micrscopy
              and cryo-electron microscopy, small angle X-ray scattering and small angle
              neutron scattering.

The combined theoretical and experimental studies will
              provide systematic understanding of the processes controlling self-assembly in
              heterogeneous mixtures, namely, amphiphiles and particles.  Such an
              understanding is critical for the rationale design of new materials that can
              accomplish specific performance parameters

