Title       : Dealing with Inexactnesss in Fault-Tolerant Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0049016

Award Number: 0049016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Blough doug.blough@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The short-term objectives of this research are to design and  evaluate general
              solutions to the problem of inexactness of values  in fault-tolerant systems.
              The long-term goals are to understand  the ways in which inherent redundancy in
               parallel and distributed systems can best be exploited to provide  highly
              dependable multicomputing environments.  Sources of  inexactness include
              round-off error, noise, quantization error,  diverse software, non-determinism,
              heterogeneity, and redundant  sensors.  Inexactness problems include
              approximate agreement,  inexact agreement, clock synchronization, sensor
              fusion, diverse  software, and inexact voting.  In this project, new solution 
              techniques for dealing with inexactness in parallel and  distributed systems
              will be developed, and a unifying methodology  for studying inexactness
              problems will be investigated.  Techniques developed in the project will be
              evaluated  analytically and in a network of workstations testbed.  This 
              research is expected to lead to more efficient and more powerful  techniques
              for dealing with inexactness in fault-tolerant systems.  The effect of these
              techniques will be increased precision of  final results, lower communication
              overhead for redundancy, and  increased overall system reliability.
