Title       : Development of the Second Generation "Smart" Balloon Capability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1997     
File        : a9610009

Award Number: 9610009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Businger businger@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9610009  Businger     This project is part of the North Atlantic Regional
              Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2) which will be conducted in June and
              July, 1997 over the subtropical Northeastern Atlantic Ocean as an international
              collaborative effort. The main objectives of ACE-2 are to study the properties
              of atmospheric aerosols relevant to radiative forcing and climate using
              aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based measurements.    In a prior
              NSF-supported project led by this PI, smart tetroons were developed and tested
              whose altitude could be controlled through variable ballasting achieved using
              an expandable balloon inside a pressurized constant volume tetroon. Smart
              tetroons were deployed successfully during the field phase of the ACE-1
              experiment in 1995 to track air parcels.  Smart balloon track information is
              provided through an onboard GPS receiver and pressure, temperature, humidity
              and rainfall sensors which collect additional data that are transmitted along
              with the position data to a research aircraft. The motivation for the
              development of this capability was to use the instrumented smart tetroons for
              data collection and tracking in Lagrangian chemistry and boundary layer physics
              experiments without the threat of balloon loss through groundings.    In this
              project, the next generation smart balloon will be developed and constructed.
              The transponder will be enhanced with the addition of two-way communications.
              This will allow the operating parameters and the altitude control strategy to
              be adjusted from the aircraft during an experiment, and provide for more
              efficient data transmission via radio. To overcome the effects of precipitation
              loading and to extend the pressure range of  the balloon in general, the
              superpressure smart balloon will be constructed from a new fabric which affords
              a tenfold larger dynamic lift range than the original fabric.  The new balloon
              will also have a spherical shape which provides improved surface area to volume
              ratio. The instrument package, pumps,  and transponder design will be
              integrated with the new balloon and undergo tests prior to deployment in field
              experiments.
