Title       : PPD: Digital Audio with Integrated E-Text Reading System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9610308

Award Number: 9610308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Churchill jchurchill@rfbd.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Recording for Blind, Inc.
	      20 Roszel Road
	      Princeton, NJ  085406206    609/452-0606

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 P. I.:  John Churchill    RFB&D is conducting a three-year project with
              funding from the National Science Foundation to develop a unique technology to
              integrate computerized text files with digital human voice recording.  This
              technology will make mathematics, science, and other educational materials
              accessible to print-disabled people.    The most widely used technology
              available to print-disabled people today for accessing information includes
              large print, braille, analog recordings and computerized text files.  Although
              analog recordings offer the sound quality of a human voice, searching for
              information is a difficult and time-consuming process.  Conversely, a book on
              computer disk has advanced search and retrieval capabilities but sound quality
              is restricted by the nature of synthetic speech.  The combination of the
              recorded voice and a computerized  text file will make mathematics and science
              materials more accessible due to the random access capabilities of both
              disciplines that digital audio offers in a more dynamic and robust format.   
              For the purposes of this project, RFB&D is employing several methods to achieve
              its previously stated objectives.  They are first and foremost working to
              develop a software that will integrate the computer text file with a digitally
              recorded human voice.  They will then create a nongraphically based user
              interface to help make mathematics, science and other technological materials
              accessible to print-disabled people via the computer.      Digital audio books
              will offer the best features of both audio and E-Text formats--the recorded
              human voice and the ability to search and retrieve information as needed.  This
              newly created reading system, which will run on a standard multimedia computer
              equipped with a sound card and CD-ROM, will revolutionize how print-disabled
              people read and obtain information.    Most important, digital audio books
              will, for the first time ever, allow print-disabled people to access
              mathematics, science and other technological m aterials through natural human
              speech using a personal computer.
