Title       : CRB: The Impact of Forest Fire Management on the Population Structure of
               Crotaphytus collaris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9610219

Award Number: 9610219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Templeton temple_a@biology.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9610219  Templeton   Is landscape management a more effective and efficient
              approach to the conservation of endangered species and habitats than strategies
              which focus solely on the species or habitats themselves?  Few studies have
              actually documented the impact of landscape management upon endangered or
              threatened species.  Dr. Alan Templeton, of Washington University, proposes to
              study the impact of fire management at the landscape level on the
              state-threatened species, the eastern collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris).  
                The eastern collared lizard is found on Ozark glades-barren rocky outcrops
              that represent a desert or dry prairie-like microhabitat.  The suppression of
              forest fires in the Ozarks has allowed trees to invade and shade over the
              glades, resulting in the local extinction of collared lizards and other species
              unique to the glade habitats.  Past work by Dr. Templeton and others has shown
              that collared lizards could thrive when translocated into glades restored by
              clearing and burning, but a restored glade was never colonized spontaneously by
              the lizards even when nearby source populations were available.   How did
              collared lizards get to glades in the first place?  The answer may lie in one
              recent and drastic change in the Ozarks-active suppression of fire. 
              Historically, fires not only maintained the glade habitat, but also maintained
              an open woodland habitat.  With the recent suppression of fires, the forest now
              has a thick understory that may inhibit dispersal of collared lizards.  By
              burning the entire landscape (forests and glades), it may be possible to
              restore both glade habitats and the ability of glade species to disperse.  The
              Peck Ranch, in the Ozarks, has been the site of past glade restoration work. 
              Starting in 1984, lizard populations were translocated there with great
              success.  Nevertheless, there was still no dispersal among the translocated
              populations and no colonization of unoccupied but restored glades (some as
              close as 64 meters). In collaboration with  the Missouri Department of
              Conservation, some preliminary landscape burns were initiated in 1994 on the
              Peck Ranch. Following a burn in 1994 and a second burn in 1996 highly
              significant increases have occurred in both dispersal among glade populations
              and colonization of new glades.     Dr. Templeton proposes to continue
              following the fate of the lizard populations in the burn areas with both
              genetic surveys as well as traditional mark/recapture studies. The genetic and
              mark/recapture data will allow rigorous tests about the dynamics of dispersal,
              gene flow and colonization at several different habitat and geographical
              scales.  These studies ultimately will allow a detailed examination and
              rigorous testing of three interrelated issues fundamental to much of
              conservation biology:  local extinction and recolonization, habitat
              fragmentation, and range expansion into restored areas.
