Title       : Structure in Power System Analysis and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9610049

Award Number: 9610049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188497             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Zaborszky zab@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz M. Schaettler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9610049  Zaborszky    In previous work the mathematical structure of the
              large power system as differential-algebraic system with or without the
              presence of hard limits has been studied in the context of an overall taxonomy.
               Along with their mathematical structure, physical systems have a wide spread
              of physical structure ranging from unstructured to hierarchical or very strict
              structures.  The large power system model has a very strong segmental (network)
              structure.  The dynamic equations typically separate into segments (which are
              physically defined by the buses in the power system), tied together only
              through non-dynamic relations (in the network).  This geographic structure
              becomes of great importance in questions related to control.  In this project,
              along with completing certain aspects of the mathematical theory, the taxonomy
              theory will be studied for segmental systems in the context of control
              problems, specially in the control of power systems.    In view of the power
              system's geographic structure many control problems can be addressed
              decentralized.  For instance, the problem of stabilizing control can be
              formulated as tracking a moving target which has a single component for each
              segment and thus can be easily computed locally.  The systemwide stability of
              such an observation  decoupled control will be analyzed.    The segmental
              structure of the power system also leads to various clustering approaches built
              on rudimentary clusters of observation decoupled single bus clusters. 
              Clustered control schemes will be analyzed on the basis of the taxonomy theory.
               The convergence and accuracy of various control approaches will be studied and
              the most desirable approaches for various circumstances-such as fast, medium
              and slow control (tasks) will be sought.    The fast control objectives are
              mostly connected to preserving the stability of the power system.  We have
              formulated it as a problem of tracking a moving target vector.  This objective
              readily breaks up into interconnected segmen tal problems and identifies the
              stable equilibrium point when the tracking is successful (note that it is not
              practical to identify the equilibrium on the time scale of the disturbances
              fact conveniently ignored in most of the literature).  However, the equilibrium
              is found precisely at the end of successful tracking.  This invites the design
              of effective approximate tracking schemes which lead in this case to precise
              results.  It is important, however, to find such tracking schemes and establish
              precisely their convergence.  This will be done in the project.    The medium
              fast control for the problems of the automatic generation control (ACC) readily
              settles into a three layer segmented scheme both for the traditional AGC
              (equipment at individual buses, segments called Areas for individual power
              companies connected with tie lines and nationwide setting of desired frequency
              by NERC) and the new deregulated scheme (generating stations, national
              transmission company and distribution companies).  Although needs are
              different, the structural similarity implies connections in the theory.  These
              will be analyzed and the most desirable schemes sought.  Clustering of the
              large system will be the basis of this work involving thorough and precise
              analysis and technique development.  New taxonomy concepts such as
              observability region and controllability region within the state-parameter
              space will be defined and analyzed at the thoroughness and precision
              corresponding to our earlier Taxonomy work.    The ongoing development of the
              power system away from local power companies and regulation connected AGC
              control to layers of generation, transmission and distribution companies based
              on a real time commodity trading nationally makes this proposed study quite
              important and potentially very useful.  At present the final shape of the
              reorganized system which will eventually dictate the structure of its control
              needs is not yet emerging.  Hence the flexibility of the taxonomy approach
              which can accommodate a grea t variety of needs and structure will make it an
              ideal vehicle for searching for the most desirable structures and objectives.
