Title       : A New Perspective on Machine Scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9610229

Award Number: 9610229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-Yee Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Andrew Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Lee  9610229   This grant provides funding for the development of algorithms to
              solve a new class of scheduling problems.  In contrast to classical scheduling
              problems with a one-machine-one-job pattern where machines are available at all
              times, this new class of problems contains jobs with
              one-job-on-multiple-machine or multiple-job-on-one-machine patterns in addition
              to machine availability constraints.   Optimal algorithms based on a
              large-scale integer programming formulation will be developed.  A six node
              Silicon Graphics Power Challenge Deskside server, purchased in large part with
              a grant from the National Science Foundation, will be used as the computational
              platform to address these problems. Dynamic programming based methods that can
              efficiently solve certain classes of restricted problems will also be
              developed.  Local search techniques, especially tabu search and genetic
              algorithms, will be developed and tested for effectiveness and efficiency. 
              Empirical work and theoretical error bound analysis for the approximation
              methods will also be conducted.    The primary goal of this work is to extend
              the current scheduling theories to include  new models that are motivated by
              industrial problems and have greater potential for application.  If successful,
              the results of this research will broaden the field of machine scheduling and
              elicit deeper insights into the structure of many more realistic scheduling
              problems. The research will lead to new computational developments in
              optimization methods for solving complex scheduling problems.  Academically, it
              will not only contribute new and interesting results in the scheduling field
              but also contribute to the computational tools and methodologies for integer
              programming problems. Practical applications of the proposed work will lead to
              effective methods in solving real-life scheduling problems in the manufacturing
              and service industries, and will eventually enable managers to achieve the goal
              of cost saving, lead-time reduction, quality improve ment   and customer
              satisfaction.
