Title       : CRB: Then Effect of Habitat Fragmentation on Biodiversity and Trophic Linkages
               in Experimental Fractal Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9610159

Award Number: 9610159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. With   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Pavuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
Program Ref : 9117,9285,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9610159  With      Habitat fragmentation is one of the biggest threats to
              biodiversity. Yet conservation biology has no formal theory to predict at what
              point landscapes are likely to become fragmented, and thus when populations are
              at risk of extinction.      Neutral landscape models provide quantitative
              predictions about when habitat fragmentation occurs and how species respond to
              habitat fragmentation.  Neutral landscapes are grid maps in which habitat is
              generated using a theoretical spatial distribution.   These theoretical models
              predict that habitat fragmentation occurs suddenly across a very small range of
              habitat loss.  As a consequence, species may abruptly go extinct at this
              critical threshold in habitat loss, even though suitable habitat is still
              available on the landscape.      Exactly where the threshold occurs depends
              upon the spatial arrangement of habitat and the dispersal abilities of the
              species.  For example, a species with poor dispersal abilities will be affected
              by habitat fragmentation sooner than a species with good dispersal abilities. 
              The potential for threshold effects in habitat fragmentation and the subsequent
              extinction of populations have been identified as major unsolved problems
              facing conservationists.    The investigators will test neutral landscape
              theory by assessing the effects of fragmentation on biodiversity and trophic
              interactions.   Because the principles and predictions of neutral landscape
              theory should apply at any scale,  the investigators will develop an
              experimental model system consisting of microlandscape plots.  These plots will
              represent a range of habitat abundance and fragmentation severity.  The plots
              will be constructed using the habitat distributions predicted by the theory.   
                The investigators intend to examine the response of insect herbivores and
              their natural enemies within these experimental landscapes.  Specifically, they
              will explore how species with different life-history strategies and dispersal
              abilities are affected by f ragmentation.  They will also study how habitat
              fragmentation affects the ability of natural enemies (predators, parasitoids)
              to control their prey or host species.  The application of such "microcosm"
              experiments has recently led to important insights into the structuring and
              maintenance of biodiversity in natural ecosystems.  The research proposed here
              may be useful in the conservation and management of native agents of biological
              control in agricultural systems.    G:\crb97\With.crb
