Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Arithmetic of Riemann's Moduli Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9610041

Award Number: 9610041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Penner rpenner@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9610041  Penner       The decorated Teichmueller theory of punctured surfaces
              gives a  new point of view on the classical Teichmueller theory, and there are,
               moreover, connections between this work and the string theory of  high-energy
              physics.  There has also evolved from this a rich  geometric theory of the
              space of right cosets of the Moebius group in  the group of
              orientation-preserving homeomorphisms of the circle  (which is our model of a
              universal Teichmueller space) as well as a  sensible universal mapping class
              group, which turns out to be  isomorphic to the (Richard) Thompson group. 
              There are also different  and interesting applications of this universal theory
              to various  seemingly disparate topics in algebraic number theory (such as
              Markov  tuples, the Gauss product of quadratic forms, and Grothendieck's 
              version of absolute Galois theory, for instance).  Current research  aims to
              develop these ideas further and pursue a deeper study of these  connections.   
                 There are important and venerable questions in mathematics  about the space
              T(S) of all possible geometric structures on a fixed  two-dimensional surface
              S.  Imagine taking a surface (like the surface  of a balloon, for instance) and
              pricking a hole in it; the hole, i.e.,  the missing point, is called a
              puncture, and there are special  techniques developed over the last decade or
              so for studying the space  T(S) of geometric structures on a punctured surface
              S.  Remarkably  enough, various quantities in the string theory of particle
              physics  are given by explicit geometric invariants of these spaces T(S) for 
              punctured surfaces S.  Moreover, these techniques lead to new insights  about
              various classical mathematical constructions in number theory,  and this
              project's research emphasis lies in these algebraic  applications.  ***
