Title       : Reseach Equipment Grant: Laboratory Equipment - VERAM: A Virtual Environment for
               Education, Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1997  
File        : a9610055

Award Number: 9610055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35424              (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Ramaswamy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsz Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southwestern St Un
	      Wheatley
	      Americus, GA  31709    912/928-1279

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9610055  Ramaswamy    This award provides funding for the purchase of equipment
              necessary for research into the development of  virtual environments for
              manufacturing applications and investigating the use of robotic manipulators as
              applied to assembly operations. An immersive virtual environment will be  
              worthwhile in training new employees in interacting with the virtual shop floor
              resources (current examples in this regard include flight simulators). It can
              be used to study employee reflexes to frequently occurring shop floor
              situations or exceptional situations (failures, etc.) that are rare in
              occurrence and thereby help in the placement (or job rotation) of these
              employees in appropriate environments.  Results obtained from such an exercise
              may also help to develop better human   computer interfacing techniques based
              on advances in multi-media. Results from implementing such virtual environments
              can be used to judge non-logical issues such as fatigue and efficiency of
              employees over time to shop floor situations thereby becoming an important
              issue in making   the shop floor safer for our work force.    If successful, 
              the results from this research can also be used successfully in studying
              multi-media enhanced instructional schemes. Although it has been consistently
              said that multi-media enhanced instructional schemes are very effective in
              student education, research into the effect of these techniques with respect to
              learning theories, strategies, visual and aural metaphors, and the effects of
              collaborated vs. situated learning mechanisms is nascent. Virtual reality in  
              instruction may provide major insights into issues such as: focusing student
              attention, improving memory retention, interleaving visual and aural interfaces
              to maximize the learning process and improving interaction mechanisms, etc.
              Thus this work may also contribute  in understanding the possible limitations
              of multi-media techniques in instruction.
