Title       : Vortex Motion and Dynamical States in Josephson Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9610042

Award Number: 9610042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry P. Orlando orlando@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9610042 
              Orlando  This  experimental  research  project  focuses  on  the  physics, 
              dynamical  excitations, and potential applications of  arrays  of  Josephson 
              junctions, devices which nonlinearly  interact.  Three  areas  are  to  be 
              studied: (1) Novel  and  universal  dynamical  states,  including a fully
              frustrated array with junctions  along  every  branch,  where  the  dynamics 
              can  be  reduced  to  three  dynamical variables. (2) Inductively coupled
              arrays, which form a  model    system    for   coupled   layers   of  
              high-temperature  superconductors and for coupled systems of nonlinear
              oscillators.  (3)  Flux-flow  in  2-d arrays will provide a  model  system  for
               investigating  the similar vortex dynamics that  occurs  in  thin  films  of 
              high temperature superconductors. The study of  vortex  motion  in  this 
              system  will clarify  aspects  of  pendula-like  whirling  modes  in  discrete 
              systems.  Other  dynamical  states  corresponding  to local and global
              phase-locking mechanisms  will  be  also be studied. The research is
              characterized by integration  of  experiment, numerical simulation, and
              mathematical  analysis,  and   will  exploit  existing  commercial  foundry 
              service   for  fabrication of arrays of Josephson junctions.  %%%  This 
              experimental research project is in the types of  "motions"  or  excitations
              that can exist in a two-dimensional array of non-  linearly  interacting
              systems (Josephson junctions). One  example  of  an  excitation  is a magnetic
              flux quantum  (vortex)  trapped  within  a  closed loop through which a
              supercurrent  flows.  Such  vortices  can move about the lattice, and can also
              interact  with  other  vortices  which  simultaneously  exist.  The 
              mathematical  equations  describing such systems are non-linear  and  can  have
               singular   solutions  called  solitons,  in  which   considerable  interest 
              exists in other areas of science. In fact, the  project  to  be  carried   out 
              in major parts will attempt  to  model  the  behavior of other systems of
              interest, including aspects  of  the  motion of magnetic flux in high
              temperature superconductors.  The  researchers will combine experimental
              measurements with numerical  simulations and with more conventional analytical
              mathematics  to  understand the observed behavior, which may have implications 
              on  additional systems than the systems specifically at hand. In  one  of  its 
              aspects  the  array  of  Josephson  junctions  may  have  applications in
              detecting and in generating  microwave radiation,  which will also be of
              interest in this project. Results from this  research  may  include unusual new
              effects or devices  which  may  find  new  application in technology. This 
              research  project  is  interdisciplinary  in nature and involves graduate 
              students  who  will  be  excellently  trained to enter  positions  in 
              industry,  government  or education. The project will also foster  inclusion 
              of   women   and  under-represented  groups  into  the   national  scientific
              work force.  ***
