Title       : Cation Radicals in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9610227

Award Number: 9610227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan L. Bauld bauld@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Nathan L. Bauld's  
              investigations of the chemistry of cation radicals in solution.    Professor
              Bauld, of the Department of Chemistry of the University of   Texas at Austin,
              is developing a convenient mechanistic criterion for   distinguishing
              electrophilic additions to alkene pi bonds from additions   proceeding via
              initial electron transfer reactions.  Formation of   homobenzylic cations
              through addition of electrophiles to aryl vinyl   ethers and sulfides, wherein
              the alkene is insulated from the aromatic   ring by virtue of the heteroatom,
              correlates with the Hammett sigma   value, while one-electron oxidation of such
              substrates correlates with   the Hammett-Brown sigma-plus value.  In contrast,
              when the alkene is   directly attached to an aryl ring, both protonation and
              ionization   correlate preferentially with sigma-plus.  Professor Bauld is
              developing   a unique set of substituent parameters which promise significantly
              better   correlations for cation radical formation, permitting the distinction 
               between electrophilic and electron transfer reactions of styrene  
              derivatives.  A new addition polymerization strategy based upon   sequential
              cation radical reactions offers an attractive route to   Diels-Alder and other
              cycloaddition polymers and will be explored   mechanistically and as a method
              for the synthesis of new materials.  Professor Nathan L. Bauld, of the
              Department of Chemistry of the   University of Texas at Austin, with support
              from the Organic Synthesis   Program, carries out studies of the formation and
              reaction chemistry of   two classes of reactive molecules, one (`cations`)
              bearing a net positive   charge, the other (`cation radicals`) having a
              positive charge and also   containing an unpaired electron in addition to those
              electrons involved   in forming the chemical bonds in the molecule.   He is
              developing a set   of parameters to describe the reactions which can lead to
              the formation   of either of these classes of molecules, determining which
              types of   molecules lead to simple cations and which to cation radicals.  The 
               importance of these unusual species is highlighted by Professor Bauld's  
              investigations of a new method for the formation of polymeric materials   based
              upon the reactions of cation radicals.  This chemistry promises to   afford
              both new materials and milder routes to known materials displaying   a range of
              important properties.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
