Title       : Collaborative Research: Social Structure, Agreement, and Conflict in Groups in
               Extreme and Isolated Environments: A Cross-Cultural Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9610231

Award Number: 9610231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123165             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Palinkas lpalinkas@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0301000   Aging (Human)                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9610231  Palinkas  Despite a vast amount of research, little is known 
              concerning the effect of group structure, and individuals'  understanding of
              that structure, on conflict and  psychological well-being in Antarctic groups. 
              The first  segment of our research endeavor has addressed three  specific
              questions:  1) What are the characteristics of the  social relations among
              individuals working and living  together in extreme and isolated environments?;
              2) What do  individuals understand about their group, how does that 
              understanding develop, and how is it socially distributed?;  and 3) What is the
              relationship between that understanding  and both individual and group
              performance?  In the proposed  second segment, we wish to determine whether
              there is  significant variation from one cultural setting to another  in terms
              of the role the above factors play in the  functioning of these groups. 
              Answers to these questions are  important if we are to advance our knowledge of
              how  individuals and groups adapt to extreme environments,  particularly with
              respect to cross-cultural similarities and  differences.    The overall
              objective of the proposed new segment of this  research program is to compare
              and contrast the group  dynamics at the United States Amundsen-Scott South Pole
               Station with four culturally distinct Antarctic groups:  India's Maitri
              Station, China's Great Wall Station, Russia's  Vostok Station, and Poland's
              Arctowski Station.    Both quantitative and qualitative data will be collected
              on  the formation of group structure, status and role consensus,  perceived
              social conflict, group morale, and individual  psychological well-being for
              three consecutive years at the  four stations.  Quantitative models on the
              formation of  group structure will be developed.  In addition, recent 
              methodological developments in the study of social networks  and intracultural
              variation will allow for the testing of a  number of related hypotheses
              concerning aspects of  cognition, social structure, and grou p functioning in a
               cross-cultural context.    This study will:  1) contribute significantly to
              the  theoretical understanding of the role of social structure  and cognition
              in the functioning of groups in isolation, 2)  complement current work on
              health and adaptation in polar  environments, 3) provide for models of the
              formation of  group structure that will aid in the development of improved     
              procedures for assembling groups for the Antarctic and other  isolated
              environments (e.g. space stations), and 4) allow  for the valid comparison of
              intercultural variation in human  group dynamics in isolated and extreme
              environments.
