Title       : Synthetic, Structural, and Mechanistic Studies of Monomeric Alkyl, Hydride,
               Sub-Valent, and Multiply Bonded Derivatives of the s-and p-Block Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9610497

Award Number: 9610497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard Parkin parkin@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research on main group compounds by Dr. Gerard F. R.   Parkin
              of the Chemistry Department, Columbia University.  Synthetic,   structural,
              mechanistic and thermodynamic studies will be undertaken to   provide a
              comprehensive and fundamental understanding of main group   (e.g., Al, Ga, Ge,
              In, Sn, Tl) complexes and their potential   applications.   Emphasis will be
              placed on metal-alkyl and   metal-chalcogenide complexes and on the energetics
              of metal-main group   multiple bonds.  A series of  new, structurally analogous
              compounds will   be prepared using sterically-controlling ligands.  The ligands
              to be used   include poly(pyrazolyl)hydroborate, tris(imidazolyl)phosphine, and
                tetraaza(14)annulene.  The steric environments created will be capable of  
              supporting monomeric alkyl, hydride, chalcogenolate, subvalent, and   multiply
              bonded chalcogenide and pnictide derivatives.  Chalcogens S, Se,   and Te are
              included in the study; pnictogens include P and Bi.   Complexes of main group
              elements find application as precursors for   ceramic materials,
              semiconductors, and superconductors.  For example,   binary II-VI chalcogenides
              (e.g., ZnSe and ZnTe) and III-V pnictides   (eg., GaAs and InP) are used in
              photovoltaic energy conversion devices,   light-emiting diodes, solid-state
              lasers and optical switches.  Ceramics   and porous solid state materials
              formed from chalcogenides and pnictides   are also in use.  In this study, new
              molecular compounds of controlled   structure will be prepared and
              characterized in order to better be able   to correlate the chemistry of these
              compounds with the properties of   materials containing them.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
