Title       : On-Line Reorganization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9610001

Award Number: 9610001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty J. Salzberg salzberg@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to design, analyze and simulate restartable
              algorithms for on-line reorganization in parallel database management systems
              (DBMSs). The approach includes the description of explicit logging operations
              to assure consistency and preserve incremental improvements in the face of
              possible system failures at any site. Each algorithm is carefully detailed to
              work with standard concurrency and recovery modules in large DBMSs. Most large
              databases will soon be managed by parallel DBMSs (i.e., DBMSs on clusters of
              workstations, each managing its own collections of disks, connected by LANs and
              running the same software), so parallel algorithms are important. Earlier work
              in a centralized setting, by the Prof. Salzberg and her students Chendong Zou
              and Allyn Dimock, included algorithms for shrinking sparsely populated B-trees
              and for moving records (for example, to improve clustering). This project
              continues this work and expands it to a parallel setting. The project
              investigates the question of incrementally and lazily updating distributed
              dictionaries and indexes when records are moved from disks at one site to disks
              at another. This project represents the only work on on-line reorganization
              done in an academic setting which considers recovery and logging. Prof.
              Salzberg collaborates with Svein-Olaf Hvasshovd and Svein-Eric Bratsberg of
              Telenor Research (Norway's telephone company) using the parallel DBMS ClustRa
              as a testbed for the algorithmic work. Because this project considers recovery
              and because of the industrial collaboration, the results of this research are
              likely to able to be used in online reorganization utilities in commercial
              parallel DBMSs.                                                    ?           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
