Title       : Hydrodynamics of Fluidization of Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9610053

Award Number: 9610053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitri Gidaspow gidaspow@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  CTS-9610053    Quantitative understanding of the hydrodynamics of
              fluidization is needed for the design and scale-up of efficient new reactors in
              the oil, chemical, and electric power industries.    The objective of this
              research is to extend the development of the hydrodynamic theory of
              fluidization and multiphase flow. This theory uses the principles of
              conservation of mass, momentum and energy for each phase and particle size.
              While the conservation laws are well known and accepted, relatively little has
              been done theoretically and experimentally to determine the constitutive
              equations for a mixture of different particle sizes that are needed as an input
              into various computational fluid dynamics (CFD) codes. The recently developed
              theory of granular flow, as reviewed by Gidaspow in Multiphase Flow and
              Fluidization, Academic Press, 1994, gave us a different perspective on the
              subject. During the last three years much experimental evidence was gathered
              that shows that indeed the particles in a fluid behave as another phase with
              their own pressure, granular temperature, viscosity, etc. In the dilute limit
              the particles obey an ideal "gas" equation of state.  For denser flow of 75
              micron fluidized catalytic cracking catalyst particles, the standard hard
              sphere model for a cohesive pressure was corrected.  Cohesion was independently
              determined using radial distribution functions measured using a charge coupled
              device (CCD) camera.    These experiments will be repeated for larger particles
              with negligible cohesion.  Then this theory will be extended to a mixture of
              binary sizes, where the principle of equi-partition does not apply.   
              Measurements will be made of particle velocities, concentrations and radial
              distribution functions using the newly developed CCD camera method and more
              conventional techniques, such as X-ray densitometers, in a two-story
              circulating fluidized bed (CFB) in a liquid-solid loop and in a
              gas-liquid-solid rectangular fluidized bed. These measurements will give th e
              viscosities of the mixtures.  The measured velocity, particle concentration and
              turbulence (granular temperature) profiles will be compared to the CFD
              computations using the computer code.
