Title       : SGER: Paleogenetics of Quaternary Coleoptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1996  
File        : a9610416

Award Number: 9610416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7724               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Reiss reiss@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9610416   Reiss   A central issue in biogographic research is the response of
              organisms to climatic changes.  This research project addresses the question of
              the molecular genetic response of organisms to climate change.  It is proposed
              that paleogenetics, the combination of paleontological and genetical
              techniques, will detect genetic changes over time and will facilitate the
              measurement of the force of  climate change as an agent of natural selection. 
              Th late Quaternary is a epoch that exhibits climatic warming and has a good
              fossil record.  Especially well represented are species of Coleoptera
              (beetles), many of which are present in extant populations (Elias 1994).  DNA
              sequence analysis on extant populations and fossil assemblages from this period
              of climate change will allow an assessment of the effect of climate change on
              the genetic constitution of natural populations.  This rsearch will contribute
              to predictions regarding future global warning.   This project will continue
              molecular biogeographic work on alpine-arctic beetle species begun as a
              postdoctoral research project (Reiss, unpublished data).  Dr. A. Ashworth and
              Dr. D. Schwert (Quaternary Entomology Lab, Fargo, ND) will continue to
              collaborate and provide both extant and fossil specimens.  Preliminary efforts
              at amplifying DNA from fossil chitin collected from bogs in the midwestern
              United States are encouraging, but are as of yet unconfirmed.  The DNA in
              fossil chitin isolated from bogs may be sufficiently degraded to preclude
              extensive molecular analysis.  However, a rich source of well-preserved fossil
              chitin is available from packrat midden researchers (Betancourt et al. 1990).  
              Collaborators Dr. J. Betancourt (U.S. Geological Survey) and Dr. S. Elias
              (University of Colorado) have agreed to provide fossil beetle specimens sorted
              from packrat middens.  This material is carbon-dated, and an independent
              assessment of the local ecossystem is available from studies of plant
              macrofossils present in the same midden.  Packrat urine  has dehydrating and
              antimicrobial activity, which preserves DNA structure.  Other researchers have
              isolated plant and mammalian DN from middens.  It is anticipated that arthropod
              DNA is also preserved.   The first experiments will optimize DNA isolation and
              amplication techniques using an abundant fossil beetle species.  Contemporary
              material is available to confirm that amplified DNA is from beetles, and not
              from other contaminating DNA sources.  In order to detect genetic changes in
              the relatively short time span represented in the midden record, the
              mitochondrial DNA rgions amplified will be those that evolve quichly, such as
              the A+T rich region, which contains the origin of replication (Simon et al.
              1994).  Once molecular techniques are established, attention will be focused on
              species whose dispersal has been traced through time in the Chihuahuan Desert. 
              A previously developed biogeographic model will be used as a guide (Elias
              1992), and the molecular genetic data will be used to follow the movement of
              species through time.  By comparing extant populations with fossil assemblages,
              the proportion of genetic variation represented in the fossil record will be
              calculated.  Questios regarding the correlation of species richness and genetic
              variation will also be addressed.  The tools to accurately calculate the
              microevolutionary rates of specific regions will be developed and used to
              detect changes in rate of response to climate change.  Eventually, this data
              will be used to predict response of species to contemporary global change.
