Title       : Geometric Techniques for Multidimensional Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a9610270

Award Number: 9610270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Leutenegger leut@cs.du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario A. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Storage and retrieval of multidimensional data is necessary for many scientific,
              geographic, engineering, and business applications. Traditional database
              secondary storage indexing techniques such as B-trees and hash tables are not
              suitable for dealing with multidimensional data, as data access is performed by
              concentrating on only one-dimension at a time and large quantities of
              extraneous data may be retrieved. The main goal of this project is to explore
              and develop techniques for efficient loading, retrieval, and update of large
              disk-resident multidimensional data for both single machine and parallel
              machine architectures. Storage and processing of both point and region data are
              considered. The database community has independently developed a number of
              disk-based multi-dimensional indexing schemes, without applying results from
              relevant fields that may significantly improve loading and retrieval
              performance. Accordingly, the approach used in this project is firmly grounded
              within the realm of computational geometry, a discipline that has produced
              numerous techniques for the efficient processing of memory-resident
              multidimensional data. The generalization and improvement of these techniques
              to handle efficiently disk-resident data is an important part of this research.
              Additionally, the use of parallelism to provide improved load and query
              response times for very large data sets is also considered. The resulting
              indexing techniques will enable higher level database architectures to provide
              efficient access to the very large multi-dimensional datasets of the future,
              thus enabling database technology to keep up with demands placed upon it from
              science and business as a whole.
