Title       : A New Method for Selective Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9610532

Award Number: 9610532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren R. DeVries wdevries@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiangdong D. Fang  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a new method for selective
              assembly in manufacturing to allow the use of low precision mating parts to
              achieve high precision mechanical products.  The new method will provide a
              mathematical model to predict the matchable degree of mating parts before
              assembly, and correspondingly a quantitative criterion on how to adjust
              manufacturing processes so that the desired match between mating parts could be
              guaranteed.  A recursive algorithm will be developed and implemented in design
              of selective assembly for optimally allocating the machining tolerance range
              for each selective group to achieve the minimum surplus parts.  Experimental
              work and industrial testing will be carried out to validate and further improve
              the new method developed.  If successful, the results of this research will
              have a significant impact on manufacturing industries to improve their
              competitiveness through reduced manufacturing production cost of mechanical
              parts. The results will also provide effective integration of design,
              manufacture and assembly of mating parts that have high fit accuracy
              requirements.  Specifically, the outcomes of the research project will provide
              a completely new yet much more effective way to design for selective assembly
              with the capability to improve mechanical product performance by achieving
              tighter tolerances at lower cost.  In particular, the proposed new selective
              assembly method will have a significant economical impact on small-business
              industries to achieve high precision mechanical products based on their limited
              manufacturing facilities.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
