Title       : Random Vibrations with Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9610363

Award Number: 9610363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail F. Dimentberg diment@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with the development of methods  and procedures for
              predicting response of vibroimpact  systems to random excitation. Typical
              fields of applications  include Engineering (response of moored bodies to ocean
               waves) and Power Engineering, particularly Nuclear (flow-  induced vibrations
              of fuel bundles within channelling tubes;  and of heat exchanger tubes
              impacting against support  plates). Other potential applications include
              Railway  Machinery (vehicle dynamics with impact-type wheel/rail  interactions)
              and Rotating Machinery (gearboxes with  reversals of motion). A
              quasiconservative stochastic  averaging method is used together with a Fourier
              series  expansion in a `rapid` time, within a response cycle. In  addition, a
              new approximation procedure is developed and  evaluated which is based on the
              dominating contribution of  the impacts into overall spectral density of
              response  acceleration for lightly damped systems. The model of a  periodic
              excitation with random phase modulation is used to  predict subharmonic
              response of moored offshore platforms to  ocean waves, and to predict
              transitions between planar and  whirling flow-induced vibrations of tubes in
              heat  exchangers. Fundamental theory of nonlinear vibration and  control would
              benefit through new analytical methods and  procedures developed during the
              course of this research and  some new specific solutions obtained for (strongly
               nonlinear) systems. Also, this research will assist in  response prediction
              and control, as well as predicting  and/or testing reliability and developing
              design guidelines  for systems in offshore and power engineering.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
