Title       : CRB: Direct and Indirect Effects of Key Alien Species in Two Hawaiian Forest
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a9610413

Award Number: 9610413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Lorence lorence@ntbg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Cabin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Trop Botanical Garden
	      PO Box 340
	      Lawai, HI  967650340    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9610413  Lorence       A key issue in conservation and restoration biology is
              the role of invasive, alien species. Although the value of developing invasion
              ecology as a predictive science is increasingly recognized, this may be
              difficult unless manipulative experiments are used more frequently. In the
              proposed research, manipulative experiments will be used to analyze the effects
              of invasive species in a dry forest site on the Island of Hawaii where
              communities have long been noted for their disturbance prone features. The goal
              of the research is to determine how native Hawaiian communities change in
              response to the removal of alien species. Specifically, experiments will
              determine the regeneration potential of native species in disturbed and
              protected habitats. It is presumed that key alien species have a
              disproportionate effect on the distribution and abundance of native species in
              these forests. The experimental site will be located in the Kaupulehu Preserve
              on the island of Hawaii in an area where the alien, fire promoting fountain
              grass is now widespread. Recruitment of native and alien species following
              removal of fountain grass and control of rats will be monitored. Removal of
              fountain grass and control of rats is expected to result in an increase in
              recruitment of the native canopy, shrub, and herbaceous species. Secondary
              effects will also be investigated such as the invasion of other alien species
              suppressed by fountain grass, and increased levels of herbivory on native
              species as they increase in abundance. The extraordinarily high degree of
              endemism and endangerment of Hawaiian species is not justification for the
              proposed research; of more general significance is an increased understanding
              of the role of alien species in disruption of native plant communities, and the
              significance of primary and secondary effects. The apparent extreme
              susceptibility of Hawaiian plant communities to invasion by aliens should make
              it easier to see the consequences of removal of alien species. Lessons  learned
              in the Hawaiian Islands about the role of alien species should have broad
              applicability to other plant communities.
