Title       : Data Mining, Information Retrieval and Pattern Matching - Application-driven
               Algorithmic Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9610170

Award Number: 9610170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amihood Amir amir@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Pattern Matching is coming of age.  The last six years have  seen great progress
              in the area of Pattern Matching  Algorithms.  In particular, researchers have
              looked into  generalized versions of the problem.  The field has evolved  from
              being an important theoretical foundational area to  being well-poised on the
              verge of practical usability in  many diverse applications, from multi-media to
              computational  molecular biology. The project is seeking a pro-active role  in
              bringing these new results into the relevant applicant  domains, as well as
              feedback and direction about the  important missing parts in the theory of
              pattern matching.  This involves joining some large applied projects as an 
              algorithmic group.  The research problems described here are  motivated and
              inspired by the needs of these projects.  These problems require achieving new
              insights into the  nature of pattern matching, as well as results of the 
              following nature:  Efficient algorithms for association  generation in dynamic
              data bases.  Efficient generation of  generalized associations (e.g.\ with
              negations).  Efficient  algorithms for approximate matching in hyper-text. 
              Efficient algorithms for approximate dictionary matching.  New multidimensional
              adaptive compression schemes that allow  efficient compressed searches and
              space and time efficient  local decompression.  Generalization of Pattern
              Matching.
