Title       : Pattern Time Distributions and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9610046

Award Number: 9610046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon M. Ross smross@euler.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9610046  Ross       This research investigates certain properties of stochastic
              processes that have applications to operational problems in production systems.
               In particular, for an independent, identically distributed sequence of random
              variables with arbitrary distribution, the investigator studies the
              distribution of the first time at which a particular (fixed) pattern appears. 
              Such a sequence may represent any of a variety of practical quantities; e.g., a
              moving average of observations of quality characteristics, or the successive
              states of a multi-component, failure-prone system.  Traditional approaches to
              this problem have attempted to study the structure of imbedded Markov chains
              and prove to be computationally intractable.  The investigator proposes a new
              approach based on renewal-theoretic arguments to obtain bounds and
              approximations that can lead to analysis tools and efficient simulation
              procedures.  A related problem, also studied in this project, involves
              improving on central limit theorem-based approximations of convolutions.  
              While the primary thrust of the work is theoretical, the investigator will
              study the computational aspects of these problems as well.         This work
              has direct relevance to fundamental problems in reliability and quality
              control, particularly in the area of multivariate control charts.  Thus this
              research is expected to result in both theoretical advances that can be applied
              to a wide range of problems as well as in practical new tools in the area of
              multivariate quality monitoring.  The latter is an active and extremely
              important area of operations research, and one in which stochastic
              process-based techniques can be expected to make significant contributions.
