Title       : Rapid Reactions of Ions and Radicals in Organized and Constrained Media: Polymer
               Films and Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9610187

Award Number: 9610187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497500             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kerry Thomas thomas.3@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Supported by the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Kerry Thomas of the  
              University of Notre Dame studies rapid reactions of ions and radicals in  
              organized and constrained media.  Low-energy photochemical and   high-energy
              radiolytic reactions of organic probe molecules held within   zeolites and
              solid polymers permit assay of the rates of development of   spectra of the
              resulting ions, allowing the exploration of the effects of   host modification
              on the unique ion kinetics occurring in these systems.    Small pools of
              organic solvents are created within the cavities of   zeolites, constraining
              and stabilizing usually short-lived   charge-separated ionic species which
              would otherwise be rapidly   neutralized.  Migration of energy and charge to
              probe molecules held   within solid polymeric hosts is induced by excitation of
              the polymer.    Both the zeolite and the polymer systems share a common
              feature, the   rapid migration of energy deposited in one region to a selected
              region,   creating chemistry at the targeted site.  Fundamental questions of
              energy conversion, transport, and loss are at   the heart of many important
              technological processes.  Through an   examination of the reactions with light
              and with high-energy electrons of   organic molecules constrained to remain
              within a tightly-defined `cage`   rather than freely moving in solution,
              Professor Thomas explores the   mechanisms of formation and reaction of free
              electrons, organic radicals   (compounds containing an odd number of
              electrons), and organic ions   (compounds bearing either positive or negative
              charges).  Ongoing studies   target the role of the `host` both in the
              generation of these reactive   species through the transfer of energy from the
              host to the organic   molecules contained within it and in the moderation of
              the transport and   reactivity of these reactive species.  These studies shed
              light on   energetic excitation processes such as those employed in x-ray  
              photolithography, wherein high-resolution structures of use, for example,   in
              microelectronic circuitry production, are produced through the  
              radiation-induced formation or destruction of polymeric materials              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
