Title       : Redox Active Inorganic Materials from Fullerene and Metal Cluster Building
               Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9610507

Award Number: 9610507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Balch albalch@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Program  
              funds the research of Professor Alan L. Balch of the University of   California
              at Davis.  The oxidation of fullerenes to mono-oxo species   will be studied
              and the oxidized species will used to form   electropolymerized thin films,
              whose reactive and conductive properties   will be studied.  A family of flat
              triangular gold(I) complexes, which   exhibit remarkable solvoluminescence
              properties,  and analogs with Ag(I),   Hg(II) and Tl(I) will be used to
              construct supramolecular species.  The   possibility of electron transfer
              through columns of these triangular   clusters will be tested by examining
              their photoconductive properties.    The possibility of charge-transfer
              complexes forming between the gold   clusters (electron donors) and fullerenes
              (electron acceptors) will be   probed. Co-crystallization of fullerenes with
              porphyrins has already   yielded an interesting class of compounds in which the
              fullerene nests in   the porphyrin.       This project is concerned with new
              inorganic materials that exhibit   novel redox activity or  luminescence. 
              Fullerenes and triangular gold(I)   complexes will be used as precursors for
              constructing the new materials,   such as supramolecular arrays and molecular
              co-crystals.  Fullerene films   will be explored as new highly conductive
              materials.   A new form of   luminescence called solvoluminescence, which is
              light emitted upon the   dissolution of a previously irradiated substance, will
              be studied.  The   hypothesis that this results from a long range separation of
              an electron   from its original site in a column of triangular gold units will
              be   tested.  Understanding such charge separations is fundamental to our  
              understanding of natural energy storage and transduction devices and  
              developing new materials along these lines.    Information gained from   either
              fullerene or triangular gold precursor classes  will have an   impact on how
              the other class is developed and their combination may lead   to entirely new
              materials.  Porphyrin complexes that can wrap partially   around fullerenes
              will be used to develop new ways of chromatographically   separating fullerene
              molecules according to their various shapes, which   may make unusual
              fullerenes more available for development.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
