Title       : Dissertation Research: Agricultural Change in the Bolivian Amazon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9610312

Award Number: 9610312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark Erickson cerickso@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Clark Erickson, Mr. John Walker will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. As part of Dr. Erickson's larger project, Mr. Walker
              will examine the practice of prehistoric raised field agriculture in the
              Lllanos de Moxos region of eastern Bolivia. This area is located in the
              low-lying Amazon basin and characterized by large expanses of carefully
              constructed and now-abandoned agricultural fields. Earth was dug to create
              drainage ditches and then mounded to form raised areas suitable for
              agriculture. This technique was widely used in Western South America as well as
              the lowlands of Middle America and experimental work has indicated that such
              systems can provide effective means for crop production. In South America this
              approach was discontinued in either prehistoric or early historic times and in
              Bolivia people now graze cattle on naturally growing grasses which cover field
              surfaces.  Mr. Walker wishes to understand how raised fields were integrated
              into a larger social and economic context and also why they were abandoned. A
              number of explanations have been proposed. They include a postulated
              prehistoric breakdown in social organization: climate change related to an El
              Nino event: and either the direct or indirect influence of Spanish
              colonization. To address these questions Mr. Walker will use aerial photographs
              to locate and verify on the ground the position and extent of raised fields. He
              will conduct a surface survey to locate habitation sites, determine their
              relationship to agricultural features and reconstruct population density. He
              will also carry out limited excavations within the fields themselves. It is
              essential to determine both when the fields were constructed and abandoned and
              this can be extremely difficult to do. NSF support will allow Mr. Walker to
              obtain radiocarbon dates on organic materials recovered in the course of
              excavation.  This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new
              light on subsistence adaptations in inhospitable lowland tropical environments.
              It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training
              a promising young scientist.                                              
              including faunal remains in an excellent state of preservation. Although many
              archaelogical sites have been discove red in this part of Alaska, the Cape
              Addington rockshelter is unique in the protected nature of the sediments and
              the high degree of preservation of the contents. Based on the presence of well
              dated beachline features, it i quite possible that the shelte r preserves
              terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene materials. It thus would have the potential
              to shed light on the entire prehistory of the region.  One of the primary goals
              for fieldwork during the summer of 1977 will be to etermine the total depth of
              the  archaeological deposit. A trench will be excavated in stratigraphic units
              to bedrock and all cultural material as well as shells, faunal and floral
              remains will be collected. Surface mapping will also take place. Material ill
              be identified and samples s ubmitted for radiocarbon dating. Isotopic analysis
              of shell will permit investigation of climate change.  Coastal Alaska is of
              anthropological interest for several reasons. It is highly likely that the
              earliest humans to ener the New World from Asia util ized a route through this
              region and Dr. Moss' work has potential to shed new light on the peopling of
              the New World. Rich coastal resources permitted hunting and gathering peoples
              to reach a level of cultural complexity unnown elsewhere in the world at  this
              level of subsistence and for decades anthropologists have studied this unique
              phenomenon. In Alaska however knowledge is severely limited because of the
              generally poor state of archaeological preservation and thereforethe discovery
              of a `dry` rock s helter is extremely important.  This research will provide
              unique data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also, hopefully, set
              the stage for a larger research project.       q ^                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
