Title       : Residual Spectrum of Quasi-Split Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9610387

Award Number: 9610387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry H. Kim henrykim@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kim  9610387    A central problem in the theory of automorphic forms is to
              decompose square integrable automorphic forms of a reductive group. While the
              continuous part of the spectrum can be deduced from the theory of Eisenstein
              series, the discrete spectrum is very hard to study. It is the purpose of
              Arthur's trace formula to study this part. However, the trace formula will not
              separate the cuspidal part from the residual part, and one needs to study the
              residual spectrum by computing the residues of Eisenstein series. Moreover, the
              first exotic example of the residual  spectrum of the split group G_2, which
              was discovered by Langlands and  further studied later by Moeglin and
              Waldspurger, was significant to Arthur in formulating his conjectures. 
              Computing residues of Eisenstein series is a very difficult problem and
              requires both the knowledge of the poles of corresponding automorphic
              L-functions, as well as handling very difficult computational combinatorics.
              These computations are already highly non-trivial even for rank 2 split groups.
               On the other hand, Arthur's conjectures are aimed at parametrizing the
              discrete spectrum in terms of representations of a certain profinite arithmetic
              group. While parametrizing most of it requires the introduction of this
              hypothetical group, there are parts of it that can be parametrized by our
              existing knowledge. In particular, this is the case if the Eisenstein series is
              built out of minimal parabolics.  Moeglin proved that for split classical
              groups, the local components of the residual spectrum coming from the trivial
              character of the torus, are parametrized by the distinguished unipotent orbits
              O of the dual group and  Springer(O) , where  Springer(O)  is the set of
              characters of the component group that are in the image of the Springer
              correspondence. The PI verified that the same thing happens for the split group
              G_2 and plan to show that the same thing would happen for all split groups. The
              fact that the component group of the Arthur parameter for  G_2 is non-abelian
              explains the "bizarre" multiplicity condition in Moeglin-Waldspurger's work on
              G_2. The PI showed, in joint work with F. Shahidi, that for an arbitrary
              unitary character, the local components of the residual spectrum attached to
              certain unipotent orbits, are parametrized by the Knapp-Stein R-group of the
              character. In general, the Knapp-Stein R-groups are not enough. We have to
              combine the R-group and Springer(O). In this way, the PI plans to  show that
              the quadratic unipotent Arthur parameters  in the sense of Moeglin exhaust the
              residual spectrum coming from the torus.  The investigator will carry the above
              projects to quasi-split groups. A similar thing happens to U(n,n), but the
              global Weil group W_F comes into play. Therefore we expect that the action of
              the global Weil group will play a role in parametrizing the residual spectrum. 
              The groups U(n,n) and  E_7,3  all have a relative root system of type C_n, and
              the technique of symplectic groups will be applied directly.     This proposal
              is in the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program. The Langlands
              program is part of Number Theory. Number Theory is the study of the  properties
              of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the
              beginning problems in number theory have  furnished a driving force in creating
              new mathematics in other  diverse parts of the discipline. The Langland's
              program is a  general philosophy that connects number theory with calculus;  it
               embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers. Modern Number
              Theory is very technical and deep, but it has had  astonishing applications in
              areas like theoretical computer  science and coding theory.
