Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics of Flexible Spinning Discs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9610456

Award Number: 9610456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179373             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Sri Namachchivaya sri@nsgun.aae.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research project is to investigate the  local and
              global dynamics in the motion of a spinning disc  system and to numerically and
              experimentally verify the  theoretical results. The results of this research
              will be  useful in applications such as computer disc memory devices, 
              industrial circular saw blades, and turbine rotor dynamics. The  objectives of
              the research are four-fold. First, the general  nonlinear equations of motion
              governing the disc dynamics will  be derived systematically  to include the
              effects due to  inherent bending rigidity, membrane stresses arising from 
              centrifugal forces, non-axismmetry of the inplane and  transverse
              displacements, geometric nonlinearities, aerodynamic  damping arising from air
              stationary and moving with respect to  the disc, parametric excitation due to
              time varying spring  rate, etc.. Second, is equations, along with
              symmetry-breaking  bifurcations, will also be examined. Third the mechanisms
              which  five rise to global bifurcations in nonlinear spinning disc to  identify
              the important modes, locate the stability boundaries,  and examine the nature
              of the nonlinear response to verity the  theoretical predictions. Validation
              studies will be carried out  using actual data from manufacturers of spinning
              discs.  Experimental verification and validation in turn, guide the 
              development and refinement of the theories to incorporate any  new phenomena
              observed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
