Title       : Pilot HGDP: Banking, Sequencing, and Haplotyping of ArchivalHuman DNA Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9610098

Award Number: 9610098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Weiss kmw4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Nickerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is widespread interest in having available a representative understanding
              of the amount and geographical distribution of human biological variation.  One
              way to obtain such information is to collect samples from human populations
              around the world.  In addition, many laboratories in nations around the world
              already house collections that were made in the past.  These 'archival'
              collections could be an important resource for the future study of human
              variation, and some of the data could not be collected again, because the
              populations no longer exist, or the material was from burials, or because of
              cost.  However, archival material is often limited in amount or preservation
              quality and many questions we would like to ask of genetic data today cannot be
              asked without large amounts of DNA (genetic material).  Fresh samples can be
              manipulated in the laboratory so that the cells can be grown continually,
              producing an open-ended supply of DNA, but this cannot be done from dead cells
              or material in poor preservation.  We are working on methods for obtaining
              large amounts of DNA from such material by making copies of the DNA in an
              enzymatic (non-living) manner.  When this is done, archival materials could be
              as available as other types of material.  We will amplify, in this way, a
              substantial number of DNA samples from Amazonian and Central American
              populations that are of widespread interest and anthropological importance. 
              These would be made available to the HGDP DNA bank when that is formally
              established, so that the samples would be widely available to scientists
              studying human variation and population history.  The methods could  also be
              applied to fresh samples that were very small in quantity (cells from cheek
              swabs, for example).  Archival samples may, however, be degraded in such a way
              that obtaining long DNA sequences from haplotypes (single chromosomes) could be
              difficult to obtain.  We will work on methods for obtaining such longer
              sequences, using a gene related to lipid (fat) metabolism, called Lipoprotein
              Lipase (LPL), as a case in point, because we have extensive data on variation
              in this gene from other studies. Mutant forms of the LPL gene may be related to
              human health (heart disease). This work will demonstrate or develop methods for
              obtaining such long sequences, but will in itself also provide a picture of the
              global variation in this gene, adding Amerindian variation to that already
              being documented for other populations.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
