Title       : Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) with High-Performance Properties and the
               Detection of Labile Structures in Vinylidene Chloride Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9610361

Award Number: 9610361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Starnes whstar@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9610361  Starnes  The proposed research is directed toweard the ultimate goal 
              of obtaining useful polymers with superior properties.  Two  parallel projects
              are envisaged.  They are related in the  sense that both are concerned with
              chlorinated polymers and  with free-radical chemistry.  One project deals with
              the  preparation of new forms of chlorinated poly(vinyl chloride)  (CPVC)
              having unusual physical properties that should make  these resins excellent
              candidates for utilization as high  performance materials.  In this context, a
              specific  synthetic target is poly(1,2-dichloroethylene)(PDCE), whose  glass
              transition temperature has predicted to be much higher  than those of the
              current commercial CPVC's.  Approaches to  the preparation of PDCE and other
              new CPVC's will include  (a) the chlorination of poly(vinyl chloride)(PVC) with
               molecular chlorine in the presence of various solvents that  can complex
              chlorine atoms, (b) the chlorination of PVC with  other reagents whose
              selectivities are unusual, and ( c)  synthesis by alternative routes in which
              no substantive  chlorination occurs.  This work will be extended eventually  to
              the preparation of other new chlorine-containing  polymeric materials.  The
              other project is designed to  identify and enumerate the anomalous (defect)
              structures in  vinylidene chloride polymers (PVDC's) and to elucidate the 
              mechanisms by which these structures are formed during  polymerization. 
              Particular attention will be paid to  thermally labile structures, because
              their mechanisms of  formation may suggest ways of modifying the polymerization
               procedures in order to create polymers whose stabilities are  greatly
              enhanced.      %%%      This research could lead to the preparation of
              important new  materials that are very useful technologically and are in  the
              family of polymers that contains PVC, the world's second  most widely used
              thermoplastic.  The work also will make a  major contribution to science
              education by training advanced  researchers and by all owing Chemistry students
              at one of the  nation's premier undergraduate schools to do research in a 
              frontier with an internationally recognized group.      ***
