Title       : Photonic Band-Gap Materials and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9610444

Award Number: 9610444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Kuchment   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9610444  Kuchment    The problem of creating photonic crystals has two major
              components: a   mathematical one and a technological one. The mathematical part
              consists   of non-standard spectral problems for the periodic Maxwell operator
              and   some of its scalar counterparts. The aim of the proposed research is to  
              develop novel analytic and numerical methods of analysis of frequency   spectra
              depending on geometric and physical characteristics of the band-gap   material.
              In particular, it is planned to develop new asymptotic models of   the problem
              in 2D and 3D, to study numerically and analytically the   asymptotic models for
              different geometries of PBG materials in 2D and 3D,   to study relations
              between spectral properties of photonic crystals and of   other mesoscopic
              physical systems, to study novel possibilities of    localization of light, to
              study geometries that promise to open large spectral   gaps, and to obtain new
              analytic results about effects caused by localized   impurities.    Photonic
              band-gap materials, often referred to as photonic crystals, have   attracted a
              lot of attention since the idea was suggested in 1987. A photonic   crystal is
              an artificial composite optical material that is an optical analog of   a
              semiconductor. The main  property of interest is existence of a range of  
              frequencies (``colors") of light that cannot propagate in this medium. It is  
              expected that creation of such a material would bring about a technological  
              revolution in optics, laser technology, computing, information transmission,  
              and other areas. Significant increase in efficiency of laser devices, highly  
              efficient planar antennas, optics protecting against enemy's laser beams,  
              perfect mirrors, laser diodes, memories, switches, and lossless optical  
              information transmission lines are among numerous applications.  This   award
              is supported by the Division of Mathematical Science and the   Experimental
              Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
