Title       : SGER: Development of GFP-chromosome Tagging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9610330

Award Number: 9610330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49623              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Dawson ddawson@opal.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dawson  9610330  The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been a favored organism
              for the study of meiotic chromosome behavior because of its genetic
              tractability.  Its primary deficiency as an organism for studying meiosis is
              that its chromosomes are very small and their behavior can not be observed in
              meiotic cells.  The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to
              develop a novel system that could allow the visualization chromosomes in living
              meiotic yeast cells.  The system would be based on the binding of green
              fluorescent protein hybrid molecules to sites placed on specific chromosomes. 
              Current understanding of the behavior of meiotic chromosomes has been gleaned
              primarily by a combination of genetic and cell biological studies.  Often these
              studies have been performed in different organisms.  For example, yeast has
              lent itself well to genetic studies while plants and insects, because their
              chromosomes can be visualized in living cells with a light microscope, have
              provided cell biologists with invaluable insights.  The coupling of these
              approaches would be especially powerful because it would permit the
              visualization of chromosome behavior in mutants known by genetic analysis to be
              defective in aspects of meiotic chromosome segregation (pairing, recombination,
              synaptonemal complex formation, spindle assembly and chromosome movement).  In
              the past decade a large collection of yeast mutants with meiotic defects have
              been identified.  The development of a system for viewing chromosome behavior
              in these mutants and wild type cells would have a tremendous impact on our
              understanding of the manner in which proper chromosome behavior is established,
              a process essential to all sexually reproducing higher organisms.
