Title       : Summer Research Program in Chemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9610442

Award Number: 9610442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelsey D. Cook kcook@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Sepaniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 0000,9232,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Prof. Kelsey D. Cook of the University of Tennessee is supported by the  
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program as the Principal Investigator   for
              this  Research Opportunity Award (ROA).  This award enables visiting   faculty
              from institutions involved primarily in undergraduate education   to come to
              the Tennessee campus for a summer research experience in   analytical
              chemistry.  Important additional components of the program   include
              interactions with scientists at the Oak Ridge National   Laboratory, and an
              interface with summer undergraduate research programs   at Tennessee which can
              include students from the campus of the visiting   faculty member.  Among the
              goals are enhanced quality of undergraduate   education in chemistry at the
              visitors' home institutions, enhanced   student interest in careers in
              analytical chemistry, exchange of ideas   concerning teaching matters, and
              career-enhancing opportunities for   under-represented groups.  Visitors are
              able to participate in a research   project available from among a dozen
              research programs of faculty at   Tennessee and staff at Oak Ridge all of which
              are focused on various   aspects of analytical chemistry.  The main thrust of
              this project is focused on the scientific   infrastructure.  By providing a
              summer research experience for visiting   faculty from undergraduate
              institutions that  have not had a research   experience for their students,
              curriculum improvements at those   institutions can be encouraged and positive
              changes in the environment to   encourage students to pursue careers in
              chemistry result.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
