Title       : Exploration of New Design Avenues for High Speed Ceramic Grinding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9610454

Award Number: 9610454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit Chandra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ghatu Subhash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yonggang Y. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Development of a cost-effective production finishing process is pivotal for
              commercial success of structural precision ceramic components.  High-speed
              grinding of ceramics has emerged as a viable potential candidate for such
              finishing operation.  However, unlike metals, ceramics are brittle and highly
              sensitive to process induced surface and sub-surface damages in the finished
              part.  Process damage may be minimized by maintaining force/abrasive grit below
              a critical threshold.  This, however, imposes an extremely small material
              removal rate that is an order of magnitude lower than that required for
              commercial viability.  Current efforts focus on improving material removal rate
              under these constraints.  This research project seeks to explore new design
              avenues, particularly for very high-speed grinding, above the current critical
              thresholds of depth of cut and feed/grit.  The objectives of the research are:
              (1) to establish and experimentally validate a mechanistic model of material
              removal and associated damage evolution in high-speed machining; (2) to use the
              validated model to investigate the roles of two new design parameters: 
              impulse/grit and intermittent unloading; and (3) to implement and investigate
              new design states in existing surface grinding facilities.     The project will
              establish the potential of new design avenues for precision ceramic grinding
              that may deliver very high material removal rate while minimizing residual
              damage in the finished part.  This can have significant impact on the
              efficiency and effectiveness of finished brittle materials including structural
              ceramic parts and optical components, as well as processing of silicon wafers
              for electronic applications.
