Title       : Models for Classification and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9610048

Award Number: 9610048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87719              (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Estes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In NSF-funded work leading up to this project, separate theoretical models for
              subsystems of human memory have been integrated into a unified model for memory
              loss, distortion, and recovery.  The unified model assumes that memories for
              objects and events are stored as arrays of properties.  A further assumption is
              that following storage, a basic, automatic, and apparently immutable process
              leads to degradation of the property information, and therefore to decreased
              accessibility of the memories. This process produces spontaneous recovery of
              memories on some occasions, often in distorted form.  Research planned for the
              project is intended to yield new methods of measuring these changes in memory,
              and to identify procedures that can alleviate memory loss and reduce
              distortions of recall and recognition.   Some planned experiments will simulate
              situations involving eyewitness testimony, such as accidents or crimes.  The
              aim is to study how recall and recognition are influenced by factors such as
              witnesses' prior familiarity with objects or people present in the scene. Other
              experiments will seek an explanation for the well-documented ability of people
              to recognize hundreds of naturalistic scenes viewed within a very limited time
              period.   An offshoot of the main effort will focus on the role of memory in
              decision making. The general memory model yields predictions about how
              decisions depend on internal referents or standards derived from long-term
              memories. The predictions will be tested in situations contrived to simulate
              decision making of the kind that occurs in gambling, selection of insurance
              options or investments, and choices among alternative goals.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
