Title       : Modeling Assembly Layouts Using the Datum Flow Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9610163

Award Number: 9610163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Whitney dwhitney@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Research will be carried out to create methods to lay out, analyze,   outsource,
              assemble, and debug complex mechanical assemblies. To accomplish   this, ways
              must be found to capture their fundamental structure,  including the designer's
              strategy for locating the parts accurately with   respect to each other. A
              concept called the `datum flow chain` will be   defined and elaborated to
              capture this logic.  Graph theory will be used to   define the properties of
              datum flow chains.  They will be explored   computationally and tested on real
              assembly examples from the aircraft and   auto industries to see how well they
              can capture the information designers   need in order to solve typical assembly
              process design problems as well as   to see how well they scale to large
              problems.  The properties of different   kinds of assembly features will be
              defined and modeled mathematically,   including those that do not constrain a
              joint completely.  A design process   will be created that permits layout
              designers to explore the consequences   for assembly and tolerances resulting
              from choices among different datum   flow chains, feasible assembly sequences,
              choices of assembly mating   features, and tolerances on the location and shape
              of these features.  If successful, this research will result in increased
              understanding of how   to model mechanical assemblies and make it easier to
              analyze them very early   in the product design cycle.  This capability could
              be beneficial to   companies that want to improve the speed of their product
              development   process.  Improved models of assemblies could also be
              incorporated into   engineering education, providing deeper understanding of
              the fundamentals of   engineering systems and better preparing students to be
              productive in   industry.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
