Title       : Process Optimization for Dimensional Accuracy in Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9610382

Award Number: 9610382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. White swhite@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe H. Geubelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9610382  White  Warpage is the manifestation of residual stresses in
              composite structures. For the automotive industry warpage leads to problems
              with the fit and finish of body panel components.  Dimensional accuracy is
              critical when mating two body panels together at the joints.  Extreme surface
              tolerances are also critical in order to produce panels with smooth, glossy
              finishes. Residual stresses will also ultimately lead to reduction in
              durability. Strength issues associated with durability will become more
              important as composites are gradually incorporated into the primary load
              bearing components of the car.  This research project is focused on
              process-induced residual stresses in composite parts and their effect on the
              dimensional stability of the manufactured component.  The fundamental
              objectives of the proposal are: (1) to develop a fundamental, mechanics-based
              understanding of the factors that control dimensional accuracy and residual
              stresses in polymer-matrix composite parts; (2) to create analytical and
              computational tools that will allow engineers to predict the final dimensions
              and stresses in composite parts, and to anticipate the effect of processing
              variables; and (3) to combine these analytical and numerical tools with recent
              developments in optimization techniques to achieve optimal manufacturing
              processes that minimize warpage and residual stress. This collaborative
              research project addresses fundamental issues on the understanding of factors
              that control dimensional accuracy and residual stresses in polymer-matrix
              parts. The research project has a balance between theory and experiment, and
              will provide valuable findings for the composite manufacturing industry.
