Title       : REG: Advanced Imaging Capability: Vorticity as Seen by a Moving Particle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9610340

Award Number: 9610340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Rogers Crogers@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    CTS-9610340  Chris Rogers  Tufts University    The main goal is to
              develop instrumentation for the measurement of instantaneous, two dimensional
              fluid velocity fields from the viewpoint of a moving particle. A Kodak camera,
              imaging frame grabber and accessory equipment will be purchased.    In order to
              accurately predict the behavior of a solid particle in a turbulent air flow,
              one must be able to predict the fluid turbulence experienced by the particle:
              that is in the particle Lagrangian reference frame. Most conventional models
              and simulations give information in the stationary Eulerian reference frame or
              in the Lagrangian reference frame. Since the particle has a gravitational drift
              and inertia, its path is different from that of a fluid point (Lagrangian) or a
              stationary point (Eulerian). The turbulence to which the particle responds is
              dependent on the physical particle properties and on its previous history of
              surrounding turbulence. The PI is modeling a transformation from an Eulerian
              coordinate system to the particle?s coordinate system for single point
              measurements, such as fluid velocity autocorrelation. For some particles,
              however, their path is dictated by local fluid vorticity. Vortices tend to
              throw particles out into straining regions. To model this behavior, one needs
              to be able to measure the local instantaneous vorticity along the particle
              path. One can approximate the vorticity using digital particle image
              velocimetry, measuring the 2-D fluid velocity field in the reference frame of
              the moving particle.    The current difficulty is spatial and temporal
              resolution, both of which are addressed here. The equipment will also be used
              by a number of other projects, both with industry and government agencies.
