Title       : PPD: Scientific Visualization Using Tactile Feedback for Visually Impaired
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9610289

Award Number: 9610289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anshuman Razdan razdan@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B L. Ramakrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Veronica A. Burrows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Anshuman Razdan    Scientific visualization provides scientists with tools
              to model  and visually observe three dimensional data.  This technique has 
              advanced scientific understanding in numerous scientific fields  such as
              biology, chemistry and engineering.  The traditional  method of visualization
              is to model the data into one of the many  surface modeling schemes and display
              the data on a computer  screen.  This approach has obvious limitations for
              people that  are visually impaired.  This project will test a novel way to 
              provide analogous information to these individuals whether they  are students,
              scientists or researchers.  Data are modeled in the  normal manner, but instead
              of displaying the model on a computer  screen, a three-dimensional wax-based
              model will be created.  The  data, after being geometrically modeled, will be
              converted into a  physical model using a Layered Manufacturing (Rapid
              Prototyping)  machine.  The tactile model will maintain the appropriate ratios 
              so as not to distort the proportions of the data.  A Scanning  Probe Microscope
              (SPM) has been chosen as the test-bed to provide  3D data.  A SPM is used to
              probe objects on a nano scale and its  output is inherently three dimensional. 
              The only way to  currently observe experiments and data performed on SPM is a 
              visual display on a screen.  With the proposed technique, a  visually impaired
              student will be able to feel the surface  representation of the 3D data on the
              physical model as seen on a  SPM.  The use of 3D physical models for tactile
              feedback will be  developed in three Arizona State University classes: a junior
               level course in Chemical Engineering, a sophomore level course in  Physical
              Science for in-service and preservice teachers, and a  junior level
              interdisciplinary science course.  Activities will  be created to demonstrate
              the viability, importance and success  of this project.  Workshops will be
              organized to bring educators,  scientists, special education teachers and
              students to both  evaluate  and provide input to this project.  The project has
               broad implications for science education for all students because  they will
              be able to touch, feel and observe tangible three-  dimensional data models.
