Title       : Optimization of Multiclass Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9610486

Award Number: 9610486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris J. Bertsimas dbertsim@aris.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9610486  Bertsimas       Multiclass queuing networks give rise to a rich class
              of models for manufacturing, and computer-communication systems.  The practical
              needs to evaluate and improve the performance of such systems have motivated
              extensive research efforts on the analysis, optimization and stability of these
              models.  This research will make contributions to the development of solution
              methods for several open problems in the analysis of multiclass queueing
              networks.  Specifically, the investigator will study the effects of
              variability, changeover times, and general holding-time distributions in
              developing improved bounds on the optimal performance of these networks.  The
              research draws on a mathematical programming-based approach (the achievable
              region approach) to performance optimization of stochastic systems.  The
              overall objective of the research is to derive heuristic scheduling policies
              with sub-optimality guarantees based on relaxations derived from the achievable
              region approach.       Multiclass queueing networks have proved quite useful in
              the computer and communications field, where they have become the models of
              choice for design, analysis, and optimization of telecommunications systems. 
              While their use as models for manufacturing systems has thus far been impeded
              by certain technical limitations, this research specifically addresses issues
              that can potentially overcome these limitations.  The potential is high that
              this research will lead to significant breakthroughs on some extremely
              difficult problems, thereby enabling the successful application of these models
              in manufacturing systems, most notably in the area of semiconductor
              manufacturing.
