Title       : Applications of Strain Gradient Plasticity: Modeling and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9610491

Award Number: 9610491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunil Saigal                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69429              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yonggang Y. Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Abhijit Chandra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan Krishnamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9610491  Huang  Efficiency   and   effectiveness  of  numerous   engineering 
              applications   (typically  macroscale)   are   significantly  influenced   by  
              the   underlying   microscale   phenomena.  Consequently,    macroscale  
              design    considerations    of  engineering  products  and manufacturing 
              processes  require  detailed microscale insights.  Texture formation in bulk
              and  sheet forming, shear banding (that essentially governs  chip  formation  
              characteristics  in  machining),  strength   and  toughness  of particle/fiber
              reinforced composite materials,  and  mechanical  properties  of  thin  film 
              interfaces  are  examples   of   this  class  of  problems,   A   multi-scale 
              representation capable of capturing the micro-scale  effects  and  synthesizing
               its  essence within  the  context  of  an  otherwise   macroscale  model  is 
              necessary  for  effective  consideration  of  such  engineering  problems.   
              Moreover,  interests in several microscale engineering problems,  e.g.,  MEMS, 
               nano-  and  sub-micron  scale  surface  modification  techniques in electronic
              packaging and failure of fine  line  interconnects   in  microelectronic 
              circuits,   have   also  increased significantly in recent years.      
              Experimental   observations  (e.g.,  micro-indentation,  torsion  of  thin
              wires, strength of thin films)  show  that  material   behavior  at  the 
              microscale  is   significantly  different  from  that at the macroscale.  
              These  microscale  experiments also exhibit considerable influence of geometric
               parameters on material properties.       Predictions  based on conventional
              constitutive  models  fail  to account for such microscale phenomena that may
              have  profound implications in design and manufacturing of a  wide  spectrum  
              of   engineering  devices.   For   example,   the  conventional plasticity
              theory cannot explain the  increased  hardness  in micro-indentation tests as
              compared  to  macro-  indentation   of   the  same  material.   Material  
              removal  characteristic s  in  machining  of  metals   are   crucially 
              dependent  on  the  thickness of the generated  shear  band;  conventional 
              plasticity  provides  no  direct   avenue   to  estimate such parameters.      
              The  strain  gradient plasticity recently  proposed  by  Fleck  and  Hutchinson
              (1993) satisfies  the  Clausius-Duhem  thermodynamic  restrictions  on  the 
              constitutive  law  for  second deformation gradients, and is potentially
              capable  of  effectively  probing  micron and sub-micron  scale  material 
              behavior.   It can also provide an effective transition  for  incorporating 
              the microscale effects within  a  generalized  framework of plasticity.
              However, a material length scale is  introduced in the strain gradient
              plasticity, and  needs  to  be   determined   from  a  set  of  independent  
              microscale  experiments.       Accordingly,  the  proposed  work  first  
              focuses   on  developing- two independent sets of experiments:      (1) bending
               of  micron-thick Cu beams  and  plates  using        Atomic Force Microscopy,
              and    (2) measurement of shear band thickness and sub-structures        (in 
              compression tests) using optical-, electron-  and        atomic force
              microscopy.  Observations  from  these experiments, in  conjunction  with 
              suitable   modeling   efforts,  will   provide   independent  estimates  of 
              the "material length scale".   Comparison  of  these results with others will
              facilitate investigations  of  the  validity of the "material length scale" as 
              a  material  parameter.   The  experiments  will  also  be  used  to  (i) 
              quantitatively  estimate  the  material  length  scale   for  individual 
              materials,  and (ii)  establish  the  region  of  interest of strain gradient
              theory for particular materials.  We will then utilize the strain gradient
              plasticity theory  to probe different engineering applications where microscale
               phenomena play important roles.  In machining, we will  directly estimate the
              shear band thickness for different  FCC, BCC and HCP materials under va rious
              cutting conditions,  and (i) validate predictions against observations from 
              proposed machining- experiments; (ii) quantitatively  investigate the influence
              of shear band thickness on quality  and integrity of the finished surface.  For
              composites, we  will investigate the influence of particle/fiber size on 
              effective strength.  Micro-mechanical sensors, actuators and  transducers
              commonly use thin film bi-layers (thin film on  thin film).  We will carry out
              modeling- and experimentation  on such systems.
