Title       : Topics in Unconditionally Secure Crypotograhy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9610138

Award Number: 9610138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Spyros S. Magliveras   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Stinson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to investigate several types of  cryptographic
              protocols that are unconditionally secure, i.e.,  their security does not
              require any computational assumptions.  Examples of topics to be studied
              include construction of  efficient authentication codes, robust secret sharing
              schemes,  key distribution schemes and broadcast encryption schemes.  All  of
              these topics are of fundamental importance in cryptography in  providing for
              confidentiality and/or integrity of information. As  the Internet becomes
              increasingly important in everyday life,  security of the information it
              contains is a critical factor.  Hence, methods of providing information
              security are of great  practical importance.  Unconditionally secure protocols
              are very  desirable precisely because their security can be rigorously  proved
              and quantified. The main mathematical tools used are  combinatorial in nature;
              error-correcting codes and combinatoral  designs play an essential role.  Other
              mathematical techniques  come into play in an important way, including
              information theory  and number theory.  The two main objectives are to
              construct new,  practical, efficient schemes, and to evaluate them in terms of 
              the amount of secret information that needs to be exchanged and  the
              computational complexity of the actual algorithms that  implement them.  Thus
              there is a whole spectrum of activity to be  carried out, from initially
              providing a mathematical solution to  the actual implementation of an
              algorithm.
