Title       : Conformation-Driven Molecular Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9610054

Award Number: 9610054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50062              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hase wlh@traj.chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Conrad  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CONRAD, Michael
CCR-9610054
Wayne State University

The high recognition
              capacity of proteins and other biological macromolecules derives largely from
              shape-based interactions.  The pictures of a lock-key or jigsaw-like fit is
              frequently used to describe this type of molecular level pattern recognition. 
              The goal of this research project is to harness this powerful intrinsic form of
              pattern recognition to solve computational problems.  The basic idea is
              captured in the self-assembly model of computing.  Signal patterns impinging on
              a device are transduced to molecular conformations which then self-organize to
              form a higher level complex (or mosaic).  Shape features common to different
              mosaics represent different families of input patterns.  Enzymes that recognize
              these shape features control the output of the device.  The solution of
              potentially difficult symbolic pattern recognition problems is converted in
              this way to a macromolecular self-organization process driven by free energy
              minimization.  Devices of this type cannot be programmed in a conventional
              sense, because of the difficulty of predicting the structural and functional
              consequences of conformational interactions.  However, they are well suited to
              molding through directed evolution (due to the high structure-function
              plasticity of biological macromolecules) and to adaptation through error
              feedback acting on the internal structure of the device.

Chemical
              implementation of this scheme can operate on the basis of the conformational
              responses of single proteins to different patterns of milieu features. 
              Shape-based enzyme recognition serves to transform input signal patterns (coded
              in chemical form) to output activity (detected spectroscopically).  The
              particular protein being used for this purpose is mitochrondrial malate
              dehydrogenase, a readily available enzyme of carbohydrate metabolism, that
              could in the future easily be coupled to other enzymes to build up a repertoire
              of special purpose pattern processors that can be utilized as co-processors for
              a conventional machine linked into computational networks capable of performing
              complex recognition-action tasks.

