Title       : Dynamics and Spectroscopy in the Semiclassical and Extreme Quantum Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9610501

Award Number: 9610501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Heller heller@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9610501  HELLER  The Theoretical and Computational Ahemistry program is
              supporting   Professor Eric Heller at Harvard University to work on scattering
              theory.    First, Heller will take a new look at scattering theory at extremely
              low   energies.  This regime has become important because of laser cooling and 
               trapping of atoms, as well as carrier gas cooling and trapping of   molecules.
               In this "cold collision" regime, Heller will study ultra-low   energy,
              three-atom collisions and recombination (molecule formation),   proximity
              resonances, which are a new class of low energy multiple   scattering
              resonances related to Efimov states, and ultra-low energy   molecule-molecule
              collisions, with an eye to the formation of long lived   resonances.  Common to
              these areas is the concept of "boundary condition   engineering," wherein the
              effect of short range potentials can in fact be   ascribed to a change in
              boundary conditions on the wavefunction.  In a   related study Heller will
              extend and apply the theory of multiple   scattering and conductance in
              "quantum corrals" and other arrangements or   arrays of atoms into walls and
              sheets.  He will also investigate novel   approaches to dynamical tunneling in
              polyatomic molecules, and its effect   on high resolution spectra, deflection
              of beams in inhomogeneous fields,   and quantum control in Landau-Zener
              crossing.  This work, like the   ultra-low energy scattering theory above,
              addresses the extreme quantum   regime.  In a second class of problems, at the
              opposite end of the scale   at higher energy, Heller will extend his
              fundamental research in   semiclassical approximations to chaotic systems to
              include the theory of   scarring by classical periodic orbits and semiclassical
              quantization of   chaos.  In particular he is looking for an appropriate
              nonlinear theory   of wavefunction scarring.  Finally this work will undertake
              several   projects involving fundamental issues of quantization, including  
              quantization on constrained non-Euclidian spac es, and quantization of   chaos
              in maps such as the whisker map.    This research involves fundamental studies
              of quantum mechanics, and the   profound effects quantum mechanics has on
              matter, as energy is lowered   almost to absolute zero.  At very low
              temperatures, matter wave-like   behavior dominates over particle-like
              behavior.  Wavelengths get   extremely long.  The waves have to obey "boundary
              conditions," which are   rules on how the waves behave when one atom or
              molecule approaches   another, or approaches a wall.  At ultra-low energies
              these boundary   conditions are uncommonly important, often determining the way
              the matter   behaves.  In this strange "tail wagging the dog" regime, anything
              that   can be done to change the boundary conditions may have profound effects.
                 For example, normal boundary conditions in quantum mechanics forces  
              minimum energy upon the system known as the zero point energy.  Removing   the
              zero point energy, by using walls made of special atoms,  may   drastically
              affect the usefulness of small devices such as wires,  and   may profoundly
              affect the outcome of the slow collision of two cold   molecules.  Related work
              involves the issue of quantization; that is, how   do we take a given system
              and correctly endow it with the proper quantum   behavior.  There are rules on
              how to do this in simple cases but the   rules are ambiguous when constraints
              are present, for example (requiring   that a given bond length to be a certain
              fixed value).  Heller is   developing some ideas which bootstrap the ambiguous
              cases as limits of   the easy cases, thus removing the ambiguity.    ***
