Title       : Effects of Spatial Inhomogeneity on Nonlinear Pattern Forming Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9610248

Award Number: 9610248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Behringer bob@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. Allan Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is an investigation of the effects of spatial inhomogeneities in both
              thermally driven convection and  Taylor vortex flow (TVF). The investigation
              will consider both porous media convection (PMC) and Rayleigh-Benard 
              convection (RBC).  The experiments on PMC will be a continued exploration of
              the effects of media spatial structure on both pattern selection and
              stability-and the consequent, often large, effects on heat and impurity
              transport.  This work will relate pattern selection to pore structure, for both
              pure fluids and binary mixtures.    Regarding RBC, the experiments will involve
              horizontal variations in both the layer thickness and in the temperature
              profile.  Related experiments will address similar effects in Taylor vortex
              flow (TVF) where the radial gap, (delta)R, between the inner and outer cylinder
              varies.  The advantage of this flow is that the first pattern-forming
              instability (when only the inner cylinder rotates) is to rolls aligned along
              the cylinder axis-therefore, the complications of directional degeneracy are
              removed. It is envisioned that experiments on different hydrodynamic systems
              with control over spatial variations in different ways, will yield broad
              insight into the effects of spatial variations on such flows.  In the past,
              there has been some work focusing on slow spatial variations of parameters or
              periodic variation of parameters, but very little on the effects of broad-band
              random spatial variations, a particularly important issue for PMC.    There are
              a number of important applications for this work including heat transfer
              devices, insulation, and the flow of contaminants in ground water when there
              are temperature or concentration gradients.  In most practical applications
              involving heat and mass flows, the systems are far from the usually studied
              idealizations, and the need for more information on imperfect systems is
              considerable.  Recently developed experimental techniques will allow
              experimenters  to non-invasively  image patterns in PMC, leading to im portant
              new insights into the effects of the medium structure on pattern selection. 
              Particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) will be used to study TVF.
