Title       : Collaborative Research: Query Optimization Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9610013

Award Number: 9610013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard D. Shapiro len@cs.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is an interinstitutional collaborative project between Oregon Graduate
              Institute of Science and Technology (OGI) and Portland State University (PSU).
              Query optimizers are one of the main means by which modern database systems
              achieve their performance advantages. Given a request for data manipulation or
              retrieval, an optimizer will choose an optimal plan for evaluating the request
              from among the manifold alternative strategies. Optimization for the basic
              relational model is considered a solved problem by many. However, new
              application areas such as knowledge discovery, on-line analytical processing,
              and complex multimedia objects, have kindled renewed research in optimization.
              Current optimizers have often proved inadequate to the needs of these new
              application areas. Researchers have developed optimization techniques, and
              several prototype optimizers, to support new applications. This research
              addresses engineering questions related to the use of new optimizers for new
              applications: which operators to use; which search strategies to employ; and
              which transforms to utilize. These investigations use the Columbia query
              optimizer framework and visualization environment developed at PSU and OGI. The
              project interacts closely with companies which produce database management
              systems and the hardware on which they run. The research results will help
              database optimizer implementors make better choices in the design of their
              systems, leading to better performance and more expressive query languages for
              commercial database systems.
