Title       : Bounded Queries and Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9610457

Award Number: 9610457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Chang chang@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the computational complexity of finding  approximate
              solutions to NP-optimization problems through an  investigation of the
              structure of complexity classes in the  bounded query hierarchy.  Many
              questions about these complexity  classes remain open.  For example, it is not
              known whether a  polynomial time Turing machine using a linear number of oracle
               queries to an NP-complete set can recognize more languages than  one which
              uses only log n queries. Recent works have established  close connections
              between NP-approximation problems and the  bounded query hierarchy.  As a
              result, there is a direct  correspondence between open questions of whether
              finding an  optimum Traveling Salesman tour can be reduced to finding a 2- 
              approximate tour (one that has at most twice the length of the  optimum tour). 
              If such a reduction were possible, it would imply  that there is no significant
              difference in the complexity of  finding approximate versus optimum solutions
              for many NP-complete  problems.  This would drastically alter the present
              understanding  of the nature of NP-completeness.  The conjecture motivating
              this  research is that such a reduction does not exist.  However,  currently,
              its existence is not known to violate any of the  common intractability
              assumptions (e.g. that P  NP or that the  Polynomial Hierarchy does not
              collapse). The goal of this project  is to solve many of the outstanding open
              questions about the  bounded query hierarchy.
