Title       : Integrating Research & Education: Using High-Speed Networking to Improve the
               Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a9620040

Award Number: 9620040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Moseley provost@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Bothun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Oregon has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has developed a campus-wide approach to
              using high-speed networks and advanced computer technology for a new generation
              of discovery-based classroom learning experiences.  The university's initiative
              includes development of interactive courseware and on-line data libraries.  The
              new Java-based interactive computer courseware provides students with -virtual
              experiments+ that allow them to manipulate variables and analyze the
              experimental data that emerges from a simulation model.  The shared data
              libraries allow students to explore the data resulting from faculty research. 
              Participation in these curriculum development efforts are now considered as
              part of tenure and promotion decisions. These learning tools -- simulations,
              interactive courseware, and access to data from faculty research -- provide
              discovery-based learning opportunities to non-science students in large
              introductory science survey courses.  This approach represents a model for
              increasing the level of scientific literacy of the entire undergraduate student
              body.  The university's efforts to integrate research and education were
              designed with specific outcomes in mind: improving student comprehension and
              performance on tests; increasing student participation in direct manipulation
              of data using analysis programs; increasing engagement and motivation of
              non-science majors enrolled in introductory science courses; and engaging
              faculty in the process of personalizing their courses by incorporating their
              research into classroom explorations.  The university is being awarded $500,000
              with the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary
              practices over the coming three years.  Plans for the use of the award funds
              include: regional workshops on the use of information technology to integrate
              research and education; continued development of Java-based interactive
              courseware; assessment of the effectiveness of learning using interactive
              simulations; and development and publication of CD-ROM materials.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
