Title       : Learning as Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9620091

Award Number: 9620091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul P. Christiano pc0i@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Indira Nair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Carnegie-Mellon University has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has made cross-disciplinary
              problem-solving a core activity in the undergraduate curriculum and has created
              many mechanisms that support institution-wide implementation.  A Center for
              Teaching Excellence and a Center for Innovation in Learning encourage and
              support faculty efforts to use problem solving as a vehicle for learning.  In
              addition to course-based problem solving, an increasing number of students
              pursue independent research throughout their undergraduate careers through
              formal courses, paid work-study, senior honors programs, internships, and
              independent study.  The university provides significant support for
              undergraduate research projects and organizes a student research symposium at
              which 200 student projects were recently presented.  The university's efforts
              to integrate research and education were designed with specific outcomes in
              mind: increasing student retention in science and engineering programs;
              increasing the proportion of students engaged in independent research;
              increasing student satisfaction with their science and engineering education;
              and enhancing the capabilities of graduates in the workplace.  The university
              has documented significant success in achieving these goals.  The university is
              being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting, and
              disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three years.  Plans for
              the use of the award funds include: establishing a freshman seminar that
              introduces students to the culture of interdisciplinary problem solving;
              expanding support for the undergraduate research program; engaging graduate
              students as research mentors for undergraduates; developing new courses that
              use interdisciplinary problem solving; developing outcome-based assessment
              tools for evaluating new courses using problem solving as a core activity;
              developing and documenting an exportable model for teaching through
              interdisciplinary problem solving; and disseminating the model through
              workshops, conferences, a handbook, and resources made available through the
              World Wide Web.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
