Title       : Intragroup Socialization and Intergroup Perceptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9620113

Award Number: 9620113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27393              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey S. Ryan cryan@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description. Intragroup processes and intergroup perceptions have long
              been central concerns of social scientists and society in general. Researchers
              interested in intragroup processes have examined the process by which new
              members are socialized into a group. There has also been considerable research
              examining intergroup perceptions. Indeed, the development, representation, and
              perceptions of stereotypes about ingroups versus outgroups have been primary
              foci of social psychologists for many years.  The proposed research is based on
              an integration of the literature from these two areas. The proposed research
              examines the effects of two features of intragroup socialization on the
              stereotypes that new members develop about ingroups and outgroups: new member
              uncertainty about being accepted by the group and the use of abstraction-
              versus instance-based information. These features of the socialization process
              will be experimentally manipulated and their effects on new members'
              perceptions of ingroups and outgroups assessed. The outcome of this work will
              be a more complete understanding of stereotype change and development and, in
              particular, the influence of group socialization on perceptions of ingroups and
              outgroups. This work may ultimately help identify ways in which groups can
              promote more positive and constructive intergroup perceptions.  &&&  Project
              Justification. Intragroup processes and intergroup perceptions have long been
              central concerns of social scientists and society in general. In many groups,
              individuals undergo an induction process during which they are socialized by
              the group before they can become full-fledged group members. Many occupational
              groups, for example, have a probationary period during which new members gain
              experience with and information about their own group and relevant outgroups
              through on-the-job training, formal training sessions, and informal
              interactions with other group members. Thus, perceptions of ingroups and
              outgroups are likely to undergo a great deal of change during this time.  The
              proposed research examines the effects of two features of the induction process
              on the stereotypes that new members develop about their ingroups and outgroups.
              The outcome of this work will be a more complete understanding of stereotype
              change and development and, in particular, how induction into a group affects
              the perceptions of ingroups and outgroups that new group members develop. This
              work may ultimately help identify ways in which groups can promote more
              positive and constructive intergroup perceptions.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
