Title       : Research-Based Education: A Template for Promoting Discovery Learning on Today's
               College Campuses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9620082

Award Number: 9620082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Roselle david.roselle@mvs.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan S. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Delaware has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has implemented a systemic and
              realistic approach to integrating research into the undergraduate curriculum. 
              The university engages as many undergraduates as feasible in meaningful
              research projects with faculty, and an office of undergraduate research
              promotes broad participation.  More than 60% of the total faculty and 90% of
              the science and mathematics faculty participate.  Special efforts are made to
              engage students from underrepresented minorities in this program.  Some
              students begin their research activities in their first year at the university,
              and most begin in the sophomore year.  Opportunities for summer research
              internships in industry and national laboratories are offered following the
              junior year.  All senior honors research theses are read and evaluated by a
              Faculty Board and are presented at a university-wide research symposium. 
              Recognizing that not all students will have access to true research
              experiences, the university provides discovery-based courses for all students. 
              These courses take varied forms, including research apprenticeships, group
              research projects, engineering design courses, and a set of new
              interdisciplinary courses that use Problem-Based Learning.  The University of
              Delaware's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
              specific outcomes in mind: enhancing the skills, understanding, and personal
              characteristics gained by students through a research experience; increasing
              the numbers of students engaged in faculty research; increasing the proportion
              of undergraduate research participants who go on to graduate study; maintaining
              high levels of faculty participation; and expanding the number of PBL-based
              courses.  The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
              documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
              years.  Plans for the use of the award funds include: creating a challenge
              grant to increase support for summer research projects; increasing staff
              support for the undergraduate research coordinating office; conducting a
              longitudinal study of a sample of students during their undergraduate research
              experiences; surveying undergraduate research alumni; producing a video on PBL
              methods for pre-service teachers; and disseminating information through
              conferences and Web-based resources.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
