Title       : Science Education for the Twenty-First Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9620104

Award Number: 9620104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Copenhaver brianc@college.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Young  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kumar Patel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) has been selected as one of
              ten recipients of the National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the
              Integration of Research and Education.  UCLA is using a systemic approach to
              integrating research and education in an urban university system with enormous
              and diverse student enrollments.  UCLA has introduced discovery-based courses
              developed by an Office of Instructional Development.  New computer-based
              interactive multimedia courseware are used in several departments for general
              education and lower division courses that reach large numbers of both science
              and non-science majors, and for upper division courses for science majors.  The
              university facilitates one-on-one collaborative research between faculty and
              first- or second-year students from underrepresented groups as well as students
              from two-year colleges in the area.    UCLA's efforts to integrate research and
              education were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the numbers
              of undergraduate students participating in collaborative research with faculty;
              increasing retention and graduation rates for minority students engaged in
              research; increasing transfer and persistence rates of two-year college
              students engaged in research; and modernizing upper division lab courses in
              science departments. The university has documented noteworthy success in
              achieving these goals.  The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal
              of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the
              coming three years.  Plans for use of the award funds include: creation of a
              Center for Student Research in Science, Engineering and Math as an
              administrative support system for ongoing initiatives; developing new methods
              of assessment and evaluation for discovery-based courses; conducting
              performance-based evaluation of students engaged in research-based learning;
              re-establishing the student research journal; and supporting dissemination of
              curriculum innovations by faculty members.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
