Title       : Making Science Education Count: Tenure Reform and Undergraduate Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9620092

Award Number: 9620092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Sypherd Sypherd@Arizona.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall M. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Arizona has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has achieved noteworthy success in two
              aspects of the integration of research and education: revision of tenure and
              promotion guidelines to consider the quality of undergraduate teaching, and
              creation of an innovative undergraduate biology program.  The university has
              established a Science and Engineering Promotion and Tenure Committee which
              ensures that education issues are considered on a par with research performance
              in hiring, promotion, and tenure decisions.  In addition, the university is
              committed to infusing research into the undergraduate experience in both lower
              and upper divisions, and noteworthy progress is being made in the biology
              program.  A Biology Learning Center is helping to create innovative courses
              that use Internet-based resources.  Undergraduate biology majors are engaged in
              research with faculty from 35 academic departments.  Research results are
              presented by students at an annual conference on campus.  Selected alumnae of
              these research experiences are placed in biomedical research labs overseas. 
              The University of Arizona's efforts to integrate research and education were
              designed with specific outcomes in mind:  implement tenure and promotion policy
              reforms at all levels and across disciplinary boundaries within the university;
              increase significantly the numbers of students participating in biological
              research on campus and overseas; expand faculty participation in undergraduate
              research projects; and increase student awareness of diverse career
              opportunities available to biology majors.  The university has documented
              noteworthy success in achieving these goals.   The university is being awarded
              $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its
              exemplary practices over the coming three years.  Plans for use of the award
              funds include: conducting workshops on tenure reform for faculty and
              administrators from other institutions; increasing support for student-faculty
              research projects; enhancing Web-based resources; and production and
              dissemination of video and print materials that document the undergraduate
              biology program.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
