Title       : Stony Brook: Integrating Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9620074

Award Number: 9620074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley S. Kenny shirley.kenny@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. McGrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook has been selected as
              one of ten recipients of the National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards
              for the Integration of Research and Education.  Stony Brook has a long-standing
              tradition of research collaboration between undergraduates and faculty.  Due in
              part to an undergraduate research office, approximately 40% of the large
              undergraduate student body participate in research through a variety of
              mechanisms and programs.  Undergraduate research programs for first-year women
              and minority students have increased retention in these traditionally
              underrepresented groups.  Another program prepares graduate students to use
              research and discovery-based activities in their teaching careers.  The
              university's tenure and promotion decisions now consider a faculty member's
              effectiveness in integrating research and teaching in addition to the quality
              of their research.  Stony Brook's efforts to integrate research and education
              were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the numbers of
              undergraduate students enrolling in research courses; proliferating upper-level
              research courses in different departments; and increasing the numbers of
              advanced science and engineering courses taken by female and minority students.
               The university has documented noteworthy success in achieving these goals. 
              The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
              documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
              years.  Plans for the use of the award funds include: expanding the pool of
              research funds for student research projects; making competitively awarded
              mini-grants to academic departments for development of new research methods
              courses or for seeding new initiatives; evaluating the impacts of programs; and
              publishing results.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
