Title       : Integrating Research & Education: Extending and Sharing Successful Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9620019

Award Number: 9620019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nannerl O. Keohane nkeohane@mail01.adm.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Duke University has been selected as one of ten recipients of the National
              Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  Duke has embarked on a comprehensive and institution-wide effort to
              integrate research and education in the major aspects of university life.  A
              Center for Teaching and Learning has been established to facilitate: a)
              development of  discovery-based courses; b) transfer of cognitive research
              results on learning styles to classroom practices; and c) evaluate teaching
              effectiveness of faculty for consideration in salary, promotion, and tenure
              decisions.  Campus networking (including dorm rooms) now provides students with
              access to Web-based course resources and linkages to faculty research.  A
              Preparing Future Faculty program seeks to introduce graduate students to
              effective teaching methods that engage students in research and discovery-based
              activities.  A new science building juxtaposes classroom teaching and faculty
              research.  The university's efforts to integrate research and education were
              designed to create a new cultural paradigm on campus.  Taken together, Duke
              University's basic restructuring of the undergraduate curriculum, creation of a
              mechanism that prepares graduate students to excel in their future teaching,
              and a significant revision of the faculty appraisal system represent profound
              change.  The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
              documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
              years.  Plans for the use of the award funds include: creating and implementing
              two new science and technology course clusters; implementing a senior capstone
              experience; expanding the summer orientation program for graduate teaching
              assistants; conducting an on-campus dissemination workshop for sharing program
              results; and conducting a three-day national conference to disseminate the Duke
              University model.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
