Title       : Integrating Research & Education: Diversity Through Engagement in Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2001   
File        : a9620103

Award Number: 9620103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee C. Bollinger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Neidhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Michigan has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has recognized the importance of
              engaging students in research experiences early in their undergraduate careers.
               The university has begun to implement an institution-wide change process by
              focusing on female and minority students, two groups that are traditionally
              underrepresented in science and engineering.  Through collaborative research
              with faculty and graduate students and through the creation of
              living/learning/research communities, first and second year students are
              electing to become and remain science majors in increasing numbers.  The
              university's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
              specific outcomes in mind: increasing the diversity of participants in science
              and engineering through to graduation; building coherent and lasting
              communities of students engaged in group inquiry experiences; and increasing
              student confidence, performance, and career aspirations.  The university has
              achieved noteworthy success in attaining these goals.  The university is being
              awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its
              exemplary practices over the coming three years.  Plans for the use of the
              award funds include: expanding the linkages between the undergraduate research
              program and the Women in Science Residential Program to extend research
              experiences into the third and fourth undergraduate years; evaluating the newly
              expanded activities; creating and distributing a handbook for other
              institutions seeking to establish undergraduate research programs; workshops
              for teams from other institutions; developing Web sites; presentations at
              professional society meetings; and publication of articles in peer-reviewed
              journals.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
