Title       : Institutionalization of an Integrated Undergraduate Curriculum Featuring
               Active-Inquiry, Research-Based Instruction and Mentored Research Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a9620032

Award Number: 9620032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brady J. Deaton deatonb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward P. Sheridan  (Principal Investigator former)
              John D. David  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Missouri has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  The university has approached the integration of
              research and education in a comprehensive and systemic fashion by initiating
              changes that integrate research and education in many important areas of campus
              life.  New discovery-based introductory courses are being implemented to reach
              all undergraduates, including non-science majors.  Future K-12 teachers are
              being prepared to use discovery-based learning methods through -Pedagogy
              Intensive+ sections of science courses.  Residential communities for freshmen
              are being established in which interdisciplinary group research is promoted and
              reinforced.  Persistence of female and minority students is being increased
              through engagement in freshman research experiences.  A capstone experience is
              being established for all students.  New support mechanisms are being created
              to promote faculty participation.  The university's efforts to integrate
              research and education were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing
              the representation of research methods in all courses; increasing student and
              faculty participation in mentored research projects; increasing the
              representation of female and minority students among science and engineering
              graduates; increasing retention rates for all science and engineering students;
              improving critical thinking and learning skills among science and engineering
              students; and improving the understanding of and appreciation for science and
              engineering among all students.  The university has achieved noteworthy success
              in achieving these important goals.  The university is being awarded $500,000
              with the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary
              practices over the coming three years.  Plans for the use of the award funds
              include: continued curriculum development; creation of a research
              internship-bridge program with Missouri industry; a longitudinal study of
              program participants with an appropriate control group; publication of
              assessment results in peer refereed journals; local workshops; and a national
              conference with published proceedings.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
