Title       : Integrating Research & Education: Contemporary Research in the Education of
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9620042

Award Number: 9620042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520309             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Coffman provost@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean A. Zollman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1169      RECOG AWDS FOR INTEG OF R&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Kansas State University (KSU) has been selected as one of ten recipients of
              the National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of
              Research and Education.  KSU has distinguished itself through its efforts to
              integrate research experiences with faculty and discovery-based learning into
              the undergraduate education of future K-12 teachers and the post-graduate
              development of inservice K-12 teachers.  Innovative courses for current and
              future teachers have been developed through collaborations between faculty in
              science departments and the College of Education.  Science and education
              faculty also collaborated in providing a capstone research experience for
              elementary education students.  Through these collaborations, faculty and
              students in the College of Education are enriched by involvement in cutting
              edge research and members of the science faculty learn the results of the
              latest research on learning and teaching.  The products of these collaborations
              include innovative new courses in genetics and quantum physics as well as a
              heightened awareness of pedagogy among science faculty.  This will facilitate a
              wider conversion of science and engineering courses to the discovery-based
              approach.  The university's vision is to expand this approach to all students. 
              The university's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
              specific outcomes in mind:  increasing the science content knowledge of K-12
              teachers; increasing the confidence level of current and future K-12 teachers
              in their ability to learn and teach science; improving the performance of
              student teachers in their first classroom teaching experience; and publishing
              research papers documenting the initiatives and their results. The university
              has documented noteworthy success in achieving these goals.  The university is
              being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting, and
              disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three years.  Plans for
              the use of the award funds include:  establishing the KSU Program for
              Integrating Education and Research dedicated to expanding faculty participation
              in integration activities; documenting the process used to create new courses;
              creating and presenting workshops at professional society meetings and other
              universities to highlight this approach; creating multimedia versions of the
              workshop for distribution on CD-ROM and through the World Wide Web; and
              developing new research-based introductory science and engineering courses and
              courses for teachers in other science and engineering disciplines.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
