Title       : Value Use and Norm Changes Among Zambian Adolescents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9710240

Award Number: 9710240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Feldman dfeldman@med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This three-year research project involves a cultural anthropologist from the
              University of Miami creating a value utilization/norm change (VUNC) model among
              10th and 11th grade Zambian public secondary school students.  The model will
              be developed from ethnography, domain analysis including systematic
              interviewing, free listing, pile sorting, rank-order tests for core values and
              social norms, consensus analysis, a planned intervention, peer leader training,
              and assessment.  The study focuses on values and norms pertaining to health and
              sexuality among adolescents to shape sexual behavior change (i.e., maintaining
              abstinence or encouraging safer sex practices).  The VUNC model will be tested
              with focus groups and interviews to establish the strength of consensus on
              these moral and social values and beliefs, then an intervention will be
              designed to use the values and strengthen or change the norms for the desired
              sexual behavior change.  Peer leaders will be trained to apply the intervention
              on a sample of male and female students.  A sample of 154 students will be
              selected, half to be a control and half to be the intervention group.  The
              latter will attend workshops which focus on providing information and
              strengthening norms.  At the end of the study all informants will be
              interviewed and tested to evaluate the intervention.   This research is
              important because it will provide a test of a strategy to develop and use an
              intervention based on norms and values to change adolescent sexual behavior.
              This study will be valuable to decision makers and health planners to develop
              programs to limit the prevalence of STDs.  While this project is one case
              study, the issues will be generalizeable to other situations of concern about
              adolescent's risk of disease.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
