Title       : The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics of the Coupled Atmosphere- Ocean System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9710285

Award Number: 9710285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey K. Vallis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9710285  Vallis, Geoffrey K.  University of California, Santa Cruz
               The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics of the Coupled Atmosphere-Ocean System     The
              PI will investigate the geophysical fluid dynamics of the coupled
              atmosphere-ocean system with novel but dynamically appropriate models.  The
              effort will concentrate on mid-latitude dynamics, and primarily on phenomena
              with timescales of a decade and longer.  The goal of the project is to isolate
              and understand specific and robust mechanisms which produce variability and
              limit predictability on these timescales.     The approach the PI will take is
              different from, but complementary to, more conventional approaches using GCMs. 
              The PI uses rational approximations of the primitive equations of motion to
              derive models appropriate for the time and space scales of interest, for both
              atmosphere and ocean.  These are then coupled and integrated numerically.  By
              basing the models on rational approximations to the underlying dynamics, the
              models are reliable indicators of the underlying mechanisms occurring in the
              real atmosphere and ocean.  Last, but by no means least, the models will
              provide a tool for the interpretation of more complex GCM experiments.    
              Specific mechanisms to be explored and hypotheses to be tested are described in
              the text of the proposal, with the primary goal of understanding the basic
              dynamics and predictability of these processes, and thereby the extent to which
              long-term variability can be produced by either atmosphere or ocean alone, or
              by coupled interactions.     In spite of much study with coupled GCMs, the
              dynamics of coupled interactions leading to variability on long timescales are
              poorly understood, and the magnitude and thus importance of such variability is
              not known.  Further, climate variability on the decadal to century time scale
              is perhaps less well studied and understood than the mechanisms of variability
              on either interannual or millennium timescales, in spite of its manifest
              importance.
