Title       : Human Settlements and Changing Landscape in Northern China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9710244

Award Number: 9710244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48220              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Rapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Civilization arose independently in many areas of the world and archaeologists
              wish to understand the underlying processes responsible for this phenomenon. To
              achieve this goal they have worked to reconstruct each of the individual cases
              and then compare them to look for common patterns. In Northern China this
              development culminated in the emergence of the Shang dynasty. While Chinese
              archaeologists have studied the ceramics and other objects produced by the
              Shang and have focused on major sites such as Anyang, the last Shang capital,
              very little is understood of how this complex society developed and functioned.
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Rapp and his Chinese collaborators
              will initiate a long term collaborative project directed at this question. The
              research has two aspects. The first involves a regional survey of the Huan
              River valley in which Anyang is located. Preliminary work indicates the
              presence of numerous archaeological sites some of which date back to
              Paleolithic times. Through a study of the distribution of sites, their age and
              their location in the landscape it is possible to delineate settlement systems,
              to infer social and economic relationships and to determine how these changed
              over time. The team will conduct extensive survey as well as limited excavation
              and they will collect many sediment cores. Given the geologically active nature
              of river valleys and the cumulative effect of thousands of years of human
              impact, one can not assume that the landforms and pattern of vegetation one
              observes today were constant over time. Through the analysis of cores it is
              possible to gain insight into such changes. This work will be complemented by
              an extensive environmental reconstruction program. This will include coring,
              geomorphological analysis, and collection and examination of pollen and macro
              botanical remains. Magnetic susceptibility measurements will be used to
              reconstruct climatic changes.  This research is important for several reasons.
              It will increase our understanding of the processes which led to the rise of
              civilization. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and it
              will help to introduce into Chinese archaeology a set of techniques widely used
              in the United States but rarely employed in China.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
