Title       : Engineering Foundation Conference: Seperations Technologies VII
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9710299

Award Number: 9710299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Savage lbvolk@erenj.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Eckert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Alan Hatton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Harwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      Proposal No:                       9710299         Proposal Type: 
                         Request for Conference Support Principal Investigator:   David
              Savage  Affiliation:   Engineering Foundation    This grant is awarded through
              the Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the Interfacial,
              Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems
              Division. The grant is to the Engineering Foundation for partial sponsorship of
              the Engineering Foundation Conference on Separations Technology to be held in
              Davos, Switzerland, October 26-31, 1997. The conference will highlight the
              complex issues associated with integrating thinking about separation process
              performance and cost, and environmental considerations. Emphasis will be on the
              means for increasing separation selectivity and yield, leading to less waste
              and pollution. The conference is designed to bring together basic and applied
              researchers with developers of new industrial processes. Technical and poster
              sessions, designed to facilitate discussion and interaction, will prmote an
              understanding of the complex, interdisciplinary nature of separations
              technology and of the environmental challenges facing the separations
              community. Bringing together specialists from industry and academia will
              promote the interchange of ideas, and will encourage the participants to apply
              their unique skills to developing new and better separations processes that are
              environmentally sound.
