Title       : Gas-Phase Studies of Substituted Aromatic Radicals, Biradicals and Polyradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9710456

Award Number: 9710456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilkka I. Kenttamaa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor Hilkka I. Kenttamaa, of the Department of   Chemistry at
              Purdue University, carries out gas-phase studies of   substituted aromatic
              radicals, biradicals, and polyradicals.  By   generating aromatic radicals
              which incorporate a positively charged   group, Professor Kenttamaa is able to
              employ Fourier-transform ion   cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry to examine
              their intrinsic or   solvent-free reactivity under clean conditions, permitting
              the assessment   of reaction rate constants, product branching ratios, and
              thermochemical   parameters such as bond dissociation energies.  Substituent
              effects are   explored for phenyl, benzyl, and other aromatic mono- and
              polyradicals   carrying neutral substituents in addition to the remote charged
              groups,   and radical traps are employed to probe the importance of polar
              effects   in different types of radical reactions.  For biradicals, the  
              relationship between reactivity and predicted ground state multiplicity   is
              examined, and this information is used to search for spin-selective   gas-phase
              reactions.  Professor Hilkka I. Kenttamaa, of the Department of Chemistry at
              Purdue   University, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the  
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical  
              Sciences Directorate, studies the chemistry of molecules containing one   or
              more unpaired electrons (`radicals`).  By appropriate choice of   radicals,
              Professor Kenttamaa is able to employ gas-phase techniques to   study their
              formation and reactivity, permitting an assessment of their   intrinsic
              properties in the absence of the complicating influences of   solvents or other
              potentially reactive species.  Through these studies is   gained fundamental
              knowledge regarding the chemistry of   electron-deficient molecules, advancing
              the understanding of the roles of   substituent effects and polar effects in
              governing their reactivity and   offering potential advances in the areas of
              radical-based organic   synthesis and organic materials research.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
