Title       : Investigation of Laminated High Saturation Magnetic Films on Sloping Surfaces &
               High Data Rate Magnetic Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9710223

Award Number: 9710223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shan X. Wang sxwang@ee.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9710223  Shan Wang     It is anticipated that the date rate of hard disk
              drives will be ~ 100 MB/s in the beginning of the new millennium, corresponding
              to recording frequencies of 300-450 Mhz.  This will be a  daunting  engineering
              and scientific feat because it requires new recording head materials and
              pathbreaking device innovations.  In particular, magnetic write heads must
              operate effectively at 300-450mhz, and write field rise time needs to be ~ 0.4
              ns, close to the magnetization rotation speed limit.   Laminated high
              saturation magnetic films are very important to high density, high data rate
              magnetic recording heads, However, the field rise time of the most advanced
              recording head is ~ 2 ns, too large for use in a data rate of 100 MB/s. 
              Furthermore, the soft magnetic properties and permeability of the magnetic
              materials degrade significantly once the write heads are fabricated, presumably
              at the sloping areas of the device.  The low frequency leads to the necessity
              of using large write currents without helping the field rise time.     The
              objectives of the proposed research are to understand and avoid the degradation
              of soft magnetic properties of high saturation magnetic film when fabricating
              recording heads, and to investigate the fundamentals of high data rate
              recording as related to laminated FeRhN/AIN films, and extremely small field
              rise time and nonlinear transition shift. It is  proposed to investigate high
              saturation, high permeability, corrosion resistant, and magnetically soft
              laminated FeRhN/AIN films, particularly when sputter deposited on sloping
              surfaces, and to incorporate these new materials into a  prototype magnetic
              write head with a field rise time of <1 ns so that an unprecedented date rate
              of 100 MB/s can be realized.   The proposed research will provide new knowledge
              on how crystal texture and perpendicular anisotropy of FeRhN films evolve under
              oblique incidence and how desired texture and soft magnetic properties can be
              achieved by understanding processing-m icrostructure-property correlation. 
              Microstructural characterizations of magnetic films on sloping surfaces by
              synchrotron X-ray radiation diffraction and cross sectional TEM are very 
              powerful techniques which can find wide acceptance in magnetic solid state
              device research.  Magnetic recording heads with data rates as high as 100 MB/s
              will greatly advance the state of the art of modern computing and
              telecommunication.  The proposal has a mixture of scientific investigation and
              technological innovation, and will greatly help the related education program
              as well.
