Title       : Photodissociation and Reaction Dynamics of Molecular and Cluster Anions Using
               Femtosecond Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9710243

Award Number: 9710243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Neumark Dan@radon.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dan Neumark of the University of California at Berkeley is supported by   the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities to use his newly developed time-resolved   experimental technique,
              anion femtosecond photoelectron spectroscopy   (FPES) to investigate the
              photodissociation and reaction dynamics of   negative ions.  Specifically, he
              will use this method to probe the   potential energy surfaces governing
              photodissociation and bimolecular   reaction processes in isolated and
              clustered negative ions.  In anion   FPES, a femtosecond (fs) pump laser
              excites a negative ion to a   dissociative electronic state; the evolving
              system that results is   photodetached with a fs probe pulse and the
              photoelectron spectrum is   measured.  The photoelectron spectrum as a function
              of pump-probe delay   yields a picture of the dynamics initiated by the probe
              pulse.  Neumark   will first apply FPES to the isolated anion, then to the
              anion   chromophore in a size-selected cluster.  Systems to be investigated  
              include clusters of iodine dimer anions solvated with carbon dioxide or  
              water, bare or clustered iodine trimer anions, ozone anions and carbonate  
              anions, and time-resolved anion-molecule reactions.    Negative ions play
              important roles in atmospheric and solution phase   chemistry.  Results of this
              research will find immediate application in   chemical kinetics and
              spectroscopy, with subsequent application in   modeling a wide range of
              physico-chemical phenomena, such as atmospheric   pollution and transmission of
              optical and radio frequency waves in the   normal and perturbed atmosphere.  In
              addition, these studies should shed   new light on the nature of chemical
              reactions in solution, and the   methods may eventually be of utility in the
              study of protein dynamics.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
