Title       : The Work of Organization and the Organization of Work: Mapping the Evolving
               Structure of Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9710729

Award Number: 9710729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter W. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Koput  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project continues a line of research into the origins and development of
              the biotechnology industry.  The focus of that research has been on the varied
              and novel forms of collaborative arrangements that have linked universities,
              research institutes, venture capital firms, established chemical and
              pharmaceutical corporations and research hospitals with new science-based
              startup companies specializing in commercializing biotech discoveries.  In
              particular, our research tests the idea that, when knowledge and skills are
              widely distributed, the locus of innovation is found in a network of
              interorganizational relationships.  To stay current in a rapidly-developing
              scientific field requires that an organization have a hand in the research
              process.  Internal research capability is essential to evaluate the quality of
              research done elsewhere and to attract premier partners, while external
              collaboration provides access to news and resources that cannot be generated
              internally.  In our view, research breakthroughs occur through intensive
              interaction among participants from diverse scientific fields and institutional
              contexts.  To test these ideas, we have assembled a relational data base that
              allows us to examine patterns of collaboration in biotechnology.  Drawing on an
              industry reference source, Bioscan, annual reports, Security and Exchange
              Commission filings, and other reference sources, we have compiled a record of
              the formal, contractual agreements undertaken by dedicated biotech firms in the
              human therapeutics and diagnostics field.  The present study will use these
              data to examine high-speed learning and collaboration among such firms.  To do
              this we will continue our network analyses of relations among organizations, 
              and will add qualitative material based on face-to-face interviews as well as
              other quantitative analyses                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
