Title       : Effects of Category-Based Expectancy Violation on Evaluations and Motivated
               Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9710012

Award Number: 9710012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Ann Bettencourt psyannb@showme.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Currently, there is widespread debate about whether persons with equal
              qualifications have equal educational and job opportunities. This research is
              part of a larger program of studies designed to understand how information
              about a job candidate's credentials in combination with information about their
              race or gender affect perceptions of the job candidate's qualifications. If
              credentials are relatively equivalent, then the chances of obtaining
              opportunities should be the same for persons of different racial and gender
              backgrounds. According to this perspective, qualifications alone determine the
              likelihood of opportunities. However, some evidence suggests that decision
              makers may use race and gender information to guide their decisions regarding a
              job candidate's qualifications. From this view, it is important to consider how
              prior expectations about particular types of persons as well as particular
              types of opportunities (e.g., jobs) may affect judgments about qualifications.
              For example, prior expectations may include stereotypes about who is best
              suited for a particular type of job or who is best suited for entry into
              medical school. These prior expectations may in turn influence decisions about
              job candidates' qualifications. This research is designed to systematically
              examine how prior expectancies in combination with person information (e.g.,
              credentials, race, gender) influence decision makers' affective reactions
              toward, evaluations and judgments of, and reasoning processes about persons. By
              examining these variables, the current research will provide insight into the
              factors that affect decision makers' perceptions about who is best qualified
              for access to valuable opportunities.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
