Title       : Mass Political Conflict: Origins and Impact on Political Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9710958

Award Number: 9710958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192381             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Craig Jenkins jenkins.12@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the origins and consequences of mass political conflict. 
              The  project will achieve three goals: (1) develop multi-dimensional indicators
              of mass political conflict; (2) analyze the sources of mass conflict and
              associated changes in civil society during the Cold War and post-Cold War
              periods; and (3) examine the impact of mass conflict on democratization and
              political crises.  Most political conflict is non-violent and occurs in the
              context of institutionalized civil society.  It can be conceptualized in terms
              of three distinct dimensions, along which individual cases may vary: (1)
              contentiousness (or extra-institutionality); (2) coerciveness (intensity of
              negative sanctions); and (3) violent outcomes. This project will use behavioral
              measures to map recent global trends in these dimensions on an annualized basis
              between 1980 and 1998 and construct indicators that are backward compatible
              with the conflict and political change indicators in the World Handbook of
              Political and Social Indicators, thus creating a continuous time-series of 50
              years.      Mass conflict will be examined in terms of relative deprivation,
              resource mobilization and dependency theories, alongside newer theories about
              international political opportunities, ecological arguments about population
              pressure, ethnic competition processes, and state repression as contributing to
              conflict escalation.  In addressing civil society, the research examines market
              development and ecological evolutionary explanations alongside religious and
              structural constraints on democratization. Democratization is examined as a
              process of stable regime transition driven by non-violent protest as well as
              elite bargaining and social structural facilitation.  Analyses will rely on
              descriptive trend, lagged panel, pooled time-series and event history
              techniques.      The research will employ innovative automated event coding
              techniques to analyze text from the Reuters World Newswire.  The coding system
              is based on the Kansas Events Dat a System (KEDS) parser, and it uses the
              Protocol for Nonviolent Direct Action (PANDA) which defines the rules linking
              word phrases to coded events.     This research will contribute to the
              important current debates about the future of civil politics around the world. 
              It will provide an improved understanding of the factors that cause ethnic
              wars, genocides and state breakdowns that threaten the social fabric, or that
              manage potential conflicts peacefully.  The research employs innovative
              computer techniques for analyzing written text, and thus it is a testing ground
              for improving these new tools that are so crucial for the future information
              infrastructure.
