Title       : SBIR Phase II: Cloning and Automated Screening of Genes Encoding Cold-Adapted
               Lipases From Bacteria Inhibiting Lipid-Rich Whale Skeletons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9710655

Award Number: 9710655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Robertson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Stein  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Diversa Corporation
	      4955 Directors Place
	      San Diego, CA  92121    858/526-5000

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop
              recombinant esterases and lipases for use in detergent and other industrial
              applications.  To reduce the need for high temperature wash conditions and
              thereby conserve energy, the detergent industry has targeted high specific
              activity/low temperature lipases for use in detergent formulations.  During
              Phase I of this work recombinant `environmental` DNA libraries were constructed
              from uncultivated bacteria encrusting lipid-rich whale skeletons located in
              deep sea basins.  To subsist on the copious lipids exuding from the whale
              skeletons in this frigid (2-5 degree C) environment, members of these diverse
              bacterial communities manufacture cold-adapted enzymes.  Recombinant expression
              clones were discovered from the whale environmental libraries during the Phase
              I work using high throughput screening methods.  In Phase II the esterases and
              lipases expressed from these clones will be overexpressed and characterized
              kinetically to determine their suitability for use in detergent and other
              industrial applications.  In addition, the discovery and screening processes
              will be optimized to generate a large collection of esterase and lipase genes
              that will serve as templates for a directed evolution project to create enzymes
              with high activity at low temperatures yet that are stable at high
              temperatures.  This work will result in a collection of stable cold-active
              enzymes with the long shelf life required for enzymes in detergent
              formulations.  Potential Commercial Applications of the Research  Detergent
              formulations, anti-stalling and ripening agents for food and beverage
              applications, interesterification processes in chemical industry.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
