Title       : COLLABORATIVE PROJECT: Physical Mechanisms of Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9710010

Award Number: 9710010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Forgacs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Forgacs  97-10010      The behavior of tissues during development, wound
              healing, tumor invasion and other morphogenetic events depends, in part, on
              quantitative relationships among physical properties such as surface tension,
              viscosity and elasticity that such tissues share with all semi-solid materials.
              Drs. Forgacs and Newman propose to extend their characterization of the
              viscoelastic properties of model tissue systems based on assembling collagen
              matrices, using the oscillating disk and magnetic tweezers microrheometers.
              These techniques will permit the simultaneous analysis of viscosity and elastic
              modulus of assembling matrices. They will also permit them to analyze the
              dependence of these properties on the presence of cell-sized particles with
              defined surface characteristics, on living cells that interact with collagen,
              and on cells whose interaction with the collagen matrix is abrogated by the
              presence of anti-integrin antibodies. They also plan to establish conditions
              under which a parallel plate tissue compression apparatus, previously used to
              measure effective surface tensions of embryonic tissues, can be used to measure
              viscosities of these tissues. This apparatus will then be used to measure the
              surface tensions and viscosities of fore and hind limb bud tissues, which they
              have previously shown to exhibit distinctive physical behaviors and
              extracellular matrix organization, and of such tissues which have been
              genetically modified to have altered extracellular matrix organization.
              Viscoelastic characteristics of embryonic flank tissue will be compared with
              those of limb tissues to test the hypothesis that the emergence of the limb bud
              from the embryonic flank is due to development of tissue immiscibility.
              Viscosity of normal and retinoic acid-treated limb tissues will be analyzed to
              test the hypothesis that the effect of this substance on limb development is
              mediated, in part, by changes in viscosity. This work will provide new
              knowledge concerning physical mechanisms of morphogenes is and their
              relationship to the expression and organization of specific gene products.
