Title       : ESH - Post-Glacial Reef Accretion History and Drowned Shore- lines as
               Constraints on Abrupt Sea-Level Movements in the Northern Main Hawaiian Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9710005

Award Number: 9710005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238637             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Fletcher fletcher@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9710005  Fletcher    The submerged slopes of the northern main Hawaiian islands
              of Kauai and Oahu are marked with a flight of terraces that are fossil
              carbonate reef tracts dating from sea-level stands during the late Quaternary. 
              The seaward-facing front of each reef terrace is a near vertical wall that
              displays drowned shoreline features such as intertidal notches, beachrock, and
              growths of fossil coral (Fletcher and Sherman, 1995).  Of special note are the
              submerged intertidal notches that are found island-wide at predictable depths
              with well-preserved overhanging visors.  These, and related paleoshoreline
              features, indicate the occurrence of abrupt jumps in relative sea-level, which,
              in the absence of a local mechanism for coseismic displacement, are best
              explained as the product of glacial melt-water pulses.    The occurrence of
              these shorelines is reminiscent of melt-water pulses identified in cores of
              fossil coral from Barbados (Fairbanks, 1989) and elsewhere (Edwards et al.,
              1993; Bard et al., 1996; Montaggioni, submitted).  Other drowned shorelines
              have also been described, such as those found in south Florida (Locker et al.,
              1996) and New Zealand (Carter et al., 1986).  Four drowned shorelines are
              identified in Hawaii.  The deepest (approx. -110 to -120 m) probably correlates
              to the glacial lowstand of sea level which occurred around the same time as
              Heinrich Event H-2 (?).  Drowned shorelines at depth ranges of -90 to -95 m and
              -58 to -60 m are approximately in the same depth range as Barbados melt-water
              pulses IA and IB, resp., however there are discrepancies of several meters in
              cases.  We speculate that the shoreline at -58 to -60 m is cut into a reef
              dating from the last major interstadial (Stage 3).  The shallowest shoreline,
              -24 m, correlates to records of a prominent melt-water pulse in the North
              Atlantic (Keigwin and Jones, 1995) and a drowned shoreline on the Great Barrier
              Reef Shelf of Australia (Larcombe et al., 1995).  This shallowest shoreline is
              carved into fossil carbon ate of ca. 190 to 240 kyrs age (Stage 7). 
              Additionally, the three shallowest shorelines correlate in their depth ranges
              with the controversial catastrophic rise events (CRE's) postulated by Blanchon
              and Shaw (1995) in their analysis of the Barbados coral sequence.  Hence, there
              is a rationale for interpreting the Hawaiian submerged shoreline series as an
              archive of abrupt sea-level events during the post-glacial and early Holocene
              interval.  However, the possibility of a correlation (if any) to other global
              records is untested and requires a detailed examination of various types of
              cored, datable samples to determine the age of drowning.  Major uncertainty
              exists regarding the true nature of the relationship (if any) between these
              features and the stratigraphic record of sea-level movements from the
              tectonically active margins of Barbados and Papua New Guinea, the stable shelf
              of Tahiti, or the marine stratigraphy from the North Atlantic that identifies
              episodes of ice-rafted debris (Bond and Lotti, 1995).  Further, because the
              Hawaiian record offers the possibility of better constraining the exact
              position of paleointertidal positions through analysis of the drowned notches
              (both msl and mllw correlate to aspects of notch morphology), it will provide
              an improved constraint on the behavior of sea level during two specific times
              of the post-glacial and Holocene interval.    Hawaii is an important station in
              establishing whether the climatic record of the North Atlantic is of regional
              importance or carries a global signature, and if global, its influence on
              eustatic sea level.  The role of sea level in melt-water events of the last
              deglaciation has not been well-constrained with regard to magnitude,
              chronology, or impact on the coastal/shelf system.  MacAyeal (1993) calculates
              that a purge phase of Heinrich event oscillations of the Laurentide ice sheet
              is capable of producing a 3.5 m shift in the position of global sea level
              within 250 yrs.  However, Clark et al(1996) propose the Antarctic ice s heet as
              the source for melt-water IA.  Hence, the position of abrupt sea-level events
              in the chain of process and response is still very much ill-defined.  The model
              of Blanchon and Shaw (1995), although derived from an interpretation of
              geological records, still requires additional testing and extension to the
              Pacific Basin.  Important questions have been raised by the new records from
              Tahiti regarding the occurrence of meltwater events and climatic episodes (Bard
              et al., 1996).  Questions also remain regarding the relative timing of Heinrich
              Events, melt-water pulses, and sea-level movements (Clark et al., 1996) that
              require additional dating before cause and effect relationships, and sources,
              are fully understood.  An important missing component of deep-sea records of
              ice-rafting events and fresh-water discharge is the role of sea level...a
              component that cannot be constrained by those records.    Dating an erosional
              notch is not easy.  Research will focus on the two shallowest drowned
              shorelines, -24 m and -58 to -60 m.  We will use datable carbonate records to
              define sea-level chronology and position.  The age of cored coral reef
              sequences that are post-glacial and Holocene in age will constrain the
              back-stepping history of accretion.  Fossil intertidal faunal assemblages
              preserved on the face of drowned notches, and perhaps contemporaneous beachrock
              exposures, will all be hydraulically cored by divers to obtain samples for
              age-dating as proxies for past sea level.  Coral grew beneath the seas that cut
              the drowned shorelines, and later it grew above.  Exposures of that coral are
              prevalent at the base and upon the visors of the paleoshorelines.  Aragonitic
              samples (determined with XRD) from cores of these exposures, early Holocene and
              late Pleistocene in age, will be dated at the SOEST-TIMS facility (run by
              K.Ruben, UH faculty member) and at the University of Arizona accelerator
              radiocarbon facility (G.S. Burr has agreed to participate as geochronologist). 
              Samples from within the arc of the  paleo-notches will also be petrographically
              analyzed for cementation histories indicating vadose-zone diagenesis (L.
              Montaggioni has agreed to participate).  We will also sample for stable light
              isotopic content (B. Popp, UH faculty member runs the UH stable light isotope
              mass spec. facility and has agreed to participate).  Likewise, cores of coral
              successions landward of the drowned shoreline, marking the final position of
              sea level following its abrupt movement, will be chronologically,
              petrographically, and geochemically analyzed and described.    The goal for
              most cores will be to penetrate the entire Holocene and post-glacial sequence
              present at each drill site.  Hence, we will employ the concept of "basal dates"
              where the post-glacial/pre-glacial contact is marked by a subaerial surface
              characterized by diagenetic alteration.  Basal dates marking the first
              incidence of newly risen (and stabilized) sea level are an important and
              recognized sea level index point that has served the tidal marsh stratigraphy
              community of the passive margin coasts of the U.S. in their investigations of
              relative sea-level history in the middle and late Holocene.  In our case, we
              will determine the distribution of basal coral dates as they relate to
              sea-level movements responsible for the drowned notches.  As a consequence of
              our drilling the Holocene section, we will also obtain samples of the fossil
              reef tracts that form the stair-step bathymetry of Oahu.  Dates (TIMS-HAS) of
              pristine aragonite in these Hawaiian reefs will provide improved understanding
              of sea-level movements at the end of the last glacial and during the early
              phases of the present interglacial.    We have developed the capability of
              coring at these depths during the course of our project EAR-9317328 using
              oxygen-rich breathing gases for decompression and carefully controlled safety
              procedures employing redundant breathing
