Title       : SBIR PHASE II: KidCode: Software for Young Children's Exploration of Symbolic
               Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9710619

Award Number: 9710619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Baker michelle.baker@acm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intellinet Inc
	      325 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10025    212/663-7026

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9102,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Mathematics without the message devolves into mere manipulation of symbols.  It
              is important to help children develop an understanding of symbolic
              representation through experience with a wide variety of codes and coded
              representations, yet there is no software explicitly designed to encourage
              children in an exploration of symbolic representation.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project from Intellinet will implement prototype
              software, Kidcode, and develop teacher resource materials for a computer
              program that allows children in the age range 5-10 years to explore symbolic
              representations.  In the course of the Phase I research a sequence of
              two-person games to be set within the context of an electronic mail system was
              developed.  These games satisfy the following objectives with respect to
              children's interest and their ability to understand and play independently: 
              Each game is genuinely enjoyed by at least some cohort of the target age range,
              and all children evaluated exhibited delight in at least one game as expressed
              by their level of interest and/or requests for repeated play.  Moreover, there
              is evidence that, taken together, the games improve the children's facility
              with symbolic processing.  The Phase II plans include completion of the
              implementation of a software prototype for the four KidCode games designed in
              Phase I; development of teacher resource materials to supplement the software;
              development of animated demonstrations and an on-line help facility; and
              evaluation and refinement of the software, help facility, and teacher resource
              materials.   The KidCode games and e-mail software have commercial applications
              in the markets for both home and school educational software.  KidCode is
              designed make use of local area computer networks and the Internet.  At
              present, with the exception of Web pages on the Internet, little or no
              educational software exists that takes advantage of a networked computing
              environment.  Moreover, the games address a real need in elementary mathematics
              curricula and appeal to teachers of elementary-aged children and other adults
              as well.  Possibilities outside of the classroom include development of a board
              game style version of the KidCode games and, because the games are interactive,
              visually and aurally attractive, humorous, and colorful, the development of an
              intriguing television game show for kids.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
