Title       : ESH - Phytolith and Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Early Holocene Climate and
               Vegetation Change in the Great Plains Grassland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9710099

Award Number: 9710099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen G. Fredlund fredlund@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9710099  Fredlund    Documenting change in semi-arid grassland ecosystems
              through time requires better proxy data than can typically be provided by
              pollen, macrofossils, or other proxy data.  Combining quantitative analysis of
              grass phytolith and carbon isotopes is a practicable approach to documenting
              change within semi-arid grasslands.  The proposed project builds on the work
              begun under a small ($30k) "Proof of Concept Award" now being completed
              (NSF-DEB-9510065).  In response to reviews of that proposal, efforts were
              focused on a few specific fossil records.  Application of the approach to
              sequence of late-Pleistocene and Holocene paleosols and sediments at Wind Cave
              National Park, South Dakota, documents the rapid early-Holocene rise of the
              mixed grass prairie composition and subsequent climate-driven changes
              throughout the Holocene (Fredlund and Tieszen, 1997).  A second study, focusing
              on late-Quaternary records in south Central Nebraska and adjacent Kansas
              (Fredlund and Tieszen, n.d.).  This study demonstrates the utility of phytolith
              analysis in quantitatively reconstructing grassland vegetation and climate in
              the Great Plains of North America.  The modern data presented are the typical
              (average) assemblages for 34 modern localities taken throughout the Great
              Plains.  Modern assemblage variability across the region is substantial.  This
              variability shows a coherent geographical pattern consistent with modern
              climate data:  specifically July mean temperature.  Seven fossil assemblages
              from three late-Pleistocene localities in the central Great Plains are
              presented.  Two alternative phytolith-temperature regression models are applied
              to these fossil assemblages to estimate paleo-temperature.  Resulting estimates
              are consistent with other efforts to calculate late Pleistocene temperature
              departures in the region (ca.-7.0 to -8.0( C).  The fossil data also show rapid
              change in grassland composition and climate across the Pleistocene-Holocene
              transition consistent with regional hypotheses.   These results demonstrate the
              utility of phytolith analysis as complement to, or substitute for, pollen
              analysis in the Great plains of North America.    The proposed project has two
              goals: 1) To expand the modern analog data to a geographically broader and more
              robust set of localities that can be better used to quantitatively estimate
              grassland composition and climate, 2) the continued development of early
              Holocene fossil records from the western central Great Plains region with the
              end goal being a geographical synthesis showing grassland compositional and
              climate over the Pleistocene-Holocene transition.  Methodological developments
              achieved by this project will be readily transferable to other semi-arid
              grassland biomes.
