Title       : GOALI: SiGe/Si Modulation-Doped Field-Effect Transistors for Low Power, High
               Speed Circuit Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9710418

Award Number: 9710418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilesanmi Adesida adesida@capone.ccsm.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710418  Adesida  Over the last decade, significant advances have been made in
              the epitaxial growth of SiGe/ Si heterostructure material system using
              molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and ultra-high vacuum chemical vapor deposition
              (UHV-CVD). The significant improvements in SiGe/Si material properties have
              brought to fore a silicon-compatible technology that has the potential to
              compete favorably with III-V compound semiconductor devices in
              application-specific designs which require low power consumption and high speed
              which are needed for cellular telephones and other portable and wireless
              electronics.  The bandgap engineering made possible on silicon by this material
              system has provided the impetus to study devices such as heterojunction bipolar
              transistors (HBTs) and modulation-doped field effect transistors (MODFETs) that
              have heretofore been in the domain of InP and GaAs.  Indeed SiGe/Si HBTs have
              demonstrated excellent high frequency performance with unity current gain
              cut-off frequencies exceeding 100 GHz.  Although, theoretical predictions have
              shown that SiGe/Si MODFETs and related devices (e.g. MOSFETs) should have
              comparable or better performance than those obtained for HBTs, experimental
              work in this area is essentially inchoate.  SiGe-based FETs need intensive
              development in order to evaluate their practical usefulness for advanced
              microwave and digital circuits.    The PI's proposed research is therefore
              motivated by the continued improvement in the growth of SiGe/Si materials and
              the need to develop manufacturable processes to turn these materials into high
              performance conventional p-type and n-type MODFETs.  These devices will also
              make possible the realization of complementary MODFETs.  In the proposed
              research, The University of Illinois (UIUC) and IBM will collaborate to
              significantly advance the growth and fabrication technologies for SiGe/Si
              MODFETs needed for low power, high speed microwave and digital circuit
              applications.  The goals of the proposed research are 1) to provide n ew
              insights into the growth of SiGe/Si with very low density of dislocations; 2)
              to develop new methodologies for the formation of Schottky and ohmic contacts
              on SiGe/Si heterostructures; 3) to develop low damage dry etching methodologies
              for the selective etching of SiGe on Si and vice versa; 4) to study the physics
              and performance of short gate-length ( < 100 nm) p-type, n-type, and
              complementary MODFETs; and 5) to demonstrate simple microwave and digital
              circuits using SiGe/Si MODFETs.  ***
