Title       : Workshop: Workshop on Structured Adaptive Mesh Refinement Grid Methods at the
               University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, MN, March 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9710443

Award Number: 9710443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Norman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott B. Baden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis B. Gannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nikos P. Chrisochoides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Workshop on Structured Adaptive Mesh Refinement Grid Methods, being held March
              12-13, 1997 at the Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications at the
              University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.  Structured Adaptive Mesh Refinement
              (SAMR) methods are playing an increasing role in tackling difficult scientific
              applications, including compressible flows, cosmology, and electronic
              structures arising in local spin density calculations. Providing adequate
              software support for SAMR codes is challenging even on sequential
              implementations.  In  parallel implementations, program complexity increases
              qualitatively due to computation and communication requirements that are
              dynamic, data-dependent, and irregular.  The rapid evolution in target parallel
              systems only further complicates design decisions.  A workshop is proposed that
              will bring together experts in applications, numerical methods, and software
              development from academia, national labs, and industry.  The goal of the
              workshop is to identify common ground in the application and implementation of
              SAMR, as well as issues requiring specialization.  The specific objectives of
              the workshop are : (i) to improve the general understanding of the application
              of SAMR to practical problems, (ii) to identify issues critical to efficient
              and effective implementation on high performance computers, (iii) to stimulate
              the development of a community code repository for software including
              benchmarks to assist in the evaluation of software and compiler technologies.
              The proceedings of the workshop will be published by Springer-Verlag as part of
              the IMA (Institute for Mathematical and its Applications) Book Series.
