Title       : Consolidating Democracy?: A Panel Study of Changes in the Political Culture of
               Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9710137

Award Number: 9710137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370766             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the hallmarks of recent Russian politics is change.  From a relatively
              totalitarian regime, Russia has emerged as a nascent democracy.  Whether this
              democracy can be consolidated is one of the most important theoretical and
              practical questions facing contemporary social science.  Change in the former
              Soviet Union provides invaluable opportunities for testing theoretical
              propositions about democratization.  In this investigation, change provides the
              opportunity to study how ordinary people develop (or fail to develop)
              attachments to basic democratic institutions and processes.  Whether (and how)
              ordinary Russians become committed to democratic institutions is an issue of
              crucial importance for the consolidation of democracy in that country.  As a
              consequence of the importance of this issue and the research site, the
              Foundation supported a major survey of the Russian mass public in 1996.  The
              purpose of that survey was to assess and compare the degree of support for
              democratic institutions and processes (including political tolerance), to test
              micro-level complements to theories of the relationship between institutional
              and cultural change, to explore the influence of contextual factors on
              judgments about the implementation of rights and liberties in Russia, and to
              conduct several experiments within the survey, ranging from the methodological
              (e.g., acquiescence) to the highly substantive (e.g., persuasibility
              experiments).  The survey was highly successful, and analysis of it is
              currently under way.  Although this an other surveys are useful for assessing
              macro-level change in Russian political culture, they are quite limited in
              their ability to address change at the level of the individual citizen. 
              Consequently, the current investigation undertakes two additional waves of
              surveys of these respondents, thus creating a three-wave panel stretching over
              the period 1996-1998.  These panel data are designed to assess several pressing
              theoretical and empirical questions, including:  a) to what degree is the
              short-term change of the persuasibility experiments reproducible; to what
              degree does this change generate more enduring changes in attitudes; b) does
              cultural change flow from institutional change; do citizens learn new ways of
              thinking and acting from the performance of their political, social and
              economic institutions; are mass preferences endogenous; what is the relative
              influence of political and economic institutions; c) what are the
              psychodynamics of the logical inconsistency between supporting most democratic
              institutions and processes, but refusing to tolerate one's political enemies. 
              These and a number of other important questions will be assessed.  In assessing
              individual-level change, a variety of micro-level theories (social learning,
              social networks, and civil society)  are being tested.  In addition, the
              research focuses heavily on the interconnection between political tolerance and
              other components of the democratic belief system.  Earlier research has shown
              that tolerance is little related to other democratic values, a finding peculiar
              to Russia.  The current project investigates that non-relationship with
              considerable diligence, determining whether the crystallization of democratic
              belief  systems results in the recognition of political tolerance as a crucial
              democratic value.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
