Title       : Dissertation Research: A Study of Zhoukoudian Locality 15
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9710275

Award Number: 9710275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8400               (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Olsen olsenj@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Olsen, Mr. Xing Gao will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. He will analyze archaeological material collected from
              the very important site of Zhoukoudian Locality 15 (ZL15), and clean the
              original profile of the excavation to describe the stratigraphy and collect
              materials for geological and chronological analysis. `Zhoukoudian` includes a
              series of sites which together likely span a major part of the last Ice Age and
              therefore probably represent an interval of over half a million years. The
              majority of the archaeological work at these sites predates World War II and is
              best known for the fossil Homo erectus crania which were recovered in
              association with faunal remains and stone tools. This East Asian hominid
              material has recently been a subject lively interest because it is uncertain
              whether the lineage they represent terminated prehistorically or whether a link
              exists with current Asian peoples. In this context ZL15 is particularly
              important because preliminary analysis indicates that in its lowest level it
              overlaps with the Homo erectus material in time and that the uppermost level
              may be fairly recent in date. It thus may provide a needed bridge. However the
              abundant cultural and faunal materials from the site have not been studied and
              the geology and chronology has not been addressed using modern techniques.  Mr.
              Gao will conduct both field and laboratory research. In the field he will
              survey Zhoukoudian Hill and the immediately surrounding area. He will clear the
              ZL15 section and collect sediment, faunal  and floral (including pollen)
              samples which will be subject to detailed analysis including absolute dating,
              palynological analysis and pedological and sedimentological study. Uranium
              series dating on fossil bone and speleothems, fission-track dating on ash and
              burned materials and amino acid racemization and electron spin resonance dating
              of fossil teeth will help to determine the ages of the individual levels. 
              Approximately 10,000 pieces of worked stone were recovered from the site and
              Mr. Gao will conduct typological and technological analyses of these. He will
              also, with the help of colleagues, study the faunal remains both to identify
              species represented and to reconstruct subsistence practices.   This research
              is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the basis for the
              physical variation observed among human populations today. It will increase our
              understanding of the prehistory of a little known region of the world and
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also assist in the
              training of a promising scientist.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
