Title       : Models, Data, Technology, and Politics: Climate Science in Historical Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9710616

Award Number: 9710616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal would support final research and writing of a book on three key
              aspects of climate science as it has evolved since World War II: climate models
              (especially global general circulation models), networks for gathering global
              meteorological data, and new technologies for modeling, data collection, and
              data treatment (primarily computers and satellites). Developments in these
              areas-the most essential underpinnings of modern climate science-were tightly
              intertwined and interdependent. The book will illuminate the significance of
              these interdependencies by framing them within a broader political history.
              Early weather and climate models were developed in a Cold War context,
              including weather and climate control as possible weapons of war. Later in the
              Cold War, with the International Geophysical Year and successor international
              projects, international collaboration for data collection served as part of a
              trust-building agenda. With the rise of the environmental movement, global
              climate change began to achieve recognition as a policy issue. Anthropogenic
              global warming became an important public policy issue beginning in 1988. Since
              then, global climate change has been among the most hotly debated science-based
              policy issues in the international arena. Involving library and archival
              research and oral history interviews, this project will result in numerous
              articles and presentations, as well as one of the first book-length histories
              of climate science. The book will explain how such models work, where climate
              data come from and how they are processed, and how technological development
              has influenced the nature of knowledge about climate change. It will also treat
              the important topic of science/policy interaction. Finally, the book will
              contribute to our understanding of a crucial, but insufficiently studied form
              of globalization: the dissemination of scientific knowledge, techniques, and
              instrumentation. Global data networks require high levels of standardization,
              creating new commonalities in practice and understanding worldwide. With the
              emergence of climate politics, they are among the forces creating concepts of
              global systems, global problems, and global common interests.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
