Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Improved Accuracy for Student/Scientist Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9710948

Award Number: 9710948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296153             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Butz james.butz@adatech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Carter  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : ADA Technologies, Inc
	      304 Inverness Way South, Ste 365
	      Englewood, CO  80112    303/792-5615

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9710948  Carter  This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project
              from ADA Technologies, Inc. addresses a fundamental difficulty encountered by a
              number of groups that desire to have networked students collect scientifically
              valid data for use by scientists.  The challenge is to have students collect
              accurate data which has been scientifically validated without sacrificing the
              educational aspects of the program.  An example network might measure the pH,
              dissolved oxygen, and temperature in a river from its head waters to its outlet
              as an indication of the river's environmental condition.  ADA Technologies
              proposes to address this issue of data accuracy and validation by using a
              unique set of hardware developed by ADA along with unique software algorithms
              to be developed under this Phase II project.  The hardware includes a low-cost,
              hand-held, four channel data logger with a set of self-identifying sensor
              modules.  The unique calibration and data tagging aspects of this system
              provide an opportunity for data tracking that does not exist for any other
              product.  All this information will be processed using innovative software
              algorithms which will perform a number of internal consistency tests to
              validate the data.  These checks will be part of an education organizational
              model that will help students learn critical thinking skills and can be
              replicated in all the network programs.  This model will link students with
              scientists and promote direct interaction focused around a specific scientific
              goal.  The aim of this program is to develop an organizational model combined
              with unique hardware and software that can aid networks in gathering
              scientifically valid data while insuring an educationally significant
              experience for the students.   This project will lead to commercial data
              acquisition and analysis tools for use in science classrooms.  The capability
              of involving students in an authentic scientific research effort prepares
              students for a future in a scientifically and technologic ally-oriented society
              as well as teaches them much of what they must learn in a science course.  ***
