Title       : Economic Evaluations, Issue Activation and Party Support: The European Union and
               the British Party System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9710148

Award Number: 9710148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Clarke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne C. Stewart  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul F. Whiteley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In late 20th century democracies, a party's standing with the electorate can
              change very rapidly.  Great Britain provides an excellent example - - the
              massive reversals of fortune experienced by the Conservative and Labour parties
              since the April, 1992 general election demonstrate how party support can vary
              greatly over short time periods.  Although political scientists long have been
              interested in such dynamics, efforts to develop theoretical models capable of
              explaining them have provoked heated controversies, and important disputes
              remain unresolved.  The proposed study is designed to address several of the
              most significant debates, and thereby illuminate forces shaping the prospects
              of individual parties and party systems as a whole in Britain and other
              contemporary mature democracies.  Building on prior research, the current
              investigation is especially timely because it investigates factors affecting
              party support in Britain at a critical juncture in that country's relationship
              with the European Union.  Analyses show that the set of  issues activated by
              the development of that relationship, as envisaged under the terms of the
              Maastricht Treaty, has exerted strong effects on public support for British
              parties and their leaders in the early and mid-1990s.  Injected into the
              political arena by provisions of that treaty, EU issues such as the single
              European currency will continue to exercise significant effects during the
              fire-year period (1997-2002) encompassed by the proposed project.  The project
              constitutes an extremely cost-effective means of gathering the time series data
              essential for investigating the evolution and impact of public attitudes toward
              the issues posed by the EU in the context of developing and testing rival
              models of the dynamics of public support for political parties and their
              leaders.  The data are generated by questions placed on 48 consecutive monthly
              national surveys conducted by the British Gallup organization.  Questions 
              asked include the standard British Election study battery on party
              identification, evaluations and (dis)approval of Britain's membership in the
              European Union, and evaluations of and  emotional reactions to national and
              personal economic conditions.  These questions are supplemented by standard
              Gallup questions concerning vote intentions, past vote, prime ministerial and
              opposition party leader approval, the relative competence of major parties to
              manage the country's economy, and a variety of important sociodemographic
              characteristics  This dataset will be of  immense value to other scholars
              interested in the topic.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
