Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in the History of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9710361

Award Number: 9710361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan I. Marcus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project looks at the relationship between technology and its social and
              cultural context by examining the ways in which changing ideas and attitudes
              about camp vehicles and leisure camping shaped recreational vehicle technology.
              Little is known about the ways in which American society framed its
              technologies to respond to the cultural craze with recreational camping. 
              Preliminary research indicates that the earliest forms of recreational vehicle
              technologies in the United States evolved as an expression of the social needs
              and cultural desires of upper class individuals..  But this changed as middle
              class consumers used a variety of recreational vehicles to fulfill their
              autocamping needs.  Using the history and evolution of  recreational vehicles
              as a case example, the project tests as well as illustrates a dynamic model of
              the relationship between technological change and social values which argues
              that technological change occurs in response to specific sets of social and
              cultural values, rather than serving as a catalyst of  social changes in the
              face of which people have little or no control.  The question shifts from
              wondering when a moment in technological  evolution occurred, to asking, first,
              what social values and ideas prompted the selection of a technology, and
              second, what new values and ideas may have then prompted the shift from one
              technology to another.  In the specific case of American camp vehicle
              technology, the changing ideas that may have prompted the replacement of
              auto-tents, camp-trailers and auto-conversions of earlier use with those
              technologies primarily in use after 1930, are ones subsumed under the phrase
              `recreational vehicles.`  Indeed, the ideas about what constituted a
              recreational vehicle changed dramatically after 1930, bringing with them an
              equally dramatic rearrangement first in the relationship between individual
              uses and the larger social and cultural context in which they were used, and,
              second, in the everyday recreational vehicle technologies.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
