Title       : Doing Business Under Conditions of Persistent Instablilty: The Use of Law by
               Russian Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9710272

Award Number: 9710272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Hendley hendley@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1093,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Hendley  9710272    Soviet-era methods for doing business in Russia
              which relied on formal enforcement of contractual obligations by industrial
              ministries and communist party officials have been destroyed.  The legal
              infrastructure that is ostensibly necessary for a market economy has been put
              into place.  Whether these new laws and legal institutions that draw more from
              Western than Russian experience are actually being used remains open to
              question.  This research will answer two basic empirical questions.  First, how
              do Russian industrial enterprises do business under these conditions?  Second,
              under what circumstances do they us law to protect and/or advance their
              interests?  This research will explore these questions using six detailed case
              studies of Russian industrial enterprises.  Three hundred enterprises are being
              surveyed and will form the sampling frame and the broadbased background for the
              case studies to be chosen.  Factors to be taken into account in choosing cases
              include the product mix, corporate structure, size, and propensity to litigate.
               Observations and semi-structured interviews with managers will be used to
              collect the in-depth case data.  Results will fill a void in the extant
              literature by providing answers to questions about the implementation of law
              where the newly relaxed atmosphere in Russia makes this research possible, and
              the transition makes it timely.      %%%  Soviet-era methods for doing business
              in Russia which relied on formal enforcement of contractual obligations by
              industrial ministries and communist party officials have been destroyed.  The
              legal infrastructure that is ostensibly necessary for a market economy has been
              put into place.  Whether these new laws and legal institutions that draw more
              from Western than Russian experience are actually being used remains open to
              question.  This research will answer two basic empirical questions.  First, how
              do Russian industrial enterprises do business under these conditions?  Second,
              under what ci rcumstances do they us law to protect and/or advance their
              interests?  This research will explore these questions using six detailed case
              studies of Russian industrial enterprises.  Three hundred enterprises are being
              surveyed and will form the sampling frame and the broadbased background for the
              case studies to be chosen.  Factors to be taken into account in choosing cases
              include the product mix, corporate structure, size, and propensity to litigate.
               Observations and semi-structured interviews with managers will be used to
              collect the in-depth case data.  Results will fill a void in the extant
              literature by providing answers to questions about the implementation of law
              where the newly relaxed atmosphere in Russia makes this research possible, and
              the transition makes it timely.      ***
