Title       : The Origins of Udi Syntax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9710085

Award Number: 9710085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Harris alice.c.harris@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Origins of Udi Syntax  Udi is an endangered language which belongs to the
              North East  Caucasian language family.  It has been selected as an object of
              study  because (a) the structures of the languages of this family are 
              different in many ways from those of more familiar languages and  therefore can
              contribute significantly to our understanding of  language universals, (b) Udi
              has a complex morphology, which supplies  ready evidence of syntactic
              relations, and (c) Udi has undergone  significant syntactic and morphological
              change.  The project centers  on the development of a construction for marking
              the focus of  attention and on the development of moveable agreement (which
              occurs  on a host of any one of many types, including verbs, nouns, pronouns, 
              and adverbs).  The project involves study of both syntax and the  morphology
              that is most relevant to that syntax, including agreement  and case marking. 
              The objectives of the project include the  description and explanation of (a)
              agreement and complex verb  formation as they function in Udi today, (b) the
              origins of moveable  agreement in Udi, (c) origins of complex verbs in Udi and
              North East  Caucasian languages generally, (d) development of the focus 
              construction in Udi and other North East Caucasian languages, (e)  origins of
              changes in case marking patterns.  The significance of the  project is not
              limited to the explanation of phenomena particular to  Udi and other languages
              of the North East Caucasian family; rather,  these changes will be related to
              the universals of syntactic change.   It is expected that the project will
              provide (a) an explanation of how  word-internal agreement originates, (b) an
              increased understanding of  how case system undergo change, (c) testing of
              claims made in the  recent literature on syntactic change regarding the
              simplification  complex constructions and regarding changes in case marking and
               agreement patterns, (d) testing of claims regarding the use in syntax  of
              historical methods originally design ed for use in reconstructing  phonology.
