Title       : Northwestern Tungus Language/Dialect Continuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9710091

Award Number: 9710091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenore A. Grenoble lenore.grenoble@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fengxiang Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lindsay J. Whaley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to gather, organize and analyze  data from the
              Northwestern Tungusic languages:  Oroqen,  Evenki, Negidal, and Solon.  The
              languages, which are spoken  in northern China and Siberian Russia, are not
              well-  documented and all are seriously endangered.  Therefore, a  primary goal
              of the project is to collect information about  the structure of the languages
              while they are still spoken.   This information will be derived through
              recordings of the  languages and elicitation sessions with native speakers.  
              The geographic distribution of the Northwestern Tungusic  languages has
              hampered comparative work on them in the past.   Russian linguists and Chinese
              linguists who have engaged in  fieldwork on these languages have had little
              scholarly  dialogue.  An important aspect of our research involves  bringing
              together the work of our Russian and Chinese  colleagues.  The actual genetic
              relationships among these  four languages and their relationships to other
              Tungusic  languages are unclear.             On the basis of the data we
              collect, we can provide a  more accurate assessment of the genetic affiliations
              within  the language family.  We will also conduct tests of mutual 
              intelligibility using recordings of narrative texts. The  Northwestern Tungusic
              languages are being replaced by  Russian, Chinese, and Yakut, all of which are
              genetically  and typologically distinct. We aim at determining the kinds  of
              structural changes the Tungusic languages are undergoing  as they become
              obsolescent, with specific attention to the  role of the three contact
              languages.
