Title       : Reorientational Dynamics and Intermolecular Cooperativity in Crosslinking
               Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9710480

Award Number: 9710480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jovan Mijovic jmijovic@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9710480  Mijovic  This grant concerns a fundamental investigation of the 
              dynamics of dipole motions in crosslinking polymers.  Dynamics of glass-forming
              materials are currently a subject  of considerable activity in the scientific
              community, but no  comprehensive study has been reported hitherto on the 
              dynamic of systems that undergo a temporal evolution of  structure as a result
              of chemical reactions.  The  advancement of chemical reactions alters the very
              nature of  the material and adds a new dimension to the study of  dynamics of
              molecular motions.  Changes in the chemical  composition, physical
              characteristics and morphology are  accompanied by a continuous variation in
              the time scale for  segmental motions or relaxations.  When a signal (electric 
              field in this study) is applied to a polymer, a number of  molecular segmental
              must respond in unison.  That requires  cooperation on the molecular level, and
              hence the  fundamental argument should begin with the proposition that  the
              relaxation processes are governed by intermolecular  cooperativity.  The
              principal objectives of the research are  to investigate the changes in dipole
              dynamics during  crosslinking and utilize the results to: 1) describe the 
              molecular origin of various relaxation process at all stages  during network
              formation; 2) formulate a methodology for  relating the chemical and physical
              state of the network to  dipole dynamics; and 3) provide an interpretation of
              network  dynamics in terms of intermolecular cooperativity.  %%%  The proposed
              methodology is of an interdisciplinary nature  and will permit a fundamental
              understanding of  reorientational dynamics and intermolecular cooperativity in 
              crosslinking polymers.  It is expected that the research,  when completed, will
              afford a molecular-level insight into  the reorientational dynamics of polymers
              that undergo a  temporal evolution of structure as a result of chemical 
              reactions.  ***
