Title       : Three-Dimensional Slab Effects in Partially-Restrained Composite Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9710238

Award Number: 9710238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto T. Leon rleon@mail.ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                    9710238  Leon  This project intends to develop experimental data and
              analytical  tools to better characterize the three-dimensional effects and 
              steel-concrete interaction in typical composite floor systems.   Such as steel
              moment frames with composite floors for which very  little is known about the
              ultimate strength capacity, ductility  and toughness of these systems.  From a
              fundamental standpoint  research is needed to answer the following questions:  
               o  Behavior of exterior connections under cyclic load reversals.  o  Behavior
              of connections framing into the weak axis of columns     when subjected to
              cyclic loads.  o  Interaction between lateral and gravity actions insofar as   
                    system strength and stiffness are concerned.  o  Effect of the floor slab
              on the torsional restraint at the end     of composite beams.  o  Influence of
              the degree of shear connection on the strength         and stiffness of the
              system under lateral loads.  o  Influence of the slab reinforcement detailing
              on the force          transfer.  o  Behavior of shear studs under reversed
              cyclic loading.    Experiments coupled with advanced analysis techniques will
              be  used to address several of the topics described above.  The  experiments
              will include some unique bi-directional loading tests  on a new type of
              partially-restrained composite (PR-CC)  connections utilizing T-stubs and
              stiffened seats.  Among the key  items to be studies are the connections to the
              weak axis of the  columns, connections at the edge of the floor slabs, and
              behavior  of shear studs under reversed cyclic loads.  The analytical 
              component will develop new elements capable of efficiently  modeling composite
              action under cyclic load reversals.   Experimental data and simplified models
              based on the component  method will be developed for T-stubs.  These connection
              models,  along with the elements developed to take into account composite 
              action, will be used in parametric studies to define code-type  design rules
              for structures with a wid e variety of PR-CC  connections.  ***
