Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Unique, High Accuracy Means of Locating Cellular Telephones
               Using the Existing Cellular Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9710667

Award Number: 9710667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen A. Parl sig@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Signatron Tech Corp
	      29 Domino Drive
	      Concord, MA  017422845    508/371-0550

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project from Signatron is
              focused on a novel radiolocation technology lowering the costs to the public of
              determining the location of cellular telephones which place emergency calls. 
              The new technology involves a proprietary technique for collection of the
              calling phone signal parameters at two or more base stations which are then
              transmitted to a central computer for position computation.  In Phase I,
              mathematical analysis and computer simulations were used to prove the technical
              feasibility of the technique.  Not only was the technique shown to be feasible,
              but it was shown to be much more accurate and an order of magnitude less costly
              than the existing state of the art.  In Phase II, a prototype system,
              comprising base stations linked to a central position location computer, will
              be integrated into a commercial cellular telephone system to further refine and
              evaluate the technology in field operation.   Besides the important application
              to emergency cellular phone location (E911), this new technology will have a
              number of applications in other location based services for which current
              geolocation technologies are either ineffective or too expensive.  Such
              services include location based billing for wireless telephones, locating
              fraudulent phone callers, vehicle fleet management, tracking of parolees, child
              location, location of wandering Alzheimer's disease patients, location of
              stolen vehicles, location of stolen equipment such as lap-top computers, and
              location of lost pets.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
