Title       : Emerging Party Systems in Post-Soviet Societies: A Study of Party Activists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9710325

Award Number: 9710325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Klobucar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Recent political science literature reflects a growing controversy regarding
              the formation of political parties and party systems in post-Soviet societies. 
              The eventual outcome of the controversy holds implications for our basic
              understanding of how party systems form and the role parties play in developing
              democracies.  The substantive debate is focused on the questions of whether or
              not the political parties that have emerged in the newly independent states of
              the former Soviet Union exhibit the types of political characteristics that
              allow us to conclude that they constitute a competitive multi-party system. 
              Two distinct camps have emerged on either side of this query.  One set of
              scholars, drawing upon traditional theories of party formation, argue that the
              formation  of institutionalized party systems in post-Communist states will be
              a long and arduous process because these societies lack previous multi-party
              socialization.  They see the current post-Soviet parties as ephemeral, lacking
              a firm foundation in policy preferences, thus reflecting nothing more
              substantial than a fan club for the party's leader.  On the opposite side of
              the argument, recent research reveals a rapid rise in the proportion of
              post-Soviet citizens who identify with a political party and who vote for the
              party with which they identify.  To date the empirical evidence presented in
              this debate, on both sides, has been limited and inconclusive.  This
              investigation provides the first comparative data on  Russia, Ukraine and
              Lithuania that incorporates directly comparable evidence on the level of
              institutionalization currently attained by party organizations, parties in the
              electorate and the parties in government.  Prior research of the investigator
              provides the data on parties in the electorate and in government.  This study
              carries out a systematic study of parties as organizations.  Information on
              party structures and the attitudes of party activists is obtained through
              face-to-face survey interviews with 400 party activists and leaders in each of
              Russia and Ukraine, and 200 party activists in Lithuania.  The resulting
              dataset provides the first comprehensive examination of party organizations in
              these three post-Soviet societies.  The data provide a benchmark for future
              studies of party development in these new democracies.  The dataset will be of
              great use to scholars interested in political party emergence in new
              democracies of  the former Soviet Union.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
