Title       : Hosts for Anion Binding and Fullerene Complexation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9710197

Award Number: 9710197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Atwood atwoodj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Jerry L.   Atwood,
              of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri -   Columbia,
              carries out the synthesis of host compounds designed to bind   anions and to
              complex fullerenes.  Studies of calix(4)arenes,   calix(5)arenes, and
              cyclotriveratrylenes which have been metallated on   the outer pi faces
              contribute to a fundamental understanding of the   factors influencing the
              binding of anions.  Development of metallated   deep cavity analogs, which are
              constructed by versatile self-assembly   processes, affords enhanced anion
              binding agents.  Synthesis of   calixarene and cyclotriveratrylene hosts
              designed to match the size,   shape, and electrostatic requirements of specific
              fullerenes offer the   opportunity to devise fullerene-selective complexing
              agents.  Recent years have seen rapid growth in studies of the ways in which  
              neutral molecules and positively-charged ions may be specifically   recognized
              and bound by molecules designed for this purpose.  Such   studies have had a
              wide range of implications, including advances in   understanding of critical
              molecule-molecule and molecule-ion interactions   in biological systems as well
              as development of practical methods for the   separation and purification of
              materials.  Corresponding developments for   the binding of negatively-charged
              ions, in contrast, have been   comparatively slow to appear.  Professor Jerry
              L. Atwood, of the   Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri -
              Columbia, with   the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, synthesizes
              organic   molecules designed to recognize and bind anions through a combination
              of   specific chemical interactions.  Related systems offer the opportunity to 
               effect analogous recognition of various fullerenes (`Buckyballs`),   providing
              further insights into the nature of molecule-molecule   interaction as well as
              techniques for the separation and purification of   various members of the
              fullerene family.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
