Title       : Low Frequency Characterization of Coherency Functions for Spatially Varying
               Earthquake Ground Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9710953

Award Number: 9710953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Harichandran harichan@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: CMS-9710953, Ronald Harichandran, Michigan State  U.    Observations
              from closely-spaced seismograph arrays since  the late 1970's have shown that
              earthquake ground  accelerograms measured at different locations within the 
              dimensions of typical large engineered structures are  significantly different.
              This has resulted in considerable  attention being given to the modeling of
              spatially varying  earthquake ground motions, and on determining its effect on 
              the seismic response of large structures such as bridges,  pipelines, and dams.
              Studies on various structural systems  have shown that including the effect of
              spatially varying  earthquake ground motions often increases critical 
              responses, and hence large structures designed without  consideration for this
              phenomenon may be unsafe.    A key component in the characterization of
              spatially varying  earthquake ground motions is the coherency function, which 
              describes the incoherence between accelerations recorded at  different spatial
              locations. Different functional forms have  been proposed by different
              investigators for coherency  functions, but studies on how these different
              forms affect  the computed responses have been few. Also, since the low- 
              frequency variation of coherency is significantly different  among some of the
              commonly used models, it is critical to  resolve contradictions and provide
              guidance to engineers.    The objective of this research program is to use the
              high-  resolution maximum entropy spectral estimation method and  long-duration
              accelerogram records to resolve these  contradictions, using records from the
              Valley of Mexico, the  SMART-1 array in Taiwan, the Chiba array in Japan, and
              the  Northridge earthquake in the U. S.    This project is a cooperative
              research program with the  Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM),
              involving a  joint collaboration between a U. S. engineer, a Mexican  engineer,
              and a Mexican seismologist.
