Title       : Collaborative Research: Implicit Social Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9710172

Award Number: 9710172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. Greenwald agg@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In ongoing research concerning implicit social cognition we have developed the
              view that important components of the cognitive processes that underlie social
              actions are (a) ordinarily hidden from the actor's awareness or ability to
              control and, as a consequence, (b) beyond the possibility of effective
              investigation using methods that are limited to self-report measures.  Our
              research has successfully employed several indirect measures to reveal the
              operation of implicit stereotypes.  The first goal of this project is to extend
              these investigations of implicit social cognition to the domains of the
              social-cognitive constructs of implicit attitudes and implicit self-esteem.  
              Existing measures of unconscious social cognition (most prominently semantic
              priming measures) have some notable limitations.  Although these measures have
              been used effectively at laboratories in which they were developed, they (a)
              have not readily been exported to other laboratories and (b) have not yielded
              large enough effect sizes to succeed as individual difference measures.  Our
              previous NSF-funded research has yielded a new procedure (the Implicit
              Association Test, IAT) that has been shown to provide a reliable, efficient,
              and sensitive measure of individual differences in implicit social cognition.
              The second goal of the current project is to document the basic properties of
              the IAT method and to develop its use as a core technique for investigating
              implicit social cognition.   The research will yield three types of desirable
              products:  (a) new measures that should be broadly useful in psychological
              investigations of social behavior, (b) new theoretical insights into the
              involvement of unconscious cognition in social behavior, and (c)applications in
              important settings, such as workplace and school, in which unrecognized (i.e.,
              implicit) stereotypes and prejudices interfere with desirable or productive
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
