Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Illustrated, Interactive, American Sign Language/Science
               Videodisk Dictionary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9710980

Award Number: 9710980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel A. McLagan techint@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tech Int'l Inc of VA
	      429 W Airline Highway, Suite S
	      La Place, LA  700683817    504/652-1127

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
Program Ref : 9102,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Technology
              International Incorporated of Virginia (located in LaPlace, LA) focuses on
              research leading to a complete set of specifications of features and
              applications of a computer-based, illustrated, interactive American Sign
              Language/Science (ASL) Dictionary for deaf and hearing impaired children. 
              Since deaf and hearing impaired children have a greater challenge in gaining
              fluency in English, traditional dictionaries are often of limited value as a
              means to acquiring knowledge.  The goal of this research project is to provide
              a means of expressing, teaching, and learning technical terms and science
              concepts in ASL as well as in English, using a format that makes academic
              content more accessible to children who are deaf and which promotes self-study.
               The outcome of the Phase II research will be identification of the content,
              user-interface, and mode of presentation of the dictionary as well as
              incorporation of ASL features in a way that is unavailable in the extant
              educational material designed for deaf children.  The combination of ASL,
              written English, animation and graphics will enhance the learning of the
              English terms and the underlying science concepts.  The software architecture
              of the dictionary will allow for implementation on IBM-compatible and Macintosh
              platforms, as well as allowing accessibility over the World Wide Web.   As a
              resource, the Multimedia ASL Science Dictionary has various applications in the
              special education arena, inasmuch as it would reinforce both the learning of
              sign language as well as science concepts among children who are deaf.  The
              concept can be applied to a diverse body of education materials for a wide
              range of population, such as illustrated dictionaries for adults, games,
              entertainment, and training products.  In particular, the utility of the
              concept of such a dictionary extends to materials for English-as-a-Second
              Language (ESL) learners.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
