Title       : The Body as Property: Disputes Over the Control of Human Tissue in a
               Biotechnology Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9710345

Award Number: 9710345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori B. Andrews landrews@kentlaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A series of scientific and commercial developments in the past decade relating
              to the collection and use of body tissue raise profound issues for scientific
              researchers, health care providers, health care institutions, patients, and
              society at large.  Blood, tissue, genes and other human body parts have become
              valuable resources -- sources of information and raw materials for
              pharmaceutical products.  This is a study of the scientific, social, ethical
              and legal underpinnings of a series of emerging disputes over the research,
              clinical and commercial uses of body tissue.  The project will analyze seven
              recent disputes over body tissue.  The disputes provide an opportunity to
              examine the interests, the discourses and the stakes of the actors.  Each case
              study will explore the scientific and technological processes involved; the way
              scientists, patients, consumer groups, and other participants in the process
              characterize body tissue; the manner in which values such as the autonomy,
              privacy, and trust in the scientific enterprise were evoked in the dispute; the
              social and legal criteria that were discussed in resolving the dispute; the
              recommendations of professional organizations about how the dispute should be
              handled; and the implications for future scientific endeavors.  Drawing upon
              theories emerging from studies of the culture of the body and studies of
              resistance to new technologies, the project will analyze the extent to which a
              conflict between differing concepts of the body provoked the initial dispute
              and the extent to which policy makers' failure to consider the social meaning
              of the body led to further disputes.  The information uncovered and analyzed
              will be available to help those designing policies to better understand
              people's view of their bodily materials and their expectations about the
              appropriate handling of those materials.  The research is intended to aid
              scientists, clinicians, judges, and policy makers who are increasingly
              confronted with demands and concerns arising from the collection, analysis, and
              use of body tissue.  It will contribute to the quality of decisions that to
              date have often been constrained by a limited contextual understanding of the
              social meaning of body tissue. Products from the project will be widely
              disseminated; they will include articles and presentations, as well as a
              broadly accessible book, jointly authored by the two principal investigators, a
              lawyer and a sociologist.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
