Title       : SBIR Phase II: Diatom Transformation for Product Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1998  
File        : a9710990

Award Number: 9710990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. C. Thomas Allnutt 74242.2565@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Martek Biosciences Corp
	      6480 Dobbin Road
	      Columbia, MD  210455825    410/740-0081

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to advance the
              number of tools available for manipulation of algae, specifically diatoms, for
              commercial purposes.  Relatively little effort has gone into molecular
              manipulation of algae.  Most of the algal molecular biology effort has been
              concentrated on a handful of species.  Advances in microalgal molecular biology
              have not kept up with the rest of molecular biology and application to
              commercially important species is lacking.  Until the Phase I research, no
              molecular manipulation of diatoms was reported.  During Phase I, we developed
              the techniques to transform diatoms for the first time.  Simultaneously,
              another laboratory reported that they developed methods for transformation of
              another diatom.  So we were one of the first two groups to transform diatoms. 
              Now the challenge is to continue this research to perfect the methods of diatom
              manipulation and provide a commercial payoff for this research.  Phase II
              research will focus on perfecting transformation techniques for diatoms.  We
              will apply these optimized techniques to a number of different diatoms,
              expanding from our current test organism, Phaeodactylum tricornutum.  The
              existing fcp promoters will be analyzed and quantified to determine the best
              promoters to utilize.  The fcp promoters will also be analyzed for application
              in other diatoms and several other microalgal systems.  We will be exploring
              ways to change the fatty acid profiles of these diatoms to further commercial
              utilization of the oil produced.  A number of different strategies will also be
              evaluated that could lower the cost of production of diatoms.  Since Martek is
              a company committed to single cell oil production, an obvious area for
              exploration and eventual exploitation is the oleagenous diatoms.  We have
              identified a number of strains that produce commercially important oils.  This
              research will explore ways to manipulate these algae to make the oils they
              produce economically feasible.  In addition, a number of diatom strains are
              important aquacultural feeds.  Another of Martek's focus areas is aquacultural
              feeds.  We will also work to make some of these diatoms more attractive to use
              as a feed by lowering their production costs or adding additional
              characteristics that enhance their use as a feed.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
