Title       : Complexity and Critical Pluralism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9710615

Award Number: 9710615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra D. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many scientific disciplines, political discussions, and social policy forums,
              there has been increasing interest in diversity as an inherent good.  There is
              corresponding concern about sliding down a slippery slope to complete
              relativism with an accompanying loss of critical standards.  In philosophy of
              science, this tension takes the form of a debate between defenders of the unity
              of science-those who advocate strong critical standards based on metaphysical
              and methodological monism-and supporters of the disunity of science-some of
              whom endorse forms of pluralism that verge on the brink of an `anything goes`
              leniency.  In this research Mitchell explores a middle ground.  The aim is to
              develop a pluralistic picture of scientific practice that retains critical
              standards of acceptability within science.  The strategy adopted is
              two-pronged, focusing on both metaphysical questions and epistemological
              issues.  Contemporary biology provides the location for exploring these topics
              and testing the results.  The metaphysical investigation involves a
              comprehensive analysis of the metaphysics of complexity.  Three forms of
              complexity are identified:  complexity of structure, complexity of process, and
              complexity of evolved domains.  In the epistemological part of the research,
              Mitchell clarifies the possibilities and constraints on representing scientific
              laws, models and explanations.  Particular attention is paid to the idealized
              character of models, the need for integration of multiple models in explanation
              and the degrees of contingency symbolized in laws of nature.  The framework of
              critical pluralism that will result from this work will provide three practical
              benefits:  1) it will allow one to distinguish between real and spurious
              scientific disputes; 2) it will offer a taxonomy of types of conflict; and 3)
              it will allow a better understanding of different kinds of compatibility and
              complementarity between alternate theories.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
