Title       : Constructing a Supranational Constitution: The Reception and Enforcement of
               European Community Law by National Courts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9710963

Award Number: 9710963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alec Stone astone@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1093,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Stone  9710963    This project is a competitive renewal of an
              ongoing investigation that seeks to account for the dynamics and mechanics of
              European legal integration, the process by which the European Community has
              constructed a transnational rule of law polity.  The first stage of the project
              focused on collection, coding, and analyzing data; developing a theory of legal
              integration; and testing a set of hypotheses, derived from the theory, against
              the data.  The new work involves intensive analysis of litigation, judicial
              decisionmaking, and the impact of this decisionmaking on national and
              supranational policy outcomes in three domains of EC law:  the free movement of
              goods, gender  equality, and environmental protection.  Analyses of data are
              focusing on how and with what effect individuals, companies  and national and
              transnational interest groups are able to use national courts to obtain policy
              change, and the extent to which intra-judicial interaction and decisionmaking
              shape policy making  at the national and supranational levels.  This research
              addresses important concerns of international relations theory and redirects
              attention from ECJ's case law which has been amply studied to the impact of
              that case law on policymaking and adjudication processes.      %%%    This
              project is a competitive renewal of an ongoing investigation that seeks to
              account for the dynamics and mechanics of European legal integration, the
              process by which the European Community has constructed a transnational rule of
              law polity.  The first stage of the project focused on collection, coding, and
              analyzing data; developing a theory of legal integration; and testing a set of
              hypotheses, derived from the theory, against the data.  The new work involves
              intensive analysis of litigation, judicial decisionmaking, and the impact of
              this decisionmaking on national and supranational policy outcomes in three
              domains of EC law:  the free movement of goods, gender  equality, and
              environmental protection.  Analy ses of data are focusing on how and with what
              effect individuals, companies  and national and transnational interest groups
              are able to use national courts to obtain policy change, and the extent to
              which intra-judicial interaction and decisionmaking shape policy making  at the
              national and supranational levels.  This research addresses important concerns
              of international relations theory and redirects attention from ECJ's case law
              which has been amply studied to the impact of that case law on policymaking and
              adjudication processes.      ***
