Title       : Blind System Identification and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9710297

Award Number: 9710297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Er-Wei Bai erwei@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9710297  Bai     The blind system identification is a variant of the
              ordinary system identification, in which the input signal to the system is
              unknown.  Despite its wide use in a host of communication and signal processing
              applications, there is a lack of understanding and efficient schemes . 
              Existing methods of blind system identification can be devided into two
              categories.   The first one assumes some statistical information, usually a
              whiteness condition, on the unknown input signal, and infeasible approach in
              many applications since inputs are unknown.  The second method is to use
              training signals and thus reduce the blind system identification to the
              ordinary system identification.  Although simple, this method significantly
              reduces the efficiency because training signals have sent again and again. For
              example, in the GSM standard for mobile communication, more than one quarter of
              the communication capability is used to send training signals instead of
              sending message signals.  This project intends to conduct a thorough study of
              the blind system identification problem based on our preliminary study in which
              a new scheme was developed.  To the best knowledge of the author, the scheme we
              propose is the first and in fact the only blind system identification scheme
              without requiring any a priori information on the unknown input.  The proposed
              research will build on our preliminary results and focus on some fundamental
              issues as well as on developing algorithms.  The expected strategies for
              conducting such a study are outlined in the proposal.
