Title       : Vibrational Dynamics: Weakly Bound Complexes and Molecule Surface Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9710026

Award Number: 9710026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Miller remiller@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Roger E. Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is  
              supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program and the Office   of
              Multidisciplinary Activities to continue his high resolution infrared   studies
              on the state-to-state dynamics of weakly bound complexes.  He   will focus on
              the water dimer, which is of particular interest to the   theoretical chemistry
              community, and measure the rotational and   vibrational photofragment
              distributions, scalar and vector correlations,   and dissociation energies.  In
              a newer effort, Miller will investigate   the intermolecular forces and
              vibrational energy transfer associated with   the scattering of vibrationally
              excited species from single crystal    surfaces. Emphasis here will be on
              improvements in experimental methods   and the investigation of more complex,
              polyatomic molecules.    Molecular clusters of two to tens of molecules loosely
              bound together can   be viewed as the intermediary stage between `isolated`
              single gas   molecules and the extended arrays of molecules that make up the
              solid.    Understanding the behavior of such clusters helps us to better
              understand   the nature of the transition from gas to solid.  As it is,
              clusters are   fairly ubiquitous and play important roles in atmospheric
              chemistry, thus   we need to understand the dynamics of their formation and
              fragmentation,   the nature of the forces between the molecules that make up
              the cluster.    The newer effort on the study of the forces that influence how
              a single   gas molecule interacts with a `supercluster` or surface can be
              viewed as   a simple extension of the earlier work by Miller.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
