Title       : Maya Hieroglyphic Database Project: The Codices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9710961

Award Number: 9710961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Macri mjmacri@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the Maya Hieroglyphic Database Project:  The  Codices is to continue
              the task of putting the entire corpus  of Maya texts from Mexico and Central
              America into a  graphics database for the purpose of increasing access to  it. 
              The hieroglyphic texts on monumental sculpture from the  Classic Period (A.D.
              250-900) were the first to be included.   Nearly every large site, and most of
              the smaller ones will  have been coded by June 1997.             During the
              proposed phase the hieroglyphic texts of the  four Maya codices dating from the
              Postclassic Period (A.D.  1100-1600) will be added to the database.  These
              books  constitute a major part of the hieroglyphic corpus, and were  the source
              of many early decipherments.  Line drawings will  be scanned and divided into
              individual glyph blocks and  larger segments of texts (usually four glyphs
              blocks with  accompanying figure).  They will be incorporated into the 
              existing format used for the monumental inscriptions in  order to allow for
              full integration with them.  Each record   will be coded for graphemic,
              lexical, grammatical,  syntactic, and temporal information.            Not only
              will this increase overall access, but it will  contribute to ongoing research
              into possible language or  dialect differences between various sections of the
              codices.   Yucatecan and Cholan languages, the modern language families 
              believed to be closest to the language(s) of the Classic  Maya are frequently
              put forward as the language of the  codices, but precise dialect differences
              have yet to be  defined.  Phonological, lexical, and syntactic variation  will
              be addressed in this research.            The hieroglyphic database including
              the low resolution  line drawings of glyph blocks and clauses will allow access
               to these texts never before  realized.  It will also bring the most current 
              transcriptions and translations of the texts directly to the  non-epigrapher,
              who may then utilize the historical,  archaeological, and linguistic
              information they contai n.  It  will provide epigraphers with the ability to
              make truly  comprehensive searches and comparisons.  This database will  be
              available on a single CD-ROM (for both PC and Macintosh  systems).  By fall of
              1998, we expect to have portions of  the database will be available on the
              World Wide Web.  The  site currently contains a summary of the project and will
              be  periodically updated:  http://cougar.ucdavis.edu/nas/MAYA/home.html
