Title       : The Long-Term Profitability of Automobile Leasing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9710145

Award Number: 9710145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Hunsaker Seiler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Since 1990 car leasing has grown rapidly. In 1994, three million vehicles, one
              out of every four cars and trucks, were leased.  Some automobile executives
              expect that, by the year 2000, half of all cars and trucks will be leased. In
              the short run, leasing is profitable because dealers reduce new car inventory.
              Anecdotal evidence suggests that the recent surge in automobile leasing stems
              from substantial increases in new car prices in the face of stagnant wages. 
              Consumers prefer leasing because of its greater affordability - the down
              payment is minimal and monthly payments are lower. Proponents of leasing also
              argue that it creates brand loyalty. A Ford Motor Company study finds that
              those who lease their products are twice as satisfied as traditional buyers. 
              Skepticism over the long-term profitability of leasing arises because of
              uncertainty surrounding the used car market. After a car's lease expires, it is
              returned to the manufacturer who must sell it in the secondary market. There is
              a risk that consumers will view these low-mileage, well-maintained cars as a
              good substitute for a new car and firms may end up competing with themselves. 
              Furthermore, a firm's finance arm is at risk. A customer who leases a car only
              pays for the proportion of the vehicle's worth she uses. Companies determine a
              consumer's payments by estimating the car's wholesale value at the end of the
              lease (i.e. residual value). A flood of off-lease cars to the used car market
              as well as other unforeseen events could result in a resale price lower than
              expected. Ex post, the company discovers that the consumer's monthly payments
              were too low and it loses money on the lease.  In order to analyze the
              profitability of leasing in a theoretical framework, one needs to accurately
              capture the benefits and risks of this marketing tool.  The issues mentioned
              above are for the most part ignored in the research on durable goods. With few
              exceptions, the existing literature focuses on durable good monopoly, which is
              not appropriate for investigating brand loyalty.  Research on switching costs
              does not examine durable goods.  In addition, the ability of the secondary
              market to limit the profitablility of the primary leasing market is unexplored.
                Optimal maintenance and its effect on the quality of cars in the secondary
              market also plays an important role.    This project analyzes a theoretical
              model which extends durable goods research by allowing for brand loyalty and by
              endogenizing the consumer maintenance choice for rented goods.  A two-period
              model in which duopolists produce a horizontally differentiated durable good is
              examined. Firms lease new products at the beginning of each period and later
              sell the used goods in a perfectly competitive market when the lease expires.
              The firms generate brand loyalty by offering a contract for maintenance which
              stipulates lower fines for loyal customers. These results are compared to a
              situation whereby firms sell new goods each period. The results of this
              preliminary model are then used to develop a theoretical model which provides
              conditions under which firms offer both sales and leasing contracts in
              equilibrium. There are plans to test the theoretical results empirically.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
