Title       : GOALI: Process Synthesis Using Units with Integrated Functionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9710303

Award Number: 9710303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignacio E. Grossmann ig0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J.  J. Siirola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Westerberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Grossmann - 9710303    Current techniques for process synthesis are
              aimed at creating process flowsheets in which each unit performs a distinct
              function such as reaction, separation or heat exchange.  It is known, however,
              that there are cases when integrating functions in one single equipment can
              lead to significant economic savings.  An example is the Eastman Chemical
              process for methyl  acetate that involves the use of reactive distillation. 
              From the standpoint of design research, one difficulty is that there are no
              systematic techniques for identifying and synthesizing such process flowsheets.
               This research project deals with the synthesis of process flowsheets that
              involve units that integrate multiple functions, such as reaction and
              separation.  A major motivation is to simultaneously perform multiple tasks in
              a given unit, which simplifies the structure of the process flowsheet, possibly
              yielding large reductions in the investment and operating expenses.    The
              project will first address this synthesis problems at two different levels. 
              One is at a high level of representation in which new geometric composition
              diagrams that will allow the visualization of design alternatives will be
              investigated.  The objective at this level will be the identification of cases
              when the integration of functions in one equipment is likely to prove to be
              advantageous.  The second level is detailed in nature and involves the modeling
              and solution of the corresponding discrete/continuous optimization problems. 
              New representations of superstructures and mathematical programming models will
              be investigated to search for optimal flowsheets with units that can perform
              multiple tasks.  The integration of the two synthesis levels will be
              investigated through a multilevel synthesis strategy that relies on a modeling
              approach that allows the coupling of functions.  The project will involve
              collaboration with Eastman Chemical Company through joint work in the
              development of the synthesis strategy, in the  testing with real process
              examples, and through mutual visits by the PI's and a graduate student.
