Title       : Post-Attentive Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9710498

Award Number: 9710498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy M. Wolfe wolfe@search.bwh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham & Womens Hosp Inc
	      75 Francis Street
	      Boston, MA  021156195    617/525-3160

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We cannot fully perceive all of the visual information our eyes can take in at
              once. If we could, beginning typists would not need to hunt for the C key; they
              could simply look at the keyboard and know that the C is the third key from the
              left in the bottom row. That doesn't happen. Even though the C is in plain
              sight, novice typists have to search from key to key until they find the one
              they need. Before finding the C, the typists see something at the location of
              the C; they just have not fully perceived it as the letter C. This example
              illustrates that vision can be broadly divided into two stages. First, basic
              features like color, motion, and size are perceived across the entire visual
              field at the same time. (There are, perhaps, a dozen of these `pre-attentive`
              basic features.)  Then, as attention is directed to a particular region of the
              visual field, the features in that region are bound together into
              representations of objects.  Thus, when we first look at a scene, what we see
              is a collection of pre-attentive features. Only when attention is deployed to
              an item are those features perceptually bound together into a recognizable
              object.  In this project we are studying `post-attentive vision,` asking what
              happens after attention moves away from an object. Do the features remain bound
              together? The traditional answer has been `yes.` However, our preliminary data
              suggest that, to the contrary, when attention leaves an object, the visual
              representation reverts to its pre-attentive state of unbound features. For
              example, when people search repeatedly through a visual display of individual
              letters for a target letter (e.g., Is there an E?;  Is there a G?) one might
              think the search would become increasingly efficient as attention was directed
              to more and more of the letters in the display. However, this does not happen;
              the search is apparently no more efficient on trial 100 than on trial 1. 
              Building upon these and other recent findings, we will conduct further tests of
              the hypothesis that people do not build up a visual percept over time, and we
              will also explore several issues arising from this hypothesis. The results will
              speak to basic questions about the nature of visual perception, and will also
              have practical implications for our understanding of real world tasks involving
              visual search (e.g., driving, interpreting X-rays, reading).                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
