Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: A Molecular- Biogeographic Analysis of
               Relationship Patterns Among Disjunct Arcto- Tertiary Woody Plant Taxa with
               Emphasis on West Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9710505

Award Number: 9710505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49788              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford R. Parks cparks@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1305,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9710505  Parks    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative 
              project between Dr. Clifford Parks, Professor of Biology at  the University of
              North Carolina, chapel Hill, and Dr. Munir  Ozturk, Director, Center for
              Environmental Studies, Ege  University, Izmir, Turkey.  The research is to
              carry out a  molecular-phylogenetic analysis of 5 genera with extant  species
              in the major Tertiary refugia in western Asia  (Turkey) to determine the
              pattern of relationships among  them and extrapolate their biographic history. 
              This will be  accomplished by: employing a phylogenetic analysis to  measure
              the amount of evolutionary divergence among species  within the 5 genera;
              determining the pattern of  biogeographic relationships among species within
              each genus  and determining the degree to which the five genera have a  common
              biogeographic history; comparing biogeographic  patterns determined from the
              molecular analysis to all  available information from the fossil record; and 
              hypothesize a possible evolutionary history of the major  refugia, particularly
              the affinities of the refugial  vegetation in western Asia.    Scope: The
              research project is intended to shed light on the  details of the relationship
              between the flora in the humid  regions in the North Temperate zones of Eurasia
              and North  America (the Arco-Tertiary vegetation).  The field research  in
              Turkey will involve two graduate students from UNC, Alice  M. Stanford and
              Fatih Coskun.  The Turkish scientist, Dr.  Ozturk, is planning to spend part of
              the first year at UNC  to become competent in modern methods of molecular 
              systematics, so that he can continue with this work after  the duration of this
              award.   This proposal meets INT  objective of increasing U.S.-foreign
              collaboration in areas  that benefit both sides, and in enhancing the
              international  experience of women scientists and junior scientists.  This 
              award includes funds from the Division of International  Programs and the
              Division of Environmental Biology.    ***
