Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Computer Simulation of Science and Technical Laboratory Exercises
               for Physically-Disabled Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9710548

Award Number: 9710548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter S. Woltosz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simulation Plus
	      1220 W. Avenue J
	      Lancaster, CA  935342902    805/723-7723

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9710548  Woltosz   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              from Simulations Plus (parent company of Words Plus) addresses the need for
              students with a variety of disabilities to be able to conduct laboratory
              experiments in the physical sciences.  The project builds on work carried out
              during the Phase I effort, as well as on work supported by Words Plus after the
              completion of Phase I, to develop efficient computer simulations of laboratory
              experiments that can be run by severely physically disabled students with
              minimal motor input.  The ability to experience firsthand the results of
              simulated experiments and to control the setup and operation of those
              experiments will enable students to assume the role of active participants as
              opposed to being limited to their current role as spectators.  This new
              opportunity should motivate more such students to take a lively interest in the
              sciences.  Being a scientist can be an ideal occupation for those whose brains
              function well, but whose bodies prevent them from participating in activities
              requiring more physical proficiency.  Professor Stephen Hawking, world famous
              theoretical physicist of the University of Cambridge in England (a Words Plus
              user since 1985), is a clear example of a severely physically-disabled person
              who is making major contributions to science through a single switch interface.
                Software that can be run by the physically-disabled can also be run by
              able-bodied students.  Whereas the ability of many disabled students to
              participate actively in the sciences would seem to require the use of
              simulation software, the use of such software in the education of all students
              is also projected to be of growing importance.  It will enable all students to
              augment their experiences via personal computer, providing expanded learning
              opportunities by allowing simulations of situations that are infeasible to
              present to students because of cost, safety, or other complexities in a
              traditional laboratory environment.  ***
