Title       : Bioethics in American Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9710579

Award Number: 9710579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan E. Sieber                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Swazey jswazey@midmaine.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Renee C. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acadia Institute
	      118 West Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  046091429    207/288-3295

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to chronicle historically and analyze
              sociologically the genesis, development, roles, and significance of bioethics
              in American society. The study will address the following topics, and the
              interconnections between them: the genesis of bioethics as a field in the late
              1960s; the chief intellectual and professional disciplines that have, and have
              not, been centrally involved, and the value complexes they represent; the ethos
              of bioethics, including the roles that moral philosophy, theology, and religion
              have and have not played; the major thematic foci of bioethical interest and
              inquiry, including the extent to which and ways in which there are or are not
              explicit interconnections as well as more latent social and value linkages
              between bioethics and other foci of ethical concerns in American society; the
              ways in which bioethics is `more-than-medical` and, however latently, has
              involved more-than-ethical themes; the social organization,
              institutionalization, and progressive expansion of the field; the ways that and
              reasons for which it has increasingly pervaded public domains; and the field's
              theories and methodologies.  The study will use a combination of historical and
              sociological research methods: (1)semi-structured in-depth individual and small
              group interviews with key persons from `three generations` of bioethicists, and
              others involved in the early `bioethics goes to Washington` policy arenas; (2)
              content analyses of the bioethics literature; (3) a social organizational
              analysis of the field's progressive institutionalization from the 1960s through
              the 1990s; and (4) a sociometric or social circles analysis of the
              interconnections between those who entered bioethics across three generations. 
              During the past 3 decades, bioethics has been a dominant component of what
              James M. Gufstason has called `ethics: an American growth industry.`  Despite
              the prominence that bioethics has achieved in American society, however, there
              has been a paucity of work that has examined the field's development. The
              project has been designed to address this vacuum: it will be the first in-depth
              study of bioethics, and one which also will illuminate broader themes dealing
              with American ideas, values, and beliefs. In addition to written products (a
              book and papers), the study will generate an important body of archival
              materials, consisting primarily of tapes and transcripts of interviews with key
              persons in bioethics, which will be deposited at the Kennedy Institute of
              Ethics.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
