Title       : Linking Fundamental Investigations and Engineering Results for Extinguishment of
               Fires on Solid Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9710413

Award Number: 9710413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dionisios G. Vlachos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Vlachos  CTS - 9710413      This is an investigation of flame
              extinction of fires on solid materials occurring because the energy feedback to
              the surface decreases either by direct cooling of the surface or by inerting of
              the oxidant stream by a thermal or chemical agent.  The study uses modern
              continuation methods for numerical calculation of stationary-state solutions in
              chemical reaction systems.  Numerical results are interpreted with a novel
              sensitivity analysis, simple physical models for flame extinction, and standard
              asymptotic analysis.  Gaseous combustion dynamics is separated from the surface
              energy balance by simulating the pyrolyzing material with a porous gaseous
              burner at a constant temperature in which a fule such as methane or ethylene
              burns with the oxidant flow.  One isssue examined is when critical conditions
              for extinction, such as dimensionless fuel supply, are independent of the
              Damkohler number.  The flame heat feedback to the surface is calculated as a
              function of mass supply rate for various dilutions of the fuel and/or oxidant
              streams by chemically inert or active agents and for various strain rates. 
              Both convective and radiative heat feedback are included.    Empirical methods
              for extinguishing fires have been used since prehistoric times.  In the last
              thirty years, sophisticated models for extinction in gaseous flames have been
              developed, but little of this can be applied to fires on solid surfaces. 
              Details of pyrolysis chemistry for most solid materials of practical interest
              are unknown.  At present, no general, robust strategy exists to characterize
              extinction of solid fires under varioius ambient flow and environmental
              conditions.  Such a strategy is outlined in this project; it integrates
              state-of-the-art fluid-phase and chemistry models and nonlinear systems theory
              with available experimental data and measurement techniques for extinction.
