Title       : Promises To Keep
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9710718

Award Number: 9710718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian Kleiman vkleiman@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cultrl Research & Comm Inc
	      2600 Tenth Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94710    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9710718  Kleiman    Cultural Research and Communications, Inc. is developing a
              project that will center around a one-hour documentary program entitled
              Promises to Keep.  The film, now in its planning phase, will chronicle the
              day-to-day efforts of students, teachers, and parents at one inner city public
              high school as they work to implement standards-based math and science reform
              while maintaining their commitment to full educational equity.   The goal is to
              inform viewers about a significant reform effort underway, heighten their
              awareness of the possibilities of high quality math and science education for
              all, and stimulate them to support or initiate similar efforts themselves.   
              During the planning phase, the applicants will focus their efforts in several
              critical areas:     1. Develop a better definition of the target audience so
              that the next stage can be designed best to address the needs and interests of
              that audience.  2. Clarify the goals, structure, and content of the program. 
              For example, is the proposed film to be primarily motivational or should it
              provide a "blueprint for change?"  How, specifically, does the school achieve
              its goals of excellence and how will this be conveyed in the film?  How can
              school around the country relate to the examples set by Thurgood Marshall High
              School?  3. Design a strong outreach, promotion, and distribution plans to
              assure that this will reach the intended audience.  4. Assess the location
              constraints that will be present during production.  5. Familiarize the
              advisors with the school where the film is to be made.    The Co-Principal
              Investigators and film producers for the project are Vivian Kleiman, an award
              winning producer of such programs as Color Adjustment and My Bodies My
              Business, and Sharon Wood who has produced, directed, and or written programs
              for Portrait of America and Super Chief:  The Life and Legacy of Earl Warren.  
              Project advisors include Dennis Bartels, Yolanda George, Donna Gerardi, Nancy
              Kreinberg, and Tom Romberg.
