Title       : Doctoral Dissetation Improvement: A Laboratory Study of Asset Markets with
               Negotiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9710048

Award Number: 9710048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary E. Deily                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Day   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy N. Cason  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project abstract  Households allocate their wealth between different classes of
              assets. One way to classify these assets is by the institution in which they
              trade. Some assets are traded in an auction institution, such as shares of a
              corporation, while others trade infrequently in an institution which involves
              search and bargaining. For ease of exposition, I refer to these classes as
              financial and real assets respectively.  Inadequate data has prevented
              econometricians from decisively determining whether real assets should be
              considered a subset of the set of assets households use to optimize their
              portfolio or if they are a distinct type of good that does not belong in the
              finance paradigm. This question can be answered by looking at how the returns
              on real assets adjust to changes in real their per-period benefits given
              returns on financial assets. In the proposed study, subjects in the laboratory
              have the option of allocating their wealth between two types of assets. The
              first type has a rate of return which is exogenous of a subject's actions. The
              second type has a return based on an price changes. To examine the impact of
              institutions, the second type of asset is traded under two types of
              institutions. First, it is traded in a double auction institution, which is
              frequently used to organize trade of financial assets. This establishes a
              baseline of how well subjects are able to price an asset relative to a
              risk-neutral asset pricing formula in an institution previously shown to have
              superior performance characteristics. In another treatment, the asset trades
              under an institution similar to the one in which heterogeneous real goods
              general trade, such as homes and small businesses. The salient features of this
              institution are that sellers attract buyers by advertising a price, buyers and
              sellers negotiate by sending binding offers, and no absolute time restriction
              on bargaining is imposed. In the proposed implementation, the information
              available to subjects is similar to what is available in naturally occurring
              markets.  This project has theoretical and policy implications. Theoretically,
              this experiment help us understand why real assets prices are not well
              explained by asset pricing models. This is typically attributed to a number of
              factors such as: the lumpiness of the asset, absence of futures contracts,
              incorrect expectations, and asymmetric information. This project isolates the
              impact of trading institutions as a possible explanation. This will also
              provide insight into how data are smoothed by real asset trading institutions. 
               Laboratory data generated by this study will also help us understand the Real
              Estate cycle.  Ultimately, better regional economic stabilization policy could
              result form a better understanding of how these asset markets work.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
