Title       : Implementation of Accurate Estimation Methodology for Compartmental Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9710081

Award Number: 9710081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Contreras   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                My research interests are in the design of experiments and  the  development
              of statistically meaningful yet computationally  tractable estimation methods
              for compartmental models.    Compartmental models provide a valuable tool in
              analyzing  a wide variety of problems, such as the the kinetics of drugs 
              through a body or the flow of nutrients through an ecosystem via  the design of
               tracer experiments.  In most cases,  cost and/or feasibility  are issues when
              designing a tracer  experiment since such experiment is often non-repeatable
              due to  high cost, ethical issues,  or possible damage to the organism. 
              Nonetheless, the careful design of an experiment involving  compartmental
              models can be accomplished through proper  collaboration between the scientist
              who has  understanding  of the biological or physiological  mechanism of the
              system  and the compartmental analyst who has knowledge of the   mathematical
              and computational issues that arise in the  identifiability and stability of
              the parameters or flow rates  which describe the system.    Once a model,
              deemed reasonable for the process under study,     has been proposed, the
              objective is to estimate the parameters   of the model from a set of
              observations gathered through time.  However,  the commonly-occurring
              non-constant variance of  biological data and/or the presence of outlying
              observations  discourage standard application of ordinary least squares  or 
              equally weighted L_2 estimation.  Although  L_1-norm estimation  would reduce
              the influence of outliers, for statistical reasons,  it is generally not
              preferred.   To obtain statistically optimal  estimators, workers often perform
              weighted least squares using   empirical  weights, iteratively reweighted least
              squares,  or  transform the data and/or  the model often using  the logarithm 
              transformation.    However, in practice, the optimal weights are not known,
              thus  application of weighted or iteratively reweighted  least squares  is not
              straightforward.  Moreover, methods involving  current  transformation
              methodology, such as Box-Cox transformations,  while succeeding in stabilizing
              the variance, often do not yield  a computationally more desirable problem to
              solve.  My immediate  research consists of investigating the use and properties
              of  integral transform methods in estimation.  Such integral  transform  should
              be  `natural' to a given problem; natural,  in  that applying such
              transformation should yield a problem which  would be computationally no more 
              costly than current methods but  more amenable to the model, in that such
              transformation should  stabilize the variance yet be computationally simple. 
              Currently,  I am looking at these issues with the Laplace transform applied  to
              linear time invariant compartmental models.
