Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Perception of Continuous and Discrete Visual Events:
               Vernier Acuity, Motion Smear, Color, and Attention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9710116

Award Number: 9710116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Romi Nijhawan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shinsuke Shimojo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research uses a striking visual illusion, the flash-lag effect, to study
              the normal functioning of the human visual system.  One example of the illusion
              involves a line segment rotating about its center.  A stationary segment is
              briefly flashed at each end of the rotating segment, such that the rotating and
              stationary segments are in alignment.  Surprisingly, observers perceive the
              stationary segments not as aligned with the rotating segment, but rather as
              lagging slightly behind it.  Even more striking is a version of the phenomenon
              involving color.  If a red line is flashed within a stationary green bar,
              observers perceive the line as yellow (because mixing red and green light
              yields yellow, due to the way the visual system processes color).  However, if
              a red line is flashed briefly within a rotating green bar, observers don't see
              a yellow line within a green bar; rather they see a red line trailing the green
              bar.  Our hypothesis is that the flash-lag effects result from mechanisms
              within the visual system that compensate for delays in neural transmission
              time.  Transmission of information from the eyes to the brain takes appreciable
              time; by the time information about a moving object reaches the brain, the
              object has moved some distance.  Thus, we might expect the object to be seen
              not where it actually is, but rather where it was a short time ago. However, we
              suggest that the visual system extrapolates the registered location of smoothly
              moving objects to compensate for the effects of the delay. Thus, given
              collinear moving and stationary line segments, the moving segment is seen as
              leading the stationary segment because the visual system extrapolates the
              location of the moving but not the stationary segment.    We will study several
              forms of the flash-lag effect under various conditions. The results will
              increase our understanding of how the visual system compensates for neural
              delays; also, the studies involving colored stimuli will allow us to test
              competing theories of color vision.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
