Title       : Collaborative Research on Sequential Voting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9710580

Award Number: 9710580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca B. Morton rebecca-morton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Traditional formal theoretical analyses of spatial voting applied to large
              elections have focused almost exclusively on elections in which voters make
              their choices simultaneously.  In many cases this is an accurate portrayal and
              although voting may take place sequentially over a period of time, voters
              typically make their choices without the knowledge of the choices made by those
              who have voted earlier.  However, there are other notable large elections in
              which groups of voters make choices with knowledge of the choices made by
              earlier voters in the same election.    In this investigation, the researchers
              focus on a particularly interesting case of sequential voting:  presidential
              primaries in the United States.  In the presidential primary system voters in
              states  that have later primaries know the outcomes of the primaries in earlier
              states when they make their choices.  However, the nomination of the party is a
              function of  the votes in both early and later states.  Thus, voting that
              determines the nomination, because of the primary system, occurs sequentially. 
              In this research the investigators focus on two ways in which sequential voting
              is different from simultaneous voting and the possibility that the voting
              process leads to different outcomes as a consequence.  First, there is the
              possibility for information aggregation during the sequential voting process
              that is not possible under simultaneous voting.  Second, when voting is
              sequential there is the unique possibility for candidates to withdraw from the
              election during the voting  process.  The current research extends an earlier
              investigation of information aggregation by examining the role of differences
              in risk preferences on the voting behavior and candidate selected.  The
              research is then extends the theoretical model to consider the effects of
              candidate exit on these factors.  The research consists of experimental tests
              of the theoretical predictions.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
