Title       : Racial Identification in Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9710366

Award Number: 9710366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Telles telles@soc.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of racial identification in Brazil.  It has a methodological
              component, focusing on a difficult issue of measurement.  Analysts of race and
              ethnicity use data that generally code racial and ethnic categories on the
              basis of respondent self identification. However, self identification of race
              and ethnicity is often inconsistent with the way persons are socially
              classified. Therefore data based on respondent self identification may be
              inappropriate for measuring racial inequality or discrimination. Differences
              between these forms of racial classification are noteworthy in the case of
              Brazil. Comparisons of racial self identification with racial social
              identification in Brazil are possible for the first time due to data collected
              in a recent national survey. Using these data, this research project will
              examine how Brazilians self-identify by race and how this may deviate from
              their socially ascribed race.      The research will also study the
              determinants of racial self identification and the consequences of using self
              identification for estimating racial inequality. This phase of the work
              addresses six chief questions: (1) the extent to which self identification of
              race deviates from interviewer (or social) identification of race using census
              racial categories, (2) the extent to which there is a preference for ambiguous
              racial categories, (3) the extent to which there is a preference for the
              Afro-Brazilian identity affirmation category, (4) the impact of class and
              racial reference group variables, (5) influences of modernization and
              urbanization variables, and (6) whether social identification leads to
              estimates of racial inequality, and particularly income inequality, that are
              different from those based on self identification.      Results from this study
              will contribute to the scientific literature on theories of racial and ethnic
              identification, changing conceptions of race in Brazil, and racial inequality
              in Brazil.  Studying the scientific questions in a social environment ve ry
              different from that of the United States will provide a useful comparison that
              can help guide public responses to issues of race and ethnicity in America.
