Title       : Early Childhood Development and Voucher Programs: Evaluation Using Randomized
               Assignment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9710000

Award Number: 9710000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kremer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Education is widely seen as essential for economic growth in developing
              countries. Yet despite a large number of studies, there are significant gaps in
              our knowledge of the relative effectiveness of different education policies. In
              part, this is because it is difficult to separate out the effect of school
              inputs from unobserved variables which also affect education, and may be
              correlated with school inputs. This project will take advantage of randomized
              treatment to evaluate two policies that have been increasingly advocated by
              education specialists: promotion of Early Childhood Development (ECD) and
              provision of vouchers to allow students to attend private schools. Both topics
              are of interest not only to developing countries but also to developed
              countries.  The study of early childhood development will be conducted in
              cooperation with a Dutch nonprofit organization which provides educational
              assistance to Kenyan schools. The principal investigator taught secondary
              school in rural Kenya for one year, and is currently collaborating with the
              organization on a prospective, randomized study of primary education in rural
              Kenya. This study will be extended to examine 100 locally run preschools.
              Teachers in these preschools typically have no training beyond secondary
              school, and receive about $10 per month in salary financed by parent fees.
              Under this study, one half of the preschools will be randomly assigned to
              receive in-service training and salary supplements for teachers, while the
              other half will serve as a comparison group.  The study of vouchers will
              examine the Subsidios PACES program in Colombia. This program, which has been
              in operation since 1992, was designed to allow students from poor households to
              attend private secondary schools. Because there were not enough funds to
              provide all applicants with vouchers, the vouchers were allocated using a
              lottery. Outcomes between 1,500 lottery winners and 1,500 lottery losers will
              be compared.  The effect of both programs on educational outcomes will be
              examined, including enrollment, daily attendance, grade repetition, and scores
              on achievement tests. Further, the effects of the programs on household
              decision making and on school organization will be analyzed. Also, the project
              will examine whether the effects of the programs vary with students' sex, socio
              economic status, age, or current school performance  Each study also raises its
              own specific sets of questions. For the preschool study, the questions include
              the following: I ) Do untrained teachers change their method of child-care
              after receiving training? 2) Do absenteeism rates among teachers fall when they
              receive salary supplements? 3) Do parents increase or decrease their support of
              schools when salary supplements were provided to teachers? 4) Does improved pre
              primary education pay for itself by reducing grade repetition in primary
              school?  The study of the voucher program will examine questions such as: 1)
              How many of the students supported by vouchers in Colombia would have attended
              school in the absence of a voucher program? 2) How many would have attended
              private schools? 3) What is the impact of the program on educational attainment
              and cognitive achievement?                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
