Title       : Spatiotemporal Patterns in Electrochemically Reacting System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9710259

Award Number: 9710259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255971             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Hudson hudson@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - Hudson - 9710259     Experimental studies will be carried out on
              electrochemical reactions under conditions in which the current changes with
              both time and position along the electrode surface.  Spatiotemporat patterns
              occur under many conditions in other types of reacting systems including liquid
              and gas phase reactions, gas-solid heterogeneous reactions, biochemical
              reactions, etc.  During electrochemical reactions, such as those being
              considered here, nonuniform surfaces are typical under dynamic conditions.  The
              nonuniformities have a strong effect on the overall rate of reaction as well as
              the system dynamics.  However, very little information is available on
              spatiotemporal patterns in electrochemistry and that which is available is
              restricted largely to limited, special cases in which the patterns are both
              visible and slow moving.   An experimental setup shall be developed to study
              these spatiotemporal patterns; arrays of electrodes are used so that the
              current, or rate of reaction, can be measured independently at many locations
              on the reaction surface.  Since the current is measured at each electrode and
              since the sampling rate at each location can be high, say 5000 Hz per channel,
              the method is applicable to all types of electrochemical reactions over a large
              range of conditions.  The arrays will be in various configurations including
              square, hexagonal, and fing patterns.  The length scale of the reaction surface
              is varied by changing the number of electrodes in an array, the size of the
              individual electrodes, or the spacing among the electrodes.  The effect of
              surface nonunifonnities or pacemakers will be studied by varying the potential
              of some of the electrodes in the array   A representative and important
              electrodissolution reaction, the dissolution of iron in sulfuric acid will be
              studied.  This reaction will be investigated in two parameter ranges.  In the
              first, low frequency active-passive oscillations occur; both the fast
              activation and the slower passivation phases  of the cycle occur by the passage
              of waves across the electrode surface.  A study of surface wave phenomena and
              the spatiotemporal bifurcations which occur among patterns as the potential is
              changed will be carried out.  Direct visual observations using microscope and
              video camera of the slowly moving passivation waves will also be made. 
              Mathematical models will be developed.
