Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Removal of Pollutants from Diesel Exhaust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9710378

Award Number: 9710378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Carlisle ccarlisle@wyoming.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CHA Corporation
	      372 West Lyon
	      Laramie, WY  82070    307/742-2829

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9150,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to build, test
              and perfect a device that will clean the exhaust gases of a diesel engine. The
              primary pollutants emitted by diesel engines are nitric oxide (NOx), carbon
              monoxide (CO), volatile organic compounds (VOC's), and dry particulate matter
              (DPM, soot). The CHA Corporation has completed its SBIR Phase I investigation
              of a novel microwave-based device to control these unwanted by-products. The 
              device captures the DPM in a filter and oxidizes the captured DPM using NOx,
              oxygen and microwave energy. The remaining NOx is converted to nitrogen and
              carbon dioxide using a reducing catalyst and a reducing agent such as hexane or
              diesel fuel in the presence of low level microwave energy. Simultaneously any
              CO and VOC materials are oxidized to carbon dioxide and water using an
              oxidizing catalyst in the presence of low level microwave energy.    Our work
              shows that a commercially available automotive catalyst such as Prototech
              PRO-VOC 7 gives satisfactory results.   This Phase II proposal offers an
              expansion of the Phase I work including the fabrication of a prototype device
              and  an extensive testing and design refinement program. The results of this
              work will be a working tested prototype of the device.    There is tremendous
              need for economical and practical NOx control devices to continue the operation
              of stationary diesel engines and other fuel based internal combustion engines.
              This segment represents a potential market exceeding one billion dollars for
              NOx control devices.      This award is supported by the Small Business
              Innovation Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
              Competitive Research (EPSCoR).    ***
