Title       : Temporary Anions and Dissociative Attachment: Probes of Intra- and
               Intermolecular Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9710076

Award Number: 9710076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Burrow pburrow@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Gay  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth D. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1312,9183,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
              Division, Burrow (University of Nebraska) and Jordan (University of Pittsburgh)
              will continue joint experimental and theoretical studies of temporary anion
              formation in gas-phase substituted hydrocarbons.  Experimental studies at both
              institutions will examine vibrational excitation and dissociative attachment
              (DA) reactions in which stable fragment anions are produced.  Both total DA
              cross sections and vertical attachment energies (VAEs) for formation of
              temporary anions will be measured.  A new instrument will be constructed to
              measure the angular dependence of fragment anions produced by DA.  The effect
              of solvation on the energies and decay properties of temporary anions will be
              examined in methyl chloride (CH3Cl) co-expanded with solvents such as water. 
              High-level electronic structure calculations will be carried out to predict how
              the vertical attachment energy is influenced by the solvation.  A powerful
              means of visualizing molecular structure and chemical reactivity is provided by
              the concept of occupied and unoccupied electronic states, which are also known
              as orbitals.  Photoelectron spectroscopy has long provided a means of studying
              occupied orbitals, but until recently the corresponding data for normally
              unoccupied orbitals has been scarce.  This work aims at gathering such data,
              thereby helping to answer key chemical questions on structure and bonding in
              complex molecules.  It also offers data crucial to models of electron transfer,
              which is the mechanism involved in a large variety of chemical processes, such
              as photosynthesis, light-induced desorption from surfaces, chemical
              carcinogenesis, and bioremediation.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
