Title       : Protection of Mayan Archeological Sites in Southern Mexico from Biodeterioration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9710577

Award Number: 9710577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph Mitchell mitchell@das.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0115000   Historical Sites                        
              0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9710577  Mitchell  There is an urgent need to protect Mayan archeological sites
              in  southern Mexico from further deterioration.  The combination of  high
              humidity and temperature, together with increased tourist  activity, is causing
              rapid deterioration of these important  historic sites.  Much of the material
              used in the construction of  Mayan buildings was soft limestone, which is
              mechanically weak  and susceptible to biodeterioration.  The objectives of this
               research will be to determine the degree of susceptibility of  these materials
              to degradation by microbial activity and to test  methods for protection of the
              building materials against further  deterioration.  This research program will
              be carried out in  close cooperation with the Escuela de Ingenieria,
              Universidad del  Mayab.    In the first phase of the research we will determine
              the nature  and activity of the microorganisms on limestone samples taken  from
              archeological sites.  Qualitative analysis of the microflora  will utilize both
              physiological and genetic methods.  Quantitative determination of the attack of
              the stone will  involve image analysis of the microflora and measurement of 
              calcium release from the stone.  Degradation studies will be made  on the stone
              from a number of different sites.    In the second phase of the research both
              artificial polymeric  consolidants and biocides will be tested for their
              ability to  protect the limestone.  AR polymers will be tested under a  variety
              of environmental conditions for susceptibility to  biodegradation. 
              Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy will be  used as a primary analytic
              tool.  Biocides to be tested will be  environmentally acceptable and will need
              to be compatible with  the consolidants.    The final phase of this project
              will be to test the protective  ability of combinations of consolidants and
              biocides in the  field.  Treated stone samples will be placed at different test
               sites with varying temperature, humidity, and organic carbon  deposition. 
              Analysis will incl ude protection against growth of  fungi and bacteria,
              deterioration of the polymer, and degradation  of the underlying stone.    The
              significance of this project will be to provide information  about the
              mechanisms of deterioration of Mayan archeological  sites.  The research will
              provide information about methods for  protecting these sites.  It is expected
              that the research will  help to provide protection of these important historic
              sites in  southern Mexico and other similar areas.  In addition, we expect 
              that graduate students and post-doctoral scholars from Escuela de  Ingenieria,
              Universidad del Mayab will spend time at Harvard, and  that we will assist in
              their training.  ***
