Title       : Collaborative Research: Economics of Continuous Trading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9710433

Award Number: 9710433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194100             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Zame zame@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Continuous trading models have been the central tools in modern financial theory
              ever since they were used to establish the Black-Scholes formula for correctly
              pricing options.  Unfortunately, the continuous trading models rest on economic
              foundations that can be questioned.  The object of this project is to put
              continuous trading models on a sounder economic footing.  The most fundamental
              difficulty addressed is the meaning of continuous trading.  The `obvious`
              interpretation of continuous trading is as a limit of models in which trading
              occurs at a finite number of discrete times, but the interval between trading
              times becomes very short.  It can be argued on the basis of counter examples,
              that there is a serious economic difficulty with this interpretation.  The aim
              of this research is to seek a more satisfactory interpretation.  The second set
              of difficulties addressed concerns the nature and existence of equilibrium. 
              Most of the analysis of continuous trading models is non-equilibrium in nature;
              for example, the Black-Scholes analysis takes the process describing security
              prices as given and solves for option prices by arbitrage arguments.  Other
              analyses simply assume the existence of a suitable equilibrium.  From an
              economic point of view, assuming the existence of such an equilibrium is
              generally unsatisfactory.  It is particularly unsatisfactory in the continuous
              time setting because the existence of equilibrium is very much in doubt in many
              cases of interest, and because even when the existence of an equilibrium
              satisfying regularity conditions is guaranteed, there may be many other
              equilibria.  This research will seek to establish the existence of equilibrium
              and to rule out equilibria not satisfying regularity conditions.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
