Title       : Optical Stark and Zeeman Studies of Gas-Phase Metal Containing Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9710174

Award Number: 9710174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Steimle tsteimle@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Timothy Steimle of  
              Arizona State University in his continuing investigations into the  
              geometrical and molecular properties of small metal-containing transient  
              molecules.  The permanent electric and magnetic dipole moments will be  
              determined.  The magnetic hyperfine and nuclear electric quadrupole  
              interactions will be analyzed and combined with the dipole moments to  
              construct a molecular orbital-based description of trends in chemical  
              bonding.  Three experimental projects are proposed:  (i) the detection   and
              characterization of small polyatomic transition metal-containing   compounds
              suspected to be products of simple model organometallic   reactions; (ii) the
              first Zeeman study of transition metal dimers; and   (iii) the detection and
              characterization of gas-phase gallium nitride.    Supersonic molecular beam
              samples will be generated using a laser   ablation/reaction scheme and high
              resolution laser-induced fluorescence   spectra in the presence of static
              electric and magnetic fields will be   recorded.  Time-of-flight mass
              spectrometry employing resonance enhanced   multi-photon ionization techniques
              will be developed for the gallium   nitride beam diagnostics.    The transition
              metal systems are important having relevance to catalysis,   surface chemistry,
              ligand field theory and ultimately to the   understanding of electronic and
              geometrical requirements for chemical   reactivity.  The particular study of
              gallium nitride may eventually prove   useful to the semiconductor industry.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
