Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Joint Study of Solar Oscillations Gong Phase
               III, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9710279

Award Number: 9710279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Bhatnagar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shashikumar M. Chitre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : udaipur Sol Observ
	      Udaipur 313001
	      Udaipur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710279  Bhatnagar   Description:  This award supports the U.S.-India
              Cooperative Research: Study of Solar  Oscillations Phase III, which will
              examine the Sun s interior utilizing the data set  from the Global Oscillation
              Network Group (GONG).  This recently completed  network of six identical
              oscillation observing stations that circle the globe will keep  the Sun under
              24 hour surveillance and will yield unique data having importance not  only for
              solar physics, but for astrophysics, solar-terrestrial physics, geophysics, and
               nuclear physics.  The U.S. team is headed by John Leibacher of the National
              Solar  Observatory (NSO), Tucson, and the Indian team by Arvind Bhatnagar,
              Udaipur Solar  Observatory (USO) Udaipur, and S.M. Chitre, Tata Institute of
              Fundamental Research,  Mumbai.  The new field of helioseismology has evolved
              from the discovery of solar  acoustic waves that emanate from randomly-excited
              seismic vibrations from within the  Sun.  This powerful new tool for studying
              the Sun s interior structure and dynamics  can probe the interior of the Sun
              with the same precision that terrestrial seismology  can probe the Earth s
              interior.  During Phase III of the study, the U.S. and Indian  teams will
              pursue collaborative research in numerous areas that have been stimulated  by
              GONG data.  These include inversions; hydrostatic Sun structure; helium 
              abundance in the solar envelope; excitation mechanisms for solar oscillations; 
              background solar spectrum; global magnetic fields in the sun s deep interior;
              nearly  steady flows and magnetic fields; and deterministic detrending.     
              Scope:  The U.S.-India component of this large international project is
              exceptionally  well balanced.  For the United States, Udaipup has physical
              attributes such as  atmospheric clarity and a unique geographic position on the
              globe diametrically  opposite to Tucson, as well as strong infrastructural
              resources.  Solar physics is a field  in which Indian scientists excel.  The
              project will involve USO staff and world cl ass  researchers from India s
              premier Tata Institute.  For India, the project offers entry to  the field of
              helioseismology, state-of -the-art instrumentation, and involvement in an 
              important international effort.  This project has thus far yielded a large
              number of  publications under U.S.-Indian authorship.       ***
