Title       : Absolute Kinetic Studies of Carbenic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9710547

Award Number: 9710547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Moss moss@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Robert A. Moss, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the   State
              University of New Jersey, is supported by the Organic Dynamics   Program for
              his kinetic studies of carbenes and related reactive   intermediates. 
              Professor Moss uses direct spectroscopic techniques,   particularly laser flash
              photolysis, complemented by ab initio molecular   orbital calculations, to
              study the fragmentation reactions of   alkoxyhalocarbenes (RO-C-Cl), exploring
              the concertedness of R-O and C-Cl   bond cleavages as a function of the alkyl
              substituent.  The kinetics and   products of the 1,2-H shift rearrangements of
              benzylhalocarbenes and   alpha-phenylethylhalocarbenes are also under
              exploration in order to   deduce the influences of solvent, carbene structure,
              and halogen identity   on the linearity of the Arrhenius correlations for these
              rearrangements,   the possible incursion of tunneling, and the simultaneous
              occurrence of   intermolecular reactions.  Professor Moss also investigates the
                possibility of modulating the rates of intramolecular rearrangements and  
              intermolecular capture by the intervention of transient carbene/benzene   pi
              complexes, competing 1,2-acyl and 1,2-H (or 1,2-C) migrations in  
              acyloxycarbenes, and the potentially pi-mediated rearrangement of  
              acenaphthenylfluorocarbene.  With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program,
              Professor Robert A.   Moss, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the
              State University of   New Jersey, carries out kinetic studies of carbenes and
              related reactive   intermediates.  Such compounds, containing a central carbon
              atom bearing   only two attached groups rather than the more commonly seen (and
              more   stable) four, are formed transiently in a wide variety of chemical  
              processes.  Through the application of fast experimental techniques  
              complemented by calculational studies, Professor Moss determines the   effects
              of various factors on the chemistry of these reactive   intermediates.  These
              studies contribute to our understanding of the   fundamental atomic level
              processes occurring in many chemical reactions   and, ultimately, to our
              ability to control them.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
