Title       : Lithographically Formed Nanoparticles for an Ultra High Density, Low Noise,
               Magnetic Data Storage Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9710395

Award Number: 9710395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. White white@ee.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Clemens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710395  White  Lithographically patterned thin film magnetic media offer the
              potential for extending the areal bit density of magnetic data storage media
              perhaps two orders of magnitude while preserving satisfactory signal-to-noise
              properties.  Present magnetic media are formed of a continuous featureless thin
              film comprised of many very small independently acting single-domain grains. 
              The size, shape, and position of the data bit is determined by the magnetic
              fields from the write head and each bit contains thousands of grains.  As data
              densities get higher, and bit size smaller, the granularity of the medium has
              become troublesome, giving rise to unacceptable "media noise".  In principle
              the noise could be reduced by decreasing grain size, but grains much smaller
              than are presently in use are unstable against thermally activated
              magnetization reversal.    In this study, the magnetic structure and recording
              potential of lithographically patterned nanoparticle arrays will be studied. 
              In such a medium, each nanoparticle is a single domain and a single data bit. 
              The initial studies will be on epitaxial cobalt thin films, where the
              crystalline uniaxial anisotropy should allow the synthesis of single-domain bar
              shaped islands magnetized in plane and also parallel to the short axis of the
              bar.  Such a nanoparticle array is compatible with present read-write
              technology.  The single-domain character of isolated individual nanoparticles
              will be carefully examined using magnetic force microscopy and Lorentz
              microscopy.  The stability of the magnetization pattern in an array will be
              determined, and the signal-to-noise characteristics of an array measured.    To
              escape the restriction to a Cartesian or hexagonal geometry inherent in the
              epitaxial films, synthesis will be pursued of appropriately magnetized
              bar-shaped nanoparticles whose orientation on the substrate can be arbitrary
              (radial or circumferential on a disk, for instance).  The required uniaxial
              anisotropy will be achieved using the anisotro pic strain relief in a
              bar-shaped nanoparticle, coupled with the magnetostriction of the material. 
              The amorphous SmFe and SmCoFe family of highly magnetostrictive films will be
              explored for this purpose.  Again, single domain character, array stability,
              and signal/noise characteristics will be evaluated.  ***
