Title       : Ethnic Minorities and Political Support: An Examination of Attitudes in Three
               Former Soviet Republics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9710208

Award Number: 9710208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lowell W. Barrington Lowell.Barrington@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                How loyal are ethnic minorities to their state of residence?  How supportive
              are they of its political system and political leaders?  If variation exists
              within a given minority, what explains this variation at the individual level? 
              Is political support by ethnic minorities a rational calculation or is it the
              result of subjective, identity-related factors?  These are the central
              questions of this research investigation to be undertaken in three former
              Soviet republics:  Belarus, Kazakhstan, and  Kyrgyzstan.  The investigators
              combine mass surveys and focus groups to examine the attachment of minorities,
              especially ethnic Russians outside Russia, to their state of residence and
              their level of support for its institutions.  The project addresses four major
              shortcomings in the existing literature on attitudes in the post-Communist
              states:  the emphasis on attitudes within Russia; the dominance of aggregate
              level data analysis; the confusion of the elements of political support; and,
              the limited use of multiple methods within a given study.  This multi-country,
              multi-method study produces a better understanding than now exists of the
              reasons for `political support` by an ethnic minority, variation in it within a
              given ethnic group, and variation in it from newly independent state to newly
              independent state.  Understanding such support and its variation enables
              scholars to make sense of the puzzle of why we have ethnic conflict in one
              post-Soviet state and not another, and it will help in understanding the future
              of ethnic nationalism and relations between Russia and its neighbors.  The
              implications for this understanding thus include both a better ability to
              understand and predict domestic and international politics in the region and a
              better understanding of the types of policies and practices that Western
              countries and international organizations should be encouraging in the former
              Soviet Union.  The dataset to be produced will be of great value to scholars
              interested in exploring this topic.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
