Title       : Characterization of High-Density Interconnect Structures for High Speed Digital
               and Wireless Communications Applica- tions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9710568

Award Number: 9710568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Virga virga@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710568  Virga  Research Activities - This research is directed at
              characterizing the performance behavior of high-density interconnect and
              distribution structures employed in compact high-speed digital and wireless
              communications circuit packages, The primary focus is to develop advanced
              measurement-based characterization techniques for complex, three-dimensional
              (3-D), multi-layer, interconnect structures.  Examples of complex interconnects
              include non-ideal (non-circular and non solid) multi-layer vias, many
              closely-spaced vertical conductors, fuzz buttons, and transitions between
              vertical and horizontal conductors.    Embedded interconnects are typically
              inaccessible in a package, thus there are currently no means to directly
              measure individual structures.  Since advanced high-density circuit packages
              incorporate very mixed-signal technologies, such as digital, analog, and RF
              signal conductor traces, hybrid measurement methods must be developed to
              accurately identify interconnect performance.  High payoff is achieved when
              measurement results are linked with advanced packaging design simulation tools.
               The coordination of computer-aided design (CAD) and computer aided test (CAT)
              results in improved first past design success and enables the rapid development
              of novel, low-cost advanced packaging technologies.  The research will involve
              both time-domain and frequency-domain measurement techniques.  The work will
              entail a balance between microwave-based (scattering parameters) and
              microelectronics-based (unique voltages and currents) methodologies.    The
              specific objectives of this research are develop advanced measurement
              methodologies based upon a hybrid of time-domain and frequency-domain
              approaches as well as microwave and microelectronics based approaches for three
              dimensional embedded interconnect structures employed in high-speed digital and
              wireless circuits, develop links between measured characteristics and circuit
              analysis and design simulation tools, characterize a few complex inter connect
              structures and make test results available to code developers to be used as
              benchmarks for comparisons with high performance simulation tools.    The
              research will first involve defining various advanced 3-D interconnects for
              high-speed digital, RF, microwave, and MEMS (Micro-Electromechanical Systems)
              packaging.  The theoretical background and implementation details of current
              measurement techniques for calibration and interconnect de-embedding will be
              evaluated.  New measurement techniques that overcome the fundamental
              limitations of existing methods will be developed.  Such methods will be
              developed from hybridizing time-domain & frequency-domain techniques.  The new
              methods will be used to provide accurate calibrations that do not rely on
              unrealistic packaging assumptions.  Interconnect de-embedding and
              statistical-based interconnect characterization will also be developed. 
              Several structures will be fabricated in order to provide validations to the
              new approaches.  The last part of the research will be geared toward creating
              links between measured interconnect characteristics and design simulation
              tools.  One novel approach to use in these links is the space-mapping technique
              that has been successfully used in the simulation-based optimization of some
              microwave circuits.  ***
