Title       : Reactive Polymers: Applications in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9710286

Award Number: 9710286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Kurth mjkurth@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil E. Schore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professors Mark J. Kurth and Neil E. Schore, of the   Department
              of Chemistry at the University of California, Davis, are   developing broadly
              applicable methodologies for the preparation and   evaluation of reactive
              polymer systems of use in organic synthesis.    Polymers with functionalized
              cross-links provide more homogeneous sets of   environments for substrate,
              catalyst, and reagent linkage, while polymers   based on cyclopolymerized
              functional monomer units afford less flexible   polymer backbones and
              potentially greater stereocontrol of linkage sites.    New traceless linker
              strategies are designed for use in both organic and   organometallic
              cycloaddition reactions of utility in combinatorial   studies, and an iterative
              strategy affords access to novel   polyisoxazole-based polypyrimidine and
              polypurine systems.  Following the successful development of solid-phase
              peptide synthesis, a   technique which allows the rapid and efficient
              preparation of   polypeptides, the possibility of carrying out other sorts of
              organic   transformations on solid `supports` has attracted a great deal of  
              attention.  Professors Mark J. Kurth and Neil E. Schore, of the   Department of
              Chemistry at the University of California, Davis, with the   support of the
              Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities of
              the Mathematical and Physical Sciences   Directorate, synthesize new polymeric
              solid supports designed to   facilitate specific chemical reactions of
              importance in the synthesis of   significant organic molecules.  They
              investigate new strategies for the   attachment of molecules to these solid
              supports, for the conversion of   these molecules to new species via various
              types of reactions, and for   the release from the solid support of the
              products of these reactions.    These solid-phase organic synthetic strategies
              are of direct relevance to   the field of combinatorial synthesis, wherein
              `libraries` of related   molecules of potential activity may be rapidly
              prepared and screened for   activity.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
