Title       : Database of Human Genetic Polymorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9710603

Award Number: 9710603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231424             (Estimated)
Investigator: L.Luca Cavalli-Sforza cavalli@lotka.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A data bank of human genetic polymorphisms, mostly protein and blood groups
              polymorphisms, including HLA, was generated by the PI and colleagues as part of
              the analyses required in the production of the volume, History and Geography of
              Human Genes.  This database contains allele frequencies obtained from the
              available literature on human genetic polymorphisms.  The current project aims
              to make these data available to research workers on the internet via the
              World-Wide Web, together with the set of methods of historical and geographic
              analysis already available or currently being developed in the PIs laboratory. 
              This is especially worthwhile and timely because the Web makes it easier for
              researchers to employ existing, sophisticated programs for data retrieval and
              analysis without porting them to their own computers.  The data to be made
              available on the Web will be stored and managed by an object-oriented database
              system based on a prototype already in place.  This system accepts arbitrary
              queries and delivers the results over the Web.  The available classical
              polymorphism data are identified by geographic and linguistic relationships,
              and all data will eventually be accompanied by geographical and linguistic
              information in order to facilitate further study the roles of culture and
              language in the distribution of contemporary genetic variation.   
              Additionally, the Web accessible database ultimately will be augmented with new
              data on classical marker frequencies, new data on DNA polymorphisms, and
              unpublished analytical methods being developed in the PIs laboratory.  Updating
              and maintenance of the database and Web-site will be ongoing.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
