Title       : TRACE (Trace-metal Research and Collaborative Education)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9710218

Award Number: 9710218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley T. Jones jonesbt@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1504,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)   project is
              supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and   the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  It focuses on interaction   between Wake Forest
              University and the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in   both research and
              education.  Students enrolled in the Instrumental   Analysis course at Wake
              Forest will perform six of their experiments at   the Company laboratories
              using equipment not available at the University.    Directed by Professor
              Bradley T. Jones, graduate students will hold six   month intern positions at
              the Company to learn the use of   instrumentation, serve as teaching assistants
              for the course experiments   conducted at the Company, and carry out research
              projects in diverse   areas of Analytical Chemistry.  One of these projects is
              to investigate   trace metal determination in natural waters by extraction onto
              solid   phase disks followed by x-ray fluorescent spectroscopy for the  
              measurement step.    Professor Bradley Jones of Wake Forest University and
              staff scientists of   the inorganic spectroscopy laboratory of the R. J.
              Reynolds Tobacco   Company will cooperate on experiments for the Instrumental
              Analysis   course at Wake Forest using facilities and equipment at both the  
              University and the Company.  In addition, graduate student interns will   be
              placed at the Company for six month terms to learn equipment operation   in
              depth and pursue research on projects of mutual interest to the   principle
              investigator and the Company.  These involve areas such as   trace metal
              determination in natural waters, and interferences in   spectroscopic
              measurements occurring with biological samples.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
