Title       : IDP: EFFECT, Equation for Future Equity in Curriculum and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9710713

Award Number: 9710713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra C. Cooper scooper@math.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy L. Meuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha L. LoFaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlena Grimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1588,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project EFFECT is a technology and curriculum based project  promoting the
              recruitment, retention and success of  undergraduate women in the academic and
              professional fields  of science, engineering and mathematics. Project EFFECT
              will  use a multi-faceted approach, building upon existing work at  Washington
              State University.  The project will empower women  as they strive to succeed in
              the existing university  structure and will facilitate the process of effecting
               permanent change toward equitable pedagogical techniques in  SEM courses. 
              Empowerment will be achieved through a dual  effort consisting of a Bridge
              Program designed to give women  a fast-start in their academic careers
              complemented by  either a concentrated series of technology seminars, or a 
              course specifically designed to equip students with critical  survival skills,
              including technological skills, self  awareness and self-confidence. 
              University faculty  and  graduate students will be involved in Innovation
              Workshops  designed around pedagogically sound practices that create  equitable
              learning environments for all constituents.  Research projects will be
              conducted in conjunction will all  facets of the project.  All materials
              developed should be  replicable at other institutions.
