Title       : Phosphor Development for Electroluminescent Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9710207

Award Number: 9710207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484378             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Wager jfw@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Plant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Sleight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1774,1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9710207 Wager  This GOALI proposal, co-supported by MPS/OMA, and the DMR
              Ceramics and Electronic Materials programs, addresses basic chemistry and
              materials science aspects of commercially-relevant phosphors, and through a
              multidisciplinary approach aims to both develop new phosphors appropriate for
              electroluminescent(EL) flat-panel displays, and to systematically analyze and
              optimize structure/performance properties of EL phosphors. The research
              strategy is to understand fundamental phosphor defect chemistry and relate this
              fundamental chemistry and solid state physics to the performance behavior of EL
              phosphors. Several synthesis and processing routes will be explored including a
              novel combination of MOCVD and RF sputtering for luminescent dopant
              incorporation and/or deep level doping, and the synthesis of two classes of
              nitride films with cations that are valence and size-matched to rare earth
              luminescent dopants(Eu, Ce, Tm).  Joint collaborative activities include staff
              exchange with graduate students spending time at Planar America, Inc. The
              proposed research emphasizes understanding of fundamental mechanisms and
              processes along with some practical aspects of electronic/photonic materials
              and device technology. %%% The project addresses forefront materials science
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of display devices and
              photonic devices, in general.  Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the performance of display technology by providing a fundamental understanding
              and a basis for designing and producing improved photonic materials.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. ***
