Title       : High-Resolution, Broadband VLSI Data Conversion Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9710647

Award Number: 9710647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Wooley wooley@par.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In systems wherein information is represented and processed digitally, the level
               of overall system performance that can be achieved is often limited by the
              speed  and dynamic range of the interfaces between analog and digital
              representations  of that information.  Since digitally encoded signals can be
              processed with  virtually arbitrary precision, continued progress in the
              scaling of integrated  circuit technology is accomplished by corresponding
              demand to improve the  precision and speed of so-called data conversion
              interfaces.  This pressure is,  in turn, accompanied by two constraining
              factors: the desire to embed data  conversion interfaces within large digital
              signal processing circuits and  explosive growth in the demand for portable
              electronic systems.  The integration  of data conversion circuits in VLSI
              technologies imposes severe constraints on  the dynamic range available to
              implement those circuits, while the concern for  battery life in portable
              systems often dictates substantial reductions in power  dissipation in
              comparison to traditional applications.    The principal objective of this
              research is to discover circuit design techniques  for digitizing signals with
              bandwidths of several MHz using standard digital CMOS  technologies.  The
              research focuses on the use of oversampling methods to encode  MHz-bandwidth
              radio signals centered at IF frequencies in the range of a few tens  of MHz and
              on methods of increasing the resolution of Nyquist-rate converters for 
              digitizing baseband signals with bandwidths on the order of 10 MHz.  A 
              complementary theme of the research is operation from a low supply voltage with
               minimum power dissipation.
