Title       : From Academic Integrity to Ethics in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9710545

Award Number: 9710545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100879             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Aarne Vesilind pav@egr.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will produce two videos as follow-ups to the highly successful
              video and workbook, Academic Integrity: The Bridge to Professional Ethics,
              funded in part by the National Science Foundation. The premise underlying
              Academic Integrity was that teaching engineering ethics in the abstract to
              engineering students is ineffective because the students have no context for
              the ethical problems faced by professional engineers. Academic Integrity shows
              four short vignettes, acted out by students of the Duke Drama Program and
              professionally directed and videotaped, in which students find themselves in
              complex ethical situations familiar to all students.  From a discussion of
              these ethical problems, using a workbook as a guide, instructors bridge the gap
              to professional engineering ethics during class discussions. This videotape is
              being used in nearly 300 universities and colleges in the United States and
              overseas. The users have asked for another tape with the engineering ethics
              scenarios provided in the workbook. Instructors feel that first showing the
              academic integrity video, engaging the students in a discussion, and then
              showing and discussing a follow-up vignette with the engineering ethical
              problem, would be most effective in helping them teach professional ethics. 
              Furthermore, though the original tape was produced with engineering in mind,
              many science instructors have found the tape useful. Therefore, the project
              will develop two follow-up videos and workbooks, one for engineering and one
              for science. The two new videos will be produced by the same team, using
              semi-professional actors and Duke University facilities. Two teams of advisors,
              one for engineering and one for science, will oversee the project. The same
              production procedure will be used. The Principal Investigator will write
              multiple scenarios involving professional engineering and science for each of
              the four vignettes shown in Academic Integrity and obtain feedback from the
              advisors. Based on their comments and preferences, eight scenarios will be
              chosen. Once the rough films have been produced, the advisors will again have a
              chance to comment on the tapes before they are duplicated and produced. The
              advisors will also test the current video and workbook in their classes, as
              well as drafts and rough cuts of the new videos.  Project results will be
              demonstrated at professional meetings and mailed to the chairs of science and
              engineering departments; the world wide web will also be used to disseminate
              and evaluate the results.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
