Title       : Vibrationally and Rotationally State-Resolved Differential Cross Sections for
               Reactive Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9710383

Award Number: 9710383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Keil mkeil@mail.nhn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mark Keil and Gregory A. Parker of the University of Oklahoma are   supported by
              the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue   their investigations
              on state-to-state reaction dynamics for various   simple reactions:  (i)
              fluorine atoms plus hydrogen dimer to form   hydrogen fluoride; (ii) fluorine
              atoms and hydrogen chloride to form   hydrogen fluoride and chlorine atoms;
              (iii) chlorine atoms and hydrogen   bromide to form hydrogen chloride and
              bromine atoms.  The reaction of   interest takes place at the intersection of
              two crossed molecular beams.    A high-resolution chemical laser in conjunction
              with a bolometer detector   is then used to resolve the scattered product
              vib-rotational state and   angular distribution.  The PIs will explore the
              effects of varying   initial rotational and kinetic energies, and isotopic
              substitutions, upon   the vibrationally and rotationally state-resolved
              differential cross   sections.  Direct comparisons will be made with ab initio
              theoretical   dynamical calculations using quantum scattering codes developed
              by the   co-PI.    The principal goal of these studies is to deepen our
              understanding of   chemical reaction dynamics at the detailed state-to-state
              level.    Tremendous theoretical progress is currently being made using  
              approximation techniques for simplifying increasingly complex chemical  
              reactivity problems.  The validity of approximations used in such quantum  
              calculations is often based upon experience with tri-atomic A+BC systems   of
              the sort studied here:  detailed investigations of A+BC systems have   provided
              the foundation upon which larger systems can be understood.  The   field of
              detailed chemical reaction dynamics is helping elucidate   chemical reactivity
              very broadly, with obvious relevance to all branches   of chemistry.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
