Title       : Collaborative Research: Phrase Structure and C-Command
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9710411

Award Number: 9710411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70686              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Vijayashanker vijay@cis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Throughout modern linguistic theory, it has been assumed almost  without
              exception that sentences are best represented in terms of  certain types of
              abstract graphs called trees. The choice of trees  as underlying sentence
              structure captures a number of intuitions  about the building blocks of
              sentence structure, what are called  constituents: they are contiguous; each
              constituent has a unique  structural position; every independent sentence
              comprises a single  constituent; etc. A grammatical theory must have some way
              of  selecting those trees that represent well-formed sentences.  Consequently,
              it must make use of some primitive vocabulary for  talking about properties of
              linguistically relevant tree  structures. The question of what enters into this
              primitive  vocabulary has been relatively neglected. While the domination 
              relation has been widely assumed as a primitive, this project  proposes that
              c-command, a highly grammatically relevant structural  relation, is a better
              choice and should instead play the the  central role of characterizing
              well-formedness.         The proposed research will address the following
              issues: (1)  What is the precise nature of c-command? What is the range of 
              structural objects that it allows us to define? (2) Is c-command  expressive
              enough to define the constructs of grammatical theory,  while not being overly
              permissive as to allow the definability of  linguistically irrelevant
              structures? (3) To what degree can the  use of primitive c-command elucidate
              the otherwise puzzling  dichotomy between segments and categories that has been
               introduced in recent work to distinguish different ways of  relating
              constituents together? (4) In what respect are views of  grammar that build
              structural representations using sequences of  derivational steps simplified in
              the context of primitive  c-command, in particular Chomsky's minimalist
              proposals as well  as Tree Adjoining Grammars, a system which has achieved 
              significant results both in theoretical and computational  li nguistics? (5)
              What are the implications of c-command for  models of human sentence
              processing? In particular, to what  degree can the assumption that the parser
              manipulates c-command  relations account for the relative acceptability of
              certain local  ambiguities while explaining the existence of processing 
              difficulty for others? This project also aims to show that the  use of
              c-command in sentence processing can unify two competing  strands of work in
              the development of sentence processing models  based on semantic dependencies
              and on structural configurations,  maintaining the advantages of each.
