Title       : Hydrodynamic Modeling of Impact Ionization Based on High- Energy Electron
               Subpopulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1997  
File        : a9710463

Award Number: 9710463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ting-wei Tang ttang@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ECS-9710463  Ting -wei Tang     Impact ionization is  one of the most
              important factors limiting the performance of today's advanced semiconductor
              devices.   The impact  ionization is the source of hot-electron-induced device
              degradation and is responsible for avalanche breakdown of transistors.  The
              main issue of impact ionization is the modeling of the impact ionization
              coefficient, (.  Conventionally ( is modeled as a function of electric field or
              the average energy of total electron population.  Unfortunately, these models
              do not properly describe the non-local of impact ionization.     In this
              research, we propose an innovative approach to model ( as a unique function of
              the average energy of only those high-energy exceed the impact ionization
              threshold energy.  This average macroscopic variable describes the behavior of 
              ( more accurately than the electric field or the average energy of total
              electron population.  The objective of this research is then to find a system
              of hydrodynamic transport equations, when solved, will provide information
              about this macroscopic variable.  A preliminary investigation indicates that
              the system of transport equations for the high-energy electron subpopulation
              can be reduced from three to a single transport equation.  This enables us to
              solve the transport equation easily and use our newly developed novel impact
              ionization model as a post processor to any existing device simulator which
              does not have an impact ionization model.    A great impact of this research on
              the computer-aided design of semiconductor devices can be anticipated.  The
              model can be readily incorporated in existing device simulation tools for more
              accurate  prediction of impact ionization related phenomena occurring in the
              transistors, including the prediction of the avalanche breakdown voltage.  The
              additional computational cost is very minimal.
