Title       : Biomathematical Research Planning Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9710350

Award Number: 9710350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evans K. Afenya evansa@elmhurst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elmhurst College
	      190 Prospect
	      Elmhurst, IL  601263271    312/279-4100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research planning activities will involve studies and  investigations of
              leukemia from a biomathematical viewpoint. The  project will focus on
              preliminary explorations of the following:  a) Construction of mathematical
              models that quantitatively and  qualitatively describe and characterize
              leukemia; b)  Contributions to the understanding of leukemia cell  kinetics; c)
              Construction of models that describe treatment  schemes and protocols for
              leukemia; d) Studies and comparison of  various treatment protocols through the
              use of mathematical  models; e) Treatment optimization models; f) Suggestion of
              ways  to improve the treatment of leukemia; g) Development of  analytical and
              numerical techniques that aid in the solution of  model equations that involve
              nonlinear ordinary and partial  differential equations; h) Interpretation of
              model results and  predictions within the context of the biomedical situation;
              i)  Studies of leukemia data as it pertains to insights and  predictions
              obtained from models; j) Development of collaborative  activities with
              physicians, biomedical researchers, and other  mathematicians and scientists
              interested in this endeavor; and k)  Extensions of the studies to include other
              cancers.    Specifics of the preliminary studies and investigations will 
              include biomathematical descriptions of leukemogenesis; studies  of models of
              normal and leukemic cells considered as interacting  cell populations;
              investigations of normal and leukemic cell  behavior in the bone marrow, blood,
              and the active and resting  phases of the cell cycle; studies of the inherent
              effects of time  lags in leukemic development; explorations of leukemia from 
              diffusion-oriented perspectives; considerations of bone marrow  transplantation
              models and chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic  treatment models for
              leukemia. Exploratory mathematical models  will be used to investigate
              treatment schemes and protocols.  Mathematical techniques for the development,
              analysis, and  solution of models will be explo red. Particular attention will
              be  paid to gathering of leukemia data from various sources and  statistical
              analysis of such data will be pursued. Numerical and  analytical techniques for
              solving large model systems of coupled  ordinary and partial differential
              equations,  differential-difference equations, and delay differential 
              equations will also be explored and studied.    It is envisioned that the
              research planning activities will lead  to a comprehensive biomathematical
              research project that will  advance knowledge in understanding cancer cell
              dynamics,  mathematically and biomedically, and will aid the biomedical 
              community in its search for better therapeutic strategies.
