Title       : Reciprocity in the Russian Labor Market: Its Role in the Transition from State
               Socialism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9710531

Award Number: 9710531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Granovetter mgranovetter@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5973,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the Russian labor market, using this empirical case to
              develop fresh theoretical propositions on the role of social networks in
              changing labor markets.  Research on the transition from state socialism to a
              "market" economy has stressed centralized allocation of goods and services and
              the shift to allocation by market exchange.  The work of Karl Polanyi is often
              cited in this connection.  Polanyi argued that there are three fundamental ways
              that goods and services are allocated, each supported by an institutional
              structure: redistribution, supported by strong central governments, exchange,
              supported by free markets, and reciprocity, supported by symmetrical social
              groupings which include social networks. Existing research slights the role of
              reciprocity, typically invoking social networks as supports for redistribution
              or exchange, but not clearly grasping their role as supporting reciprocity.
              This project explores the possibility that reciprocity is in fact important
              both in market and in state socialist societies, and that during complex
              transitions such as those occurring in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
              Union, it takes on an especially vital role.     This study examines how
              working people in Russia have coped with the tumultuous  changes in the labor
              market brought on by dramatic restructuring of both private and public
              enterprises, and the virtual disappearance of many long-standing employers,
              accompanied by the rise of new organizations and organizational forms. It will
              conduct a substantial survey in Samara, a large industrial city in the Russian
              heartland, which will provide the first systematic picture of how productive
              organizations and workers are being matched under the conditions of transition.
                  By studying a probability sample of both firms and the workers themselves
              who find work in these firms, the study will investigate the significance of
              restructuring, the origins of workers who enter the newly developed private
              sector, the fate of workers cut loo se by the shrinking of the public sector,
              and the strategies by which people may survive and under some circumstances
              prosper, amidst these unprecedented changes. The research focuses upon how
              labor market allocation is influenced by previously existing ties between
              workers and employers, the continuing role of kinship networks in directing
              workers to one or another work situation, and the extent to which ties to
              previous or new political authorities results in influence that has labor
              market consequences.     Analysis of these survey results will give the first
              full account from the ground up of how individual Russians have coped with
              transition, and thus will help construct a fuller theoretical account of how
              economic, political and social institutions are linked following the collapse
              of state socialism.
