Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Controlled Atmosphere Disinfestation of Raw Agricultural Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9710582

Award Number: 9710582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Swette lswette@ginerinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GINER, INC.
	      89 Rumford Avenue
	      Newton, MA  024661311    781/529-0500

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1417,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This Small Business Research Phase II  project is directed to development of
              a method for disinfestation of raw agricultural products.  Insect infestation
              is a universal problem in produce storage, processing and shipping that must be
              effectively addressed to minimize health concerns and to maintain an appetizing
              appearance, shelf life and marketability.  Cargoes that cross state and
              national boundaries are also generally subject to stringent regulations for the
              same reasons as well as to prevent the importation of harmful agricultural
              pests.  Containerized cargo transport in which containers carry a dedicated
              refrigeration unit ("reefers") employs controlled-atmospheres (CA) for
              preservation of' perishable products.  Giner, Inc. has developed a system for
              active continuous removal of oxygen leaking into "sealed" reefers to controlled
              low oxygen levels, and extend CA technology from food preservation to
              disinfestation applications.  The oxygen level must be lowered sufficiently for
              disinfestation but not below the tolerance level of the respiring produce.  The
              Giner, Inc. Electrochemical Oxygen Removal (EOR) system is uniquely suited for
              adaptation as an Electrochemical Oxygen Control (EOC) system.   In Phase I a
              prototype FOC system suitable for disinfestation was designed, built and
              tested, and a feasibility demonstration with fresh produce was Successfully
              concluded.  Phase II of the program will optimize the electrochemical reactor
              and refine the control system of the prototype EOC.  The unit will be field
              tested more extensively with a variety of produce for effectiveness in
              disinfestation.    Anticipated benefits of this development include greater
              availability of' fresh,  healthy,  agricultural products without the loss of
              quality associated with disinfestation by heating or freezing or the chemical
              residues from pesticides.  There should also be substantial cost savings
              associated with the prevention of losses for producers, shippers and consumers.
               This technology may also open to sh ip transport more distant markets that are
              now only accessible by expensive air transport.  The technology developed is
              anticipated to find application for disinfestation in many other environments
              where insect infestation is a problem.
