Title       : Transition Metal Catalyzed Olefin Polymerizations: Mechanistic Studies and
               Catalyst Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9710380

Award Number: 9710380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice S. Brookhart mbrookhart@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Maurice Brookhart, Department of Chemistry, University of North   Carolina -
              Chapel Hill, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Program of the Chemistry Division, with a contribution for   instrumentation
              from the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate, for mechanistic and   design studies of late
              transition metal olefin polymerization catalysts.   The major thrust of the
              project will be the study of Ni(II) and Pd(II)   complexes of bulky
              alpha-diimines, which have, for example, the ability   to control polymer chain
              branching through ligand variation. Rigorous   mechanistic studies of the
              polymerization reactions will be carried out   in order to gain understanding
              of the factors that control the behavior   of the catalysts and that determine
              the properties of the resultant   polymer. A variety of alpha-diimine based
              catalysts, with a variety of   ligand architectures, will be synthesized with
              the objective of probing   the effect of ligand structure on polymer
              microstructure and mechanisms   of monomer enchainment. These catalysts will be
              evaluated for the   polymerization and copolymerization of new monomers. Using
              insights from   these studies new neutral Ni(II) and Pd(II) catalyst systems
              will be   prepared containing bulky bidentate anionic ligands. These systems
              should   exhibit great functional group tolerance and be especially good
              catalysts   for the copolymerization of ethylene and polar olefins.  Intensive
              research has been directed toward understanding fundamental   aspects of
              metal-catalyzed olefin polymerization and the results of these   studies have
              been used to develop new catalysts. These have been   enormously important
              contributions since over thirty billion pounds of   polyolefin are produced in
              the United States each year. Most of the   commercial olefin polymerization
              catalysts are based on early transition   or lanthanide metals. In this project
              a series of highly versatile late   transition metal catalysts will be
              investigated. These will provide   fundamental information on how catalysts
              join olefins to one another   during the polymerization process as well as new
              catalyst systems with   potential industrial applications.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
