Title       : Testing the Adequacy of a Linear Model via Critical Smoothing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9710084

Award Number: 9710084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Li-Shan Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Local linear regression is a useful tool for estimating an unknown  
              regression function under a random design model. An important problem   in the
              fitting of a local linear regression is  the choice of the   smoothing
              parameter.  As the smoothing parameter becomes   large, the estimator tends to
              a straight line, which is the least   squares fit in the ordinary  linear
              regression setting. Such  a property   may be used to assess the adequacy of a
              linear model. The idea is that in   the nonlinear case a large bandwidth is
              required to yield a   linear estimate, while  if the true model is linear, less
              smoothing   is needed to give  a linear regression estimate. Thus a suitable  
              test statistic is the value of the  smoothing parameter at the point   where
              the estimate changes from nonlinear to linear. For a set of   given data, this
              critical bandwidth can be found, to certain   accuracy, by a binary search. The
              ``wild bootstrap'' procedure   can be used to replicate the data to assess  the
              significance of the   test.       The development of the  proposed project will
              involve some theoretical   proofs that the test has the required asymptotic 
              properties and   simulation studies  to evaluate  the performance of the test
              on examples   arising in applications. Research problems related to the
              proposed   project  are  nonparametric tests  of the difference   between two
              regression curves  and detecting  heteroscedasticity   in regression problems, 
              based on  the local linear regression.   These may be  topics for the  future 
              research proposals.
