Title       : CRUI: Observations of PLA2 at the Phospholipid Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9710795

Award Number: 9710795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Walter waltera@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Walczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger B. Proksch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1091,9178,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9710795    The organization of the enzymes that work at biological  membrane
              surfaces will be studied by combining expertise in  chemistry, physics and
              biology.  Indirect measurements  suggest that their activity may be determined
              by their  arrangement (single, dimeric or aggregated) and by the  length of
              time they spend at the surface.  In turn, the  organization and dwell time of
              the enzyme is altered by the  lipid composition of the membrane.  The goal is
              to directly  observe the state of these enzymes under a variety of  conditions
              using scanning probe microscopy (SPM), and to  correlate these results with
              their catalytic properties  measured under similar conditions.  Robust models
              of  biological membranes suitable for examination by SPM will be  developed.  
              Then these model  systems will be adapted for measuring enzyme activities and 
              the membrane state using optical spectroscopy and  electrochemical techniques.
              Preliminary experiments  conducted by undergraduate students and faculty show
              that  the methods proposed are feasible and the information  obtained will
              address a fundamental question about how cell  activities are controlled.  Over
              the life of this project,  twenty  or more undergraduate students will
              experience  collaborative, interdisciplinary research with sophisticated 
              equipment, addressing problems that could not be solved by a  single researcher
              or discipline alone.     Nontechnical Abstract    This project focuses on cell
              membranes, thin layers of  proteins and lipids that are crucial structures
              within and  bordering the cells of all living organisms. Cell membranes  have
              many functions including  providing a means of  organizing other components of
              the cell and regulating  traffic and information flow between the inside and
              outside  of the cell. One can describe the cell membrane in terms of  its
              average composition, but this is not sufficient to tell  us how the membrane
              functions.  The tools are just being  developed to describe the cell membrane
              at the level of  detai l needed to understand its function. One new technique, 
              scanning probe microscopy (SPM),  measures the physical  features of the
              membrane at a molecular scale by probing in  a manner analogous to the way the
              needle of a record player  systematically touches the record and converts the
              small  changes in the vinyl to an electrical signal and then to  music.  This
              type of probing  will allow the description of  the membrane at the level of
              detail necessary to explain at  least one of its functions, the control of an
              important  signaling pathway that requires special interactions between  a
              protein and the membrane lipids.
