Title       : RUI: Natural-Enemy Response to Herbivore Host-Race Formation: Specialization to
               Host-Plant Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9710109

Award Number: 9710109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren G. Abrahamson ABRAHMSN@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Cronin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABRAHAMSON  9710109    The incorporation of a novel host into the diet of an
              herbivorous insect is a common occurrence, and it is thought to be a
              significant early step in the speciation process.  One plausible consequence of
              herbivore speciation via a host-plant shift is that the herbivore's natural
              enemies might also undergo speciation in response.  The investigators will
              examine the ecological response of the parasitic wasp, Eurytoma gigantea, to a
              recent host shift by its herbivorous prey, the goldenrod ball gall inducer
              (Eurosta solidaginis).  Evidence suggests that tall goldenrod (Solidago
              altissima) was the original host of the gall inducer, and that only more
              recently was late goldenrod (S. gigantea) incorporated into the gall inducer's
              diet.  The gall inducer currently exists as two distinct "host-associated
              races" that differ genetically, behaviorally, and physiologically.  The
              objective of this study is to determine if phenotypic differences exist within
              and among the gall inducer predators.  In particular the investigators ask if
              wasp populations differ in terms of adult oviposition preference for the two
              host races or if larval performance of the wasp predators differs on the two
              goldenrod host-races.    Insect herbivores and their predators represent a
              great majority of biological diversity and are of considerable economic
              significance.  Host shifts such as the one described above are common and have
              been reported for pests of agricultural, forest, endangered, and other native
              plant species.  A shift by an agricultural pest to a new crop species may lead
              to high economic losses of the new crop species as the herbivore escapes its
              predators.  This study will increase understanding of what may facilitate or
              limit a corresponding shift by natural enemies onto the novel host plant, and
              what may influence the evolution of increased efficiency of a predator in the
              utilization of the new host-plant complex.  By directing research toward the
              adaptation of natural enemies to the plants on w hich their hosts feed, this
              research may improve the biological control of both native and introduced
              pests.
