Title       : Counting the Uncountable: Investigations into Social Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9710353

Award Number: 9710353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253812             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Russell Bernard ufruss@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher McCarty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whenever someone says `we have a problem here, and we need to spend public money
              to fix it` the first question asked is `how big is this problem -- how many
              people are affected by it?`  The current research will improve a new method --
              called the `network scale-up` -- for estimating the size of hard-to-count
              populations like the homeless and victims of various kinds of crime.  The
              network scale-up method involves asking people how many people they know in
              various populations whose size is well known.  One difficulty with the network
              scale-up method is that people often over-report their knowledge about members
              of small populations and under-report their knowledge about members of large
              populations.  Under-reporting may occur because people are unaware that someone
              they know is, in fact, a member of a specific population, while over-reporting
              may occur when people are forced to choose a specific number for their
              knowledge of a population, and guess.  In this project, we will use focus
              groups and a network survey to provide a qualitative understanding of the
              dimensions of these effects. The network survey will produce information about
              the probability that people know certain kinds of things about each other.  For
              example, people often know the occupations of each of their acquaintances, but
              are less likely to know that their acquaintances have a twin sibling.  The
              probabilities derived from this research will enhance the accuracy of the
              network scale-up method for estimating the size of populations whose size is
              not known.  We will then conduct national, representative surveys to
              incorporate and test refinements of the method.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
