Title       : Becoming Democratic (?): A Panel Study of Learning to Tolerate in South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9710214

Award Number: 9710214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259186             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1093,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Gibson  9710214    This research extends the PI's previous research
              on the process of democratization in South Africa.  The current project is a
              second wave panel study of 3,0331 persons who were interviewed in 1996.  The
              second wave will explore further respondents political intolerance, and changes
              that are occurring in how South Africans are becoming committed to democratic
              institutions and processes over the course of the early period of
              democratization, the role institutional change plays in creating more
              democratic attitudes, values and behaviors, the effect of efforts to induce
              tolerance through persuasive communication, and the roles cognitive
              mobilization and civil society play in creating more democratic attitudes and
              values.  Great care is being taken to minimize the loss of respondents in the
              second wave of the design, to be sure that respondents can answer in their
              language of choice, to be certain the questions and experimental scenarios used
              in the interviews are equivalent across languages, that respondents represent
              the racial and linguistic heterogeneity of the population, and that reliability
              estimates for the instruments are calculable.  The sophistication of the
              surveys in this project fill a void that previous survey work in Africa has
              left because of the questionable methods employed.  The project extends
              theoretical developments in our understanding of the process of democratization
              as well as provides an invaluable dataset that will be available to other
              researchers at the conclusion of the project.      %%%    This research extends
              the PI's previous research on the process of democratization in South Africa. 
              The current project is a second wave panel study of 3,0331 persons who were
              interviewed in 1996.  The second wave will explore further respondents
              political intolerance, and changes that are occurring in how South Africans are
              becoming committed to democratic institutions and processes over the course of
              the early period of democratization, the role ins titutional change plays in
              creating more democratic attitudes, values and behaviors, the effect of efforts
              to induce tolerance through persuasive communication, and the roles cognitive
              mobilization and civil society play in creating more democratic attitudes and
              values.  Great care is being taken to minimize the loss of respondents in the
              second wave of the design, to be sure that respondents can answer in their
              language of choice, to be certain the questions and experimental scenarios used
              in the interviews are equivalent across languages, that respondents represent
              the racial and linguistic heterogeneity of the population, and that reliability
              estimates for the instruments are calculable.  The sophistication of the
              surveys in this project fill a void that previous survey work in Africa has
              left because of the questionable methods employed.  The project extends
              theoretical developments in our understanding of the process of democratization
              as well as provides an invaluable dataset that will be available to other
              researchers at the conclusion of the project.      ***
