Title       : Oxidations of Organosulfur Compounds with Molecular Oxygen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9710166

Award Number: 9710166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Clennan clennane@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor Edward L. Clennan, of the Department of Chemistry   at
              the University of Wyoming, studies the oxidation of organosulfur   compounds
              with molecular oxygen.  Professor Clennan examines the   reactions of
              dialkylsulfides with singlet oxygen, in which both physical   quenching and
              chemical reaction are observed, elucidating their   mechanisms by observing
              reactive intermediates such as O,S-sulfenyl   sulfinates and thiopersulfoxides.
               The photooxidations of thiolanes and   1,3-dithianes are also explored,
              focusing on the formation and reactions   of hydroperoxy sulfonium ylides.  In
              order both to investigate the   fundamental influence of environment on organic
              sulfide oxidations and to   develop new synthetic methods, Professor Clennan
              examines the electron   transfer oxidation of 1,3-dithianes and the molecular
              oxidation of   sulfides in zeolite microenvironments.  Sulfur-containing
              organic compounds and their oxidation are matters of   considerable importance
              in a wide variety of biological, atmospheric, and   industrial processes. 
              Professor Edward L. Clennan, of the Department of   Chemistry at the University
              of Wyoming, with the support of the Organic   Dynamics Program and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate, studies the reactions of   sulfur-containing molecules with
              oxygen. Through analysis of the products   of these reactions and of the
              intermediate compounds formed en route to   these products, Professor Clennan
              sheds light on the fundamental   molecular events responsible for their
              formation.  In addition to the   provision of a more general understanding of
              such oxidation reactions,   these studies are leading to the development of new
              mechanistic tools to   explore light-assisted oxidation reactions and the
              discovery of new and   useful oxidizing environments and new methods for the
              synthesis of   important materials.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
