Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Multimedia for Learning Structural Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1998  
File        : a9710664

Award Number: 9710664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. J. Mackay don@sciencemedia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ScienceMedia
	      6540 Lusk Blvd. Suite C144
	      San Diego, CA  92121    619/625-9261

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9710664  Mackay   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              from ScienceMedia develops an interactive multimedia tool ("Molecules of Life")
              to teach students how information, structure, and chemistry give rise to
              biological function at the molecular level.  This project uses advances in
              computer, multimedia, and information technologies to respond to the national
              priority of improving scientific literacy.  During Phase I, molecular graphics
              and virtual reality technologies were integrated into a prototype multimedia
              system.  Content covering enzyme structure and mechanism was developed that
              showed that the system could teach structure-function relationships in a
              visually compelling and intuitive fashion.  During Phase II, under the guidance
              of a development team including a molecular modeling specialist, a multimedia
              programmer, a graphic artist, and a cognitive scientist, the content will be
              expanded to include examples in six other areas of biochemistry, along with
              additional background material.  "Molecules of Life" will be reviewed by
              teachers and students both during design and following implementation.  The
              feasibility of distributing "Molecules of Life" at least in part over the World
              Wide Web will also be investigated.  The result of the Phase II project will be
              a multimedia product ready for testing in the marketplace.   The explosion of
              technological and fundamental advances in molecular genetics and biotechnology
              in the last twenty years is increasingly having an important impact on the
              health sciences, agriculture, environmental cleanup, forensics, and other
              diverse fields. By utilizing emerging technologies in interactive multimedia to
              provide individualized, interactive learning experiences, this project will
              contribute to overcoming some of the barriers to effective teaching and thus
              will contribute to meeting the need for basic literacy in the biological and
              health sciences among the general public as explicitly included in the National
              Science Education Stand ards.  "Molecules of Life" will be sold to college
              level students enrolled in biology, biochemistry, and molecular biology
              courses.  ***
