Title       : In-Situ X-ray Structural Study of Electrode less- Metallization Using a Chemical
               Deposition Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9710789

Award Number: 9710789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luz J. Martinez-Miranda martinez@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710789  Martinez-Miranda  Nanometer size particles or films of materials have
              structural, electrical and mechanical properties that differ from those of the
              bulk material, due to confinement effects and the presence of a large number of
              interfaces.  These materials have potential new applications in devices.  Their
              use as device elements depends on the careful control of the materials'
              properties, achieved through the careful control of the processing methods used
              to develop these materials.    Many methods are used to prepare nanoscale
              materials.  This proposal concentrates on the analysis of materials grown by
              solution chemistry, specifically using a non-aqueous, alcohol-based route known
              as the polyol method.  Scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory have used
              this method in the metallization of electronic ceramic substrates.  Little
              information exists about the process of metal precipitation on the substrate,
              and of the eventual process of nucleation and film growth.  Similarly, the
              structural evolution of the film during the deposition process is not known.   
              This proposal describes a collaborative effort to study the in-situ structural
              evolution of metal deposition on AIN substrates between the University of
              Maryland and the Naval Research Laboratory.  Film structure can be probed using
              diffraction methods.  The project consists of two activities: 1. the
              development of a deposition cell suitable for in-situ diffraction studies; 2.
              An in-situ combined grazing incidence asymmetric Bragg (GIAB) diffraction study
              and small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) study of film evolution during
              deposition.  This study will examine the following issues: 1. the possible
              existence of predeposition nanometer size agglomerates; 2. the formation of
              (reaction) layers during the first stages of deposition; 3. metal deposit
              evolution.    These two activities combine expertise available at the
              University of Maryland (characterization) and at the Naval Research Laboratory.
               The activities will expand the charac terization capabilities available at the
              University of Maryland as well as provide an increase understanding of how
              processing parameters affect film formation.  This project will impact other
              potential collaborations involving the solution-based deposition of magnetic
              multilayers and ceramic materials' films and particles.  ***
