Title       : Minority Perspectives on Attitudes Toward Informed Consent Procedures for
               Adolescent Risk Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9710310

Award Number: 9710310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Celia Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4651

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              US scientists are increasingly aware of public distrust about research
              participation following some abuses, most notably the Tuskegee study which
              failed to appropriately inform and provide treatment for African American men
              with syphilis. This project will assess the strength and impact of the
              `Tuskegee effect` on the attitudes of African American and European American
              parents and youth regarding social science research and associated ethical
              issues. A major goal of this project is to enhance community trust in the
              scientific enterprise by gathering information that can improve approaches to
              informed consent for research conducted with adolescents at-risk for health
              compromising behaviors, juvenile delinquency, and academic failure. A
              two-pronged methodology will draw upon community perspectives and incorporate
              both qualitative and quantitative techniques that can document common and
              unique dimensions of ethical attitudes in different ethnic groups. Ultimately
              it will empower individuals in ways that improve ethical procedures.
              Qualitative data will be collected through focus groups on parents' and
              adolescents' opinions on (a) trust and suspicion of social science research;
              (b) the perceived value and potential cost of adolescent risk research to
              individuals and communities, and (b) attitudes toward different ethical
              arguments on requiring and waiving guardian consent.  Building on the
              qualitative data, the PI will create culturally valid questionnaires to
              quantify significant aspects of parent and adolescent responses to ethical
              issues in informed consent procedures for adolescent risk research. Focus
              groups for community input at the outset and throughout the project will insure
              that the issues raised in the qualitative portion of the project reflect
              community concerns, that the terminology and format of the quantitative
              instruments are appropriate for the participants, and that conclusions drawn
              from the study are culturally valid. Project results will be disseminated
              through scholarly publications, meetings with IRB members, and newsletters
              reaching both scientists and African and European American community members.
              At the end of the second year a Community Forum held at Fordham University will
              engage the original participants, their community leaders, and scholars from
              diverse ethnic backgrounds in open dialogue about how to improve
              ethics-in-science practices and how to increase ethnic minority interest in
              social science research and sensitivity to both its promise and risks. The
              community forum will provide an opportunity for African American and European
              American clergy, teachers, parents and youth to work in partnership with
              developmental scientists to create socially meaningful and ethically
              responsible guidelines for social science research. It will provide the basis
              of a Guidebook for Informed Consent Procedures for Ethnic Minority Adolescent
              Risk Research to be distributed to developmental scientists, IRB members,
              ethnic minority scholars, and community members.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
