Title       : Cataloging and Computerizing the Paul S. Martin Collection of Archaeological
               Materials at The Field Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a9710181

Award Number: 9710181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Haas Haas@fmnh785.fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Field Museum of Natural History
              will construct an up to date catalogue of items in the Paul S. Martin
              Archaeological Collection, enter it into an electronic data base and make this
              available via the Museum's World Wide Web connection. Martin spent his
              archaeological career, which began in the 1930s and spanned more than 40 years,
              in the U.S.Southwest. His excavations and resultant collections constitute a
              unique national resource representing the coordinated efforts of a single
              individual in two relatively small areas: southwest Colorade and East Central
              Arizona/West Central New Mexico. Martin surveyed and excavated extensively in
              both areas and brought back to the Field Museum large systematic samples of his
              fieldwork. They are accompanied by extensive notes and photographs which make
              them useful for addressing many modern research questions. Martin was
              meticulous in his methods of excavation and survey and his work provides a
              solid data base for exploring issues of evolutionary precess, social relations,
              culture history and human behavior. Not only is a large corpus of ceramics and
              lithic artifacts represented, but hte materials include tens of thousands of
              corn cobs, seeds and other archaeobotanical samples which can be used to
              understand plant genetics, evolution and past environments.  Currently, much of
              the collection is uncatalogued and the previously catalogued items consist of
              litte more than an electronic  list. No detailed provenience information is
              included and there is limited consistency to the artifact descriptions,
              artifact material types or site characteristics. Therefore it is extremely
              difficult for researchers to use the collection in an effective manner. With
              NSF support, the catalogued information will be upgraded and the remaining
              materials will be entered into the system. An electronic database will be
              constructed. All pertinent `hard copy` records will be updated to agree with
              the corrected and upgraded electronic databases. Provenience data and artifact
              descriptions will be entered into the catalogue books. Access to the entire
              collection wiill ths be greatly facilitated and greatlyh improved service can
              be provided to the large number of archaeologists working in the Southwest USA.
                                                           `                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
