Title       : Social Equity, Group Identity, and the Management of Difference in Research on
               Human Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9710432

Award Number: 9710432
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Epstein sepstein@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project analyzes the management of difference and the concern with social
              equity in   scientific research on human populations. Specifically, the project
              tracks the incorporation of gender and race as variables in the design and
              evaluation of biological and biomedical research. While some argue that these
              policies promote research that is both more equitable and more capable of
              producing adequate, generalizable data, others suggest that such requirements
              interfere with the conduct of rigorous research. The central case study will be
              the recent mandates to include women and members of racial minority groups in
              experiments such as randomized clinical trials. In addition, the project will
              analyze the extent of concern with issues of gender and racial diversity in
              other domains of biological research, including the Human Genome Project. The
              project seeks to identify the causes and consequences of the recent push for
              the inclusion of diverse subject populations in biomedical and biological
              research. It asks how, and in what ways, scientific institutions should be
              sensitive to conceptions of social and bodily difference. And the study
              explores the practical consequences of this management of difference for the
              acquisition of   biomedical and biological knowledge about the human body, as
              well as for broader cultural understandings of gender and race as bodily
              markers and determinants of social identity. The methods to be employed
              include: 1) analysis of government records and content analysis of published
              reports of clinical trials to measure changes in the demographic diversity of
              biological experiments on human subjects; 2) open-ended, semi-structured
              interviews with researchers, government officials, politicians, and activists
              to reconstruct the history of recent policy changes regarding the inclusion of
              women and racial minorities in biomedical research; and 3) database searches to
              retrieve relevant articles in the mass media, the scientific press, the
              Congressional Record. and other sources. This study holds significance for
              scientists, practitioners of science and technology studies, and the public at
              large. For scientists, the project has considerable relevance because it will
              analyze the causes and consequences of policy shifts that centrally affect
              their work. For practitioners of science and technology studies, the project
              contributes to debates concerning the public negotiation of the credibility of
              experiments (particularly experiments conducted on human subjects, such as
              randomized clinical trials) as well as contributing to research on the public
              accountability of science and the relation between science and social
              movements. For the general public, the study analyzes the impact of `identity
              politics` upon actual scientific practice. Study findings will be presented in
              the form of journal articles directed to specialized audiences, presentations
              at conferences, and a book intended for a wide audience of academics and
              educated lay readers.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
