Title       : GOALI: Implantation of Large Molecular Ions Into Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9710483

Award Number: 9710483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Sosnowski marek@hertz.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Poate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Class  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Jacobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Eaglesham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9710483  Sosnowski  Ion implantation, an essential technology for the doping and
              fabrication of all Si integrated circuits, is now facing critical research and
              development challenges.  Principal amongst these is the production of ultra-low
              energy beams and the concomitant formation of ultra-shallow junctions.  The
              research challenges can be broadly defined into two areas (1) the production
              and transport of low energy beams and (11) determining the dopant range and
              defect production in close proximity to the surface.  The research described
              here will be carried out by a collaboration of NJIT, a university with
              expertise in ion beams and microelectronics research, Bell Laboratories of
              Lucent Technologies, a force in Si integrated circuit research and development,
              and Eaton, a leading manufacturer of ion implantation tools.    Boron
              implantation poses the most severe challenge for ultra-shallow junction
              formation because of its inherently large range and the phenomenon of transient
              enhanced diff-usion.  Large molecules such as decaborane, BlOH14, offer a
              unique way of performing ultra-shallow implantation without the use of very low
              accelerating voltages as the kinetic energy is partitioned proportionally to
              the constituent atomic mass.  Research at NJIT and Eaton will involve the
              construction of ion sources and beam lines to determine the optimum conditions
              for the generation and transport of these fragile molecules.  Concurrently,
              research at NJIT and Bell Labs will focus on the implantation of these
              molecules into Si, damage formation and electrical junction formation. 
              Analysis of the implanted samples will involve the dopant marker layer
              techniques that the Bell Labs group have used to unravel the mechanism of
              transient enhanced diffusion at medium energies.  A crucial aspect here will be
              to understand transient enhanced diffusion for these large molecules and
              equivalent atomic implantation at close proximity to the Si surface.    The
              benefits of this research will be manifested on several fro nts.  A fundamental
              knowledge of the mechanism of generation and stability of beams of decaborane
              will help define the road map for future generations of low energy implantation
              machines.  A knowledge of the range and transient enhanced diffusion of large
              molecule implantation, and equivalent atomic implantation, will help resolve
              fundamental questions regarding dopant clustering and defect production
              contiguous to the surface.  This information, which is essential for the design
              of future generations of devices, would be a milestone for implantation and
              defect research.  ***
