Title       : Engineering Growth Factor/Receptor Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a9710143

Award Number: 9710143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Lauffenburger lauffen@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1338,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9710143  Lauffenburger  This project will combine approaches of biochemical 
              engineering, cell biology, and molecular biology to increase  the quantitative
              understanding and manipulation of growth  factor/receptor dynamics at both the
              cell and tissue level.  Work will focus on the dynamics of autocrine growth
              factor  signaling, particularly with respect to the spatial  regulation of
              ligand release and receptor occupancy.  A  major goal in this direction will be
              to determine whether  autocrine ligands provided information to cells regarding
               their tissue "community" as opposed to their local  microenvironment, and how
              physico-chemical parameters  influence this information.  Work will also
              continue to  build on current models of receptor trafficking to include  new
              experimental information about the sorting compartment,  and to extend these
              models to incorporate key components of  related signal transduction pathways. 
              This will allow a  quantitative evaluation of the effects of altered receptor 
              trafficking on signaling pathways underlying previous  studies of cell
              proliferation responses.  Understanding  these sorts of integrated dynamical
              influences on growth  factor signaling will continue to generate a rational
              basis  for the design of improved pharmacological growth factor  mimics or
              antagonists.  By using the human epidermal growth  factor/receptor system
              transfected into defined cell lines,  tools for molecular biology such as
              monoclonal antibodies,  site-directed receptor mutants, and recombinant site- 
              directed ligand variants can be used for biochemical  engineering purposes. 
              The work for the new grant period has  been organized into three specific aims
              which are designed  to facilitate the understanding of receptor and ligand 
              dynamics in growth factor regulation of cell function.  ***
