Title       : Career: Developmental Tradeoffs and Host Race Formation in Rhagoletis Pomonella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9508559

Award Number: 9508559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Feder Feder.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508559  FEDER   The Tephritid fly Rhagoletis pomonella is of interest to both
              farmers and population biologists alike.  Not only are these flies major
              economic pests of apples, but they may also be in the process of speciating. 
              Although R. pomonella is commonly referred to as the "Apple Maggot", apples are
              not the native host plant of these flies.  That distinction belongs to
              hawthorns (thornapples).  In the mid-1800's a portion of the R. pomonella 
              populations in the Hudson Valley region of New York shifted from hawthorns and
              started attacking apples as a new host plant.  Since then, apple-infesting
              populations of R. pomonella  have spread across the eastern United States and
              have recently been introduced into California, Oregon and Washington.  Genetic
              studies indicate that apple and hawthorn populations of R. pomonella are
              partially isolated entities.  Six genes consistently display frequency
              differences between the apple and hawthorn fly races.  These studies suggest
              that Rhagoletis flies may speciate sympatrically (i.e. without geographic
              isolation) in the process of specializing on new host plants.   The goals of
              the proposed research are two-fold:1.)  To ascertain how R. pomonella has
              adapted its life history to allow it to successfully attack apples as a new
              host plant. 2.) To determine the role that such changes in life history play in
              isolating apples from hawthorn races of the fly.   Because R. pomonella flies
              have only one generation per year and adults live for only about a month, there
              is strong selection pressure on apple and hawthorn flies to match their
              development to that of their respective host plants.   To test this hypothesis,
              Dr. Feder will manipulate rearing conditions for flies in the laboratory to
              induce environment dependent changes at the six genetic markers differing
              between the host races.  In effect, he will be attempting to genetically
              transform the hawthorn host race into the apple race (and vice-versa) by
              selecting on hawthorn flies as if they were infesting f ruits with the earlier
              phenology of apples.         What will we learn from the proposed research? 
              First, the experiments will elucidate whether and how R. pomonella has altered
              its life history so that it can attack apples.  Second, the results will
              pinpoint which environmental factors are most important for R. pomonella to
              overcome in a successful host shift.  By subsequently measuring the intensity
              with which these factors act in the field, it will be possible to gauge how
              effective host-associated selection is at reproductively isolating apple and of
              the development traits adapting R. pomonella to apples.  Such information will
              aid us in devising new measures to control the Apple Maggot and other fruit fly
              pests.  The results will also help us predict what crops are potentially
              vulnerable to attack by Rhagoletis, as this pest spreads into new, fruit
              growing regions of the United States.   Dr. Feder also has a strong commitment
              to transfer knowledge of population biology to others.  This CAREER grant will
              also allow him to continue to pursue his teaching interest.  He will teach a
              series of three classes at the undergraduate and graduate levels, exposing
              students to the general principles and concepts that form the basis for this
              and other research in population biology & systematics.
