Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Modeling and Estimation ofMechanical Behavior
               of Elastomer Based Smart Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9508617

Award Number: 9508617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Thomas Banks htbanks@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Munoz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Yanyo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9508617  Banks   The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
              Mathematical   Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
              exchange of mathematical   scientists between academia and industry at
              different stages of their careers. These   programs will strengthen the links
              between industry and academia and identify and   encourage new avenues of
              research in the mathematical sciences. The University-Industry   Postdoctoral
              Research Fellowships provide two years of support for recent recipients of  
              doctoral degrees in the mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of
              contributing   to the future vitality of the scientific effort of the nation.
              The postdoctoral fellow will   work closely with scientific advisors from both
              academia and industry.   In collaboration with polymer scientists at the Lord
              Corporation, the postdoctoral   fellow will use material independent force and
              moment balance derivations combined with   a material dependent finite strain
              elasticity theory to develop and validate nonlinear   dynamic models for rubber
              based filled elastomers undergoing large deformations. The   resulting
              nonlinear partial differential equation models, to be used in design of
              controllable   or "smart material" elastomers, will be modified and validated
              using specially designed   experiments performed in Lord Corporation labs along
              with inverse problem algorithms   that are developed. These algorithms and
              associated computational packages will be   developed in the context of a
              mathematical framework for wellposedness and   approximation  that will be
              developed by the applied mathematicians in this   multidisciplinary team.
