Title       : Regulation of Underground Insect Herbivores: Subterranean Trophic Cascades?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9508673

Award Number: 9508673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Strong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9508673  STRONG   This research focuses on a below-ground trophic cascade
              involving a root-feeding moth caterpillar, a bush lupine, a soil-dwelling
              entomopathogenic nematode, and predators on this nematode.  It is the nematode
              predators that initiate this cascade.  These predators are primarily the
              nematophagous fungi impertecti, which are speciose and abundant in soils.  The
              trophic interactions are constructed as follows:  Dead lupine killed by
              caterpillars are substrates for mushrooms that are putatively the reproductive
              stages of the nematophages.  With opposite potential effect, leaves bearing
              copious alkaloids that are potent fungicides accumulate in thick blankets on
              the soil habitat of the nematophagous stages of the fungi.  Neither the
              caterpillar, which consumes only wood low in alkaloid, nor the nematode appear
              to be affected by these alkaloids.  The caterpillars are widely dispersed among
              lupine patches, yet their numbers are negatively correlated with nematode
              abundance.  The nematodes suffer frequent local extinctions and are present
              only in areas where lupines flourish.  However, where caterpillar densities are
              high, both lupine litter and the nematode-eating fungi are abundant.  In these
              areas, there are a few nematodes.   Soils are among the most poorly known
              habitats of life on earth.  Underground insect herbivores, which are diverse,
              injurious to plants, and influential in ecosystems, have been studied to a
              degree in agriculture systems, but have had only had cursory treatment by
              ecologists.  Population regulation of underground insect herbivores has been
              almost totally ignored by agriculturalists and ecologists alike.  While
              underground insects are drawn from familiar above-ground groups, their natural
              enemies in the soil are distinctive.  This research has clear linkages to
              understanding factors that regulate populations of below-ground herbivores in
              natural and agricultural communities.
