Title       : Hydrogen Peroxide Fluxes to Forest Canopies: Field & Laboratory Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9508417

Award Number: 9508417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Candis S. Claiborn claiborn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9508417  Claiborn     Atmospheric hydrogen peroxide plays important roles in
              tropospheric photochemistry and in converting sulfur dioxide to sulfuric acid
              in cloudwater, and may also be toxic to vegetation.  The interactions between
              plants and atmospheric hydrogen peroxide are of interest to both the
              atmospheric and plant sciences communities.  While quantification of its dry
              deposition rates to vegetation is necessary for photochemical models, there
              have been very few studies that have attempted to measure deposition of
              hydrogen peroxide to plants.  In previous work it was demonstrated that it is
              possible, in both field and laboratory experiments, to measure hydrogen
              peroxide with adequate precision to enable calculation of fluxes.   In this
              work, it is proposed to adapt a more direct measure of the flux, the relaxed
              eddy accumulation (REA) method, to measure hydrogen peroxide fluxes over a
              forest canopy.  Then, over a three-year period, the principal investigator will
              conduct two types of experiments: 1) field measurements of deposition rates of
              hydrogen peroxide to forest canopies, and 2) controlled chamber experiments on
              individual saplings representing some of the same species found in the forest
              studies.  By conducting both experiments, it will be possible to both quantify
              the deposition rate to the canopy under the environmental conditions of the
              experiment, and to predict how the deposition rate changes with changing
              environmental conditions.   The education plan is based upon three main
              objectives.  Like the proposed research plan, the education plan emphasizes the
              cross-disciplinary nature of environmental studies.  Development of both
              undergraduate and graduate courses that emphasize the cross-media behavior of
              pollutants and that draw upon several sciences including chemistry, biology,
              atmospheric sciences, and engineering, is planned.  The second objective is to
              improve communication skills of engineering students, both at the graduate and
              undergraduate levels.  The third objective  is to improve retention of
              students, particularly from underrepresented groups.
