Title       : Fitting Mixotrophy into the Microbial Loop Paradigm: Advantages and Consequences
               of Mixotrophic Behavior Among Phagotrophic Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9508571

Award Number: 9508571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Caron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508571  Caron  Mixotrophy is the combination of heterotrophic and phototrophic
              nutrition in a single organism. Among the unicellular microalgae, a wide
              variety of species ingest particulate organic material. Several possible
              adaptive advantages exist for mixotrophic behavior among phagotrophic algae.
              Thus far, three general strategies are served by phagotrophic behavior: (1)
              primarily phagotrophic growth at high bacterial abundances, with phototrophy
              serving as a mechanism for very slow grouth when bacteria are present at low
              abundances, (2) primarily phototrophic growth with phagotrophy serving as a
              mechanism for supplementing growth at low light intensities, and (3) primarily
              phototrophic growth with phagotrophy serving as a mechanism for acquiring major
              nutrients such as nitrogen or phosphorus.   This research will focus on the
              ability of phagotrophic microalgae to compete with purely phototrophic protists
              (algae) and purely heterotrophic protists (protozoa). The framework includes a
              model that incorporates mixotrophy into a simple microbial food web in order to
              generate hypotheses concerning the ability of phagotrophic algae to compete
              with nonphagotrophic algae and protozoa. The model is based on the
              understanding of the three strategies for mixotrophic behavior. Hypotheses will
              be tested in the laboratory via a series of competition experiments between
              algae, protozoa, and phagotrophic algae in continuous cultures. Experiments
              will examine the effects of light limitation, additions of labile dissolved
              organic carbon, and inorganic nutrient limitation on the growth of phagotrophic
              algae competing with nonphagotrophic algae and protozoa. The guiding hypothesis
              is that the different behaviors exhibited by different species of phagotrophic
              algae provide them with a competitive advantage that will result in their
              success under particular circumstances. These experiments will establish those
              circumstances and provide valuable insights for explaining the distribution of
              mixotrophic species in na ture.
