Title       : Solid State Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9508522

Award Number: 9508522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. DiSalvo disalvo@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9508522  DiSalvo       The objective of this research is to explore the
              formation of  solid-state ternary nitrides, their crystal structure and 
              properties. This research is a continuation of studies of a class  of materials
              that so far had been virtual y unexplored considerable  technological utility.
              These include titanium nitride for wear  resistant coatings on machine tools,
              aluminum nitride as a high  thermal conductivity ceramic, and silicon nitride
              in numerous  applications where hard impervious films are needed and can be 
              deposited by low temperature chemical processes, as well as in bulk  ceramics.
              This research will address the development of general  methods for the
              preparation of small single crystals of the new  phases to facilitate crystal
              structure determination, and the  examination of materials that contain
              continuous networks of  transition metal nitrogen bonds in one, two and
              especially three  dimensions. The continuous network compounds are expected to 
              exhibit a wider variety of physical properties and to be  mechanically and
              chemically more robust. The synthetic methods to  be used include preparation
              from oxides in flowing ammonia, growth  of crystals from metallic fluxes, and
              high pressures and at  temperatures from 500 to 1700  C. The structures of the
              compounds  prepared will be determined by x-ray diffraction, and the 
              electrical, magnetic and thermal properties will be determined. In  some cases
              chemical properties, such as catalytic activity or redox  chemistry at low
              temperatures (i.e soft chemistry such as  intercalation) will also be examined.
              The chemical and structural  behavior of these materials will be compared to
              related compounds  such as oxides, sulfides or phosphides.   %%%  This research
              team has pioneered the study of ternary metal  nitrides and discovered many new
              phases. The structure of some  nitrides have shown that both the structural
              features and  properties of some of them are rather unique. Yet there are many 
              more systems left to investigate.  These include compounds that are  stabilized
              by alkali metals other than lithium, or by rare earth  metals. There remain
              significant challenges in the preparation of  single crystals and in compounds
              that are rich in the transition  metal. The proposed research outlines
              approaches to these  challenges and propose to continue the attack on this
              previously  neglected family of materials. The expectation is that some of 
              these materials will exhibit chemical or physical properties that  may prove as
              useful as, or more so than, some of the binary  nitrides. The hope is that some
              materials will exhibit novel  phenomena that will lead to exciting science and
              perhaps even new  technology.
