Title       : Topics in Algorithm Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9508545

Award Number: 9508545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287481             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Rao Kosaraju kosaraju@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research project examines algorithm design issues in the  areas of (1)
              Pattern Matching, (2) DNA Sequence Assembly,  (3) Data Structures,  and (4)
              Computation of n-body Potential  Fields.    The proposed problems in  pattern
              matching deal with efficient  methods for the construction of suffix  trees of
              strings and  trees, treatment of ambiguous symbols with the help of  suffix 
              trees, external memory algorithms for suffix trees, and several  issues 
              related to computation of convolutions of strings.  These  investigations are
              of  great significance to the broad areas of  Digital Libraries and
              Computational  Biology.    With the emergence of faster DNA sequencing methods,
              there is an  immediate need to develop better algorithms for assembling large 
              numbers of DNA  fragments.  Several problems that arise in such  sequence
              assembly are  investigated.    Recently, the PI developed an attractive
              procedure for  transforming data-structure-based algorithms which have good 
              amortized speed  into ones that have matching worst-case speed 
              characteristics.  Another goal of  this project is to explore the 
              applicability of this technique to problems  related to  persistence of data
              structures and dynamic maintenance of minimum  spanning trees.    In addition,
              the PI developed the concept of a well-separated  pair decomposition of points
              in d-dimensional space.  For a set P  of n-points,  this consists of a binary
              tree whose leaves are in  P, with internal nodes  corresponding to subsets of P
              in the  natural way, and a list of pairs of nodes,  such that the sets 
              corresponding to each node are geometrically separated by  appropriate
              distance, and each distinct pair of points is  `covered` by exactly  one of the
              pairs of the nodes.  The PI had  made use of this decomposition in  designing
              efficient algorithms  for n-body potential field computations and  several
              related  problems.  These techniques are extended to other problems.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
