Title       : The Geochemical Carbon Cycle: A Vadose-Hydrologic Study of the Effect of Plants
               on Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9508003

Award Number: 9508003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35989              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Kent Keller ckkeller@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508003  Keller   Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas.  One avenue to
              understanding the relationship of atmospheric CO2 concentration to climate, is
              to study processes affecting atmospheric CO2 on long time scales.  The
              principal pathway for long-term transfer of CO2 from Earth's atmosphere to its
              crust is  "chemical weathering" of common minerals in soils, subsoils, and
              groundwater systems followed by transport of the dissolved material to the
              oceans in continental drainage, where they are deposited on ocean floor.  This
              sequence effects transfer of CO2 because mineral dissolution consumes CO2
              containing acids, entrains bicarbonate, deposits carbonate minerals.  CO2 in
              buried carbonate minerals returned to the atmosphere by volcanism and
              metamorphism.  The relative rates of these processes determine the masses of
              CO2 in the atmosphere and lithosphere at any on time and, in the process,
              affect Earth's climate.  It is therefore important the factors controlling the
              rates of the various processes in the cycle.  Plant communities, are an
              important factor.  Plants could enhance chemical weathering by raising
              subsurface concentrations of acids, facilitating the exposure of fresh mineral
              surfaces, and binding mineral grains into water-retaining structures
              characteristic of soils.  The actual extent of weathering enhancement by these
              mechanisms is, however poorly understood because of the difficulty of factoring
              other variables out of comparative field studies.  This study takes advantage
              of ongoing long-term, field-scale experiments in plant nutrient cycling.  To
              collect needed data for subsequent research to test hypotheses on
              plant-weathering relationships.  Existing instrumentation will is augmented to
              observe how chemical weathering evolves with depth and time in soils and
              subsoils beneath various plant communities
