Title       : NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program: Methodological and
               Organizational Aspects of Collaborative Design in Concurrent Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9508782

Award Number: 9508782
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sotiris Papantonopoulos sotiris@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9508782  Papantonopoulos    This proposal supports a six month postdoctoral 
              fellowship for Dr. Sotiris Papantonopoulos of the  Department of Engineering
              Management of the George  Washington University. Project funding will enable
              Dr.  Papantonopoulos to undertake a collaborative research  effort with Dr.
              Takao Enkawa of the Tokyo Institute of  Technology.  The investigators intend
              to study the  methodology of cross-functional design teams, including  how
              design teams collaborate to generate design  conjectures, resolve trade-offs,
              and reach decisions.    As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Papantonopoulos will have
              the  opportunity to become familiar with researchers and research  techniques
              at the Tokyo Institute of Technology while  contributing to the overall
              research effort. The six month  visit by Papantonopoulos will enable him to
              establish a  personal and professional link with a leading engineer in  Japan. 
              The PI's studies of concurrent engineering design in  Japan should be of
              benefit to the U.S. engineering community  upon his return. Therefore, this
              proposal fulfills the  objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer
              of  scientific knowledge through an international collaboration.  ***
