Title       : The Intrinsic Conductivity of the Metallic Phase of Conducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9508723

Award Number: 9508723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Epstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      9508723  Epstein    The objective of this research is to explore
              electrically  conducting polymers. Despite the extensive studies there are many
               open questions concerning the correct description of the metallic  state of
              the various conducting polymers and the determination of  the ultimately
              achievable conductivity of each of these families of  conducting polymers. In
              this research, an extensive array of  correlated charge transport, magnetic and
              optical studies of highly  conducting polymers (including doped polythiophenes,
              doped  polypyrroles and doped polyanilines) is planned. In addition to 
              traditional experiments such as electrical conductivity,  thermopower, and
              susceptibility, frequency-dependent studies will  be emphasized to gain insight
              into microscopic processes. The  dielectric constant and conductivity will be
              obtained at microwave  frequencies and also from the far ir to the uv. For the
              first time  synchrotron radiation will be used to span the important region 
              between the microwave and the far ir. Where appropriate,  experiments will be
              conducted at very high magnetic fields or very  low temperatures. Correlation
              of the results of these studies with  structural and compositional information
              of the different polymer  systems should elucidate the design criteria for
              creating truly  metallic polymers, some with conductivities even exceeding that
              of  copper.   %%%  Electrically conducting polymers have been studied for the
              past 1.5  decades. Highly conducting polymer materials have expanded from 
              doped polyacetylene to include also doped polypyrrole, doped  polythiophene,
              doped polyaniline, and their many derivatives and  related polymers. There
              continue to be important advances in these  materials and their understanding.
              Initially, these systems were  only modestly good conductors, and, in fact,
              became insulators at  low temperatures. The present generation of materials
              have  conductivities in the range of that of traditional metals. This new 
              generation of conduct ing polymers share other properties in common  with
              traditional metals (such as a negative dielectric constant).  Despite the
              extensive studies there are many open questions  concerning the correct
              description of the metallic state of the  various conducting polymers and the
              determination of the ultimately  achievable conductivity of each of these
              families of conducting  polymers. These issues are the subject of this
              research. Success in  this research program would have an impact in the
              understanding of  electronic polymers, nanostructured materials, and concepts
              of  localization, delocalization, and electronic properties in reduced 
              dimensions. Also, development of a fundamental understanding of the  metallic
              state will impact the implementation of metallic polymers  in technologies
              ranging from electromagnetic interference shielding  to molecular
              manufacturing, to improved environmentally friendly  materials for ease of
              recycling.
