Title       : NSF/ARPA Workshop on Visual Information Management Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9508593

Award Number: 9508593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh C. Jain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This workshop will be held on June 19, 1995, in conjunction with  the ICCV
              conference at MIT in Cambridge, Mass. The objective of the  workshop is to
              bring together researchers who in the last few years  have started addressing
              problems in Visual Information Management  (VIM). Most of these efforts,
              however, were focussed either on only  a small aspect of the problem or a very
              narrow application.  Clearly, visual information management systems encompass
              central  aspects of databases, image processing and image understanding,  very
              sophisticated interfaces, networks and storage systems,  knowledge based
              systems, compression and decompression, and object  oriented systems. Without
              addressing most of these issues, one may  either address only theoretical
              issues, or may work in a microcosm  that will, at best, be extremely narrow in
              its utility and  extensibility. Considering the growing need and interest in
              the  organization and retrieval of visual and other non-alphanumeric 
              information, and the insufficient number of academic projects in  this area,
              the workshop on visual information management systems  will provide a much
              needed platform. While VIM is a very broad  area, the focus of the workshop is
              on what researchers in computer  vision could contribute. The challange for
              vision researchers is to  develop tools for analyzing the semantic content of
              video and  image, and then representing that content in a way that can be 
              efficiently searched and compared, and finally delivering that  content to
              users in the form a of useful, focused presentation.  Computer vision can
              contribute techniques for semiautomatically and  automatically extracting
              features that will be essential for  indexing and query formulation in image
              and video databases.  Computer vision researchers have addressed problems in
              human and  robotic vision for several applications, but very little attention 
              has been given to this new emerging field. This workshop will be  exploring
              computer vision techniques which are going to prov ide the  basic foundation
              for visual information management systems.
