Title       : Artificial Selection for Spectral Sensitivity and its Effects in Poecilia
               reticulata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1996    
File        : a9508198

Award Number: 9508198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111916             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Endler endler@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9508198  ENDLER   What generates the great diversity of shapes, sizes, and
              color patterns in animals?  Through the analysis of traits with known function,
              and explorations of the theoretical and experimental relationship between
              structure, function, and fitness,  we can begin to understand why required
              functions differ and why structures also differ among species.     A
              particularly good model system is the genetics of vision and of color patterns,
              which are essential to visually oriented species.  The appearance, perception
              and usefulness of an animal's color pattern depend upon interactions of the
              spectral composition of the light environment, the reflectance spectra of each
              pattern element, and the cone pigments in the viewers' eye.  Any changes in the
              visual environment or visual parameters should affect perception and hence
              fitness in a predictable way.     Dr. Endler proposes to examine the effects of
              sensory biases by means of an extensive artificial selection experiment that
              will select for altered vision, and examine the possible effects of this in
              Poecilia reticulata.  He will also run a semi-natural experiment in which
              visual conditions and predation will be varied independently.    These
              questions are interesting and important from the viewpoint of selection, and
              also have important implications for the origin and maintenance of species. 
              Efforts to conserve and protect endangered species usually concentrate on
              ecological factors such as minimum viable population size, genetic factors such
              as effective population size, and unknown factors encompassed in efforts toward
              general habitat protection.  However, if we do not understand how a species
              maintains itself we cannot hope to protect it indefinitely.  The proposed work
              specifically inquires into species recognition,  and will quantify (1) changing
              visual perception by direct artificial selection on visual parameters, and (2)
              changing the visual environment.  Because the research tests general principles
              with an ideal model system,  the results should be of wide general application.
