Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships Among Freshwater and Marine Ascomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9508992

Award Number: 9508992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weidong Chen weichen@denr1.igis.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Shearer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Leland Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508992  Chen   Ascomycete fungi occur in terrestrial, freshwater (rivers,
              streams, lakes), and marine (estuaries, salt marshes, oceans) habitats around
              the world. The marine and many of the freshwater ascomycetes have distinctive
              morphological features of their spore bodies (the ascoma) that have
              traditionally been used to distinguish them from terrestrial ascomycetes. The
              same features occur in many different species and genera and may represent
              adaptations to the aquatic environment. It is difficult to determine whether
              two morpholgically similar species are similar because they share the same
              recent common ancestor or because they have both adapted to the aquatic
              environment in the same way despite different ancestries. Thus, evolutionary or
              phylogenetic relationships among terrestrial and aquatic ascomycete fungi
              remain obscure and poorly studied. In particular, whether marine fungi
              constitute a single major lineage or an assemblage of multiple lines that have
              adapted to saltwater conditions stands as a classic problem of mycology (the
              study of fungi).   Drs. Chen, Shearer, and Crane of the Illinois Natural
              History Survey are analyzing new molecular sources of evidence, including
              nuclear ribosomal DNA sequencing, along with traditional morphological features
              in an attempt to determine the phylogenetic relationships among a large group
              of freshwater and marine fungi. Nucleotide sequences provide information about
              mutational differences between species that is independent of their morphology.
              Understanding the evolutionary relationships among ascomycetes is important
              because these fungi play an important role in our living world as decomposers
              of organic matter and as agents of plant and animal diseases, and as sources of
              medically and industrially significant compounds such as penicillin. Knowledge
              of the phylogenetic linkages among the ascomycetes allows us to search for new
              chemicals or to identify new pathogens from knowledge of their closest living
              relatives.
