Title       : Molecular Modelling of Fluids Mixtures in Microporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9508680

Award Number: 9508680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9508680  Keith E. Gubbins  Cornell University      Micro-and
              meso-porous solids find widespread use in the chemical, oil, pharmaceutical and
              food industries as adsorbents and membranes for separation processes, and as
              catalysts and catalyst supports.  At present the design of such processes and
              materials is largely empirical.  The aim of this project is to provide more
              powerful methods, based in molecular theory and simulation, for prediction of
              absorbed fluid behavior and for the design of improved processes.  Modern
              statistical mechanical methods, including density functional theory,
              simulation, and kinetic theory will be employed to carry our studies in four
              areas:    1. Development of an improved method for pore size distribution (PSD)
              analysis.  Density functional theory proves much more powerful than classical
              methods for determining PSD's from absorption isotherms.  This method, which is
              already findine commercial application for carbons, will be extended to gases
              other than nitrogen, and to materials such as aluminosilicate and oxide
              molecular sieves, which have cylindrical pore geometries.  2. Molecular
              simulations will be used to develop and understanding of the importance of
              connectivity effects in networks for both pure fluids and mixtures.  The
              effects of connectivity on both diffusion rates and absorption isotherms will
              be investigated.  Goals include incorporation of network effects into PSD
              analyses, and understanding how networks can hinder and promote separations. 
              3. Selective absorption of trace components in gas streams.  Calculations will
              be made to elucidate the role of pore and system variables on the selective
              absorption of trace contaminants in nitrogen and air streams for materials with
              pores of cylindrical geometry.  Specific case studies will be made for several
              trace halocarbons in a range of molecular sieves, carbons and oxides.  The goal
              of this work is to develop methods for designing improved absorbents for
              removal of trace contaminants.  4. Viscou s flow and diffusion in pores. 
              Nonequilibrium molecular dynamics methods will be used to study viscous flow
              and mutual diffusion in mixtures in pores.  The goal of this work will be to
              develop an understanding of the role of fluid-wall interactions and pore shape
              and size on these transport processes.
