Title       : Acquisition of a New Electron Microprobe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9508616

Award Number: 9508616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Leger   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edmond A. Mathez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Langmuir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508616  Leger    The Department of Mineral Sciences at the American Museum of 
              Natural History (AMNH) and Department of Geological Sciences  (LDEO) of
              Columbia University will establish a joint electron  microprobe laboratory.
              This development builds upon numerous pre-  existing links between these
              departments such as a joint program  of Graduate Studies, research
              collaboration, and shared use of  experimental petrology, x-ray, and FTIR
              laboratories.  AMNH will  acquire of a new electron microprobe to replace the
              18-year old  ARL SEMQ in current operation and to provide LDEO researchers 
              with added capabilities in the analysis of light elements and in  image
              analysis processing not currently possible with their 10-  year old Cameca MBX.
               This grant supports half of the $800,000  capital cost of a new Cameca
              electron microprobe and half will be  supported equally by AMNH and Columbia
              University.  In addition,  AMNH supports a full-time Ph.D.-level research
              position (the PI)  to manage the facility.  Replacing the two aging microprobes
              with  a single state-of-the-art instrument has advantages for  efficiency of
              operation, full utilization of the analytical  facility, cost efficiency of
              internal operation, and maximizing  the use of scarce instrumentation dollars. 
              The new instrument  will lead to increased productivity and analytical
              capability for  multiple investigators at both institutions and in the New York
               metropolitan area including students from the City University of  New York
              (CUNY) system.  A single laboratory has the additional  advantage that it will
              bring scientists from AMNH and LDEO closer  together and encourage new
              intellectual links.    ***
