Title       : Exploratory Continuous Multispectral Reflectance Measurements at Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9508407

Award Number: 9508407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Moore moore@boojum.asrc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT/Moore           The general objective of this research is to relate
              seasonal  changes in narrow-band surface reflectance to evapotranspiration in 
              mid-latitude deciduous forest.  The specific objectives are:       1. To detect
              seasonal change in surface albedo (reflectance)  in certain important
              wavebands, and link these changes to canopy  liquid water content,       2. To
              relate reflectance measurements to surface turbulent  energy fluxes, especially
              evapotranspiration, through the surface  resistance to water vapor transfer,   
                 3. To compare seasonal changes in narrow-band multispectral  reflectance
              with satellite broadband reflectance (visible and near-  infrared) in biweekly
              composites.       4. To use the aerosol optical depths retrieved from the 
              upward-looking shadowband instrument to calculate atmospheric  corrections for
              satellite data, according to published schemes.         The overall goal of
              this study is to improve indirect  measurements of surface energy and trace gas
              fluxes using surface-  based remote sensing techniques.  The investigator
              proposes to  study seasonal changes in forest canopy reflectance and its 
              relationship to surface turbulent energy exchange.  Vegetation  exerts a strong
              influence on regional climate through control of  the surface fluxes of energy
              and trace gases, especially  evapotranspiration.  This proposed study is a
              logical development  form a unique, ongoing long-term measurement program at
              Harvard  Forest in Massachusetts;  that study has yielded results indicating 
              that certain seasonal changes in canopy radiative properties (near-  infrared
              reflectance, thermal response) can be related to  evapotranspiration.  The
              investigator proposes to complement the  ongoing turbulent energy flux and
              radiation measurement program at  Harvard Forest with both upward-looking and
              downward-looking  Multifilter Rotating Shadowband Radiometers.
