Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Dynamics and Structure in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9508336

Award Number: 9508336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $925500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Chandler chandler@gold.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Chandler is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research on the   statistical mechanics of
              dynamics and structure of liquids.  Four   specific research areas are
              targeted: 1) dynamics of solvation will be   studied in an attempt to
              understand the interplay between solute and   solvent relaxation times and
              length scales; 2) confined fluids and the   dynamics of their surface induced
              phase transitions will be studied in an   effort to understand the effects of
              confinement on time scales for   relaxation and nucleation of phases; 3) self
              assembly and the stability   of membranes will be studied to characterize
              conditions for stability and   assembly of complex fluid structures; and 4)
              metallization in fluids will   be studied to understand and contrast the
              structures of metallic and   insulating liquid phases such as are observed in
              metal/ammonia solutions.    In all of these areas Chandler will address natural
              phenomena with the   development of models, and treat those models with
              statistical field   theory and simulations.  Theoretical models for gas phase
              systems have relied heavily on   simplifications based on weakly interacting
              particles undergoing elastic   collisions.  Models for the solid state rely on
              simplifications arising   from the symmetry and order of the solid state.  In
              both of these areas,   theoretical models are quite well developed, and agree
              well with   experimental data.  Theoretical treatment of the liquid phase, on
              the   other hand has been difficult because the systems are not orderly, and  
              yet the interactions are strong.  Over the past 20 years, several good  
              theoretical models have started to emerge, for example, the so-called  
              `reference interaction site model` developed in part by Chandler and   other
              collaborators.  Chandler is continuing to improve upon the   theoretical models
              for liquids, and to apply them to new systems which   have important chemical
              significance such as molecular assemblies and   molecules undergoing
              conformational changes and chemical reactions.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
