Title       : High-Performance Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9508543

Award Number: 9508543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhaojun Bai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Hayden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold J. Stromberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508543  Perry       The Departments of Mathematics and Statistics at the
              University of  Kentucky will purchase high-performance computing equipment
              which will  be dedicated to the support of research in mathematical sciences.
              This  equipment will substantially advance the following research projects:    
                Large-Scale Numerical Linear Algebra Problems. As a part of the  continuing
              LAPACK project, Professor Bai will work on theoretical  analysis and
              implementation of numerical algorithms for large-scale  eigenvalue problems.   
                 Molecular Conformations from Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)  Data. Finding
              molecular conformations is a "Grand Challenge" problem in  high-performance
              computing and communications (HPCC). Professor Hayden  will develop algorithms
              to calculate molecular conformations from NMR  data and distribute the
              resulting software through the Quantum  Chemistry Program Exchange.      
              Numerical Investigation of Scattering Resonances. Professor Perry  will study
              the distribution of scattering resonances for hyperbolic  surfaces in order to
              elucidate the connection between classical  dynamics and quantum scattering.   
                 Animated Plots for Robust Regression. Professor Stromberg will  study how
              animated residual plots can be used to assist practitioners  in selecting
              parameters for robust regression estimators as well as how  three-dimensional
              plots of various robust regression parameter  estimates can be used to
              differentiate between the estimates.
