Title       : NSF Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Facility: Operations and Research
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9508413

Award Number: 9508413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $988077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Donahue djd@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Damon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. J. Timothy Jull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508413  Donahue    An Accelerator Mass Spectrometer (AMS) using a 2 MV General 
              Ionex tandem particle accelerator has been operated at the  University of
              Arizona since 1981.  The primary mission of  this AMS laboratory is twofold.  
              It operates as both a  service laboratory to provide radiocarbon (l4C) 
              determinations of samples of geophysical and archaeological  importance to the
              scientific community at large, but also  supports a wide range of in-house
              scientific research.  The  laboratory presently analyzes the l4C content of
              over 3,000  samples a year for many scientists from many parts of the  world. 
              Just under half of the current laboratory analyses  are for in-house research,
              or for research undertaken in  collaboration with external researchers.  Such
              in-house  research has focused on a diverse set of topics. Some of  this
              research has been oriented toward improving AMS  technology in terms of
              chemical preparation of samples,  improvements to instrumentation and data
              reduction and  interpretation.  The labs efforts have enabled them to  obtain
              unprecedented precision in l4C analyses.  They  currently are able to produce
              l4C/l3C ratios with  measurement precisions of +0.5% in a counting time of
              about  30 minutes per sample, for recent material. High-precision  measurements
              as accurate as +0.25% have been reported by  this facility using multiple
              target determinations.  Other  in-house research projects are oriented towards
              more basic  science goals including studies of in-situ production of 14C  in
              rocks and ice and improvements to the l4C calibration  curve using tree rings
              or coral l4CU-Th measurements.  This  grant supports operating and maintenance
              costs of the  Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometer (AMS) laboratory and  will
              allow them to maintain and improve the high standards  of AMS measurements that
              the scientific community has come  to expect from this facility, and to develop
              new  applications of AMS, which will then be available to the  scientific
              community.  As part of this  grant, Arizona will  upgrade their existing AMS
              system with an injection system  with an electrostatic analyzer, a
              high-resolution injection  magnet, a fast isotope pulsing system, a high-energy
               analysis system with an electrostatic quadrupole lens, a 90  magnetic
              analyzer, and a cylindrical electrostatic analyzer.  Support for the next
              International Conference on Accelerator  Mass Spectrometry, to be held in
              Tucson in March 1996 is  also included.    ***
