Title       : Oxygen Activation in Engineered Heme Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9508533

Award Number: 9508533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry B. Gray hbgray@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Harry B. Gray and Dr. John H. Richards, Chemistry Department,   California
              Institute of Technology, are supported by the Inorganic,   Bioinorganic, and
              Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division to develop methods
              and materials for studying the intermediates   in the oxygen-activation
              chemistry of single heme proteins. A series of   kinetic studies which focus on
              the critical O-O bond cleavage reactions   will be carried out. Photochemical
              methods will be developed for rapidly   injecting electrons into the dioxygen
              coordinated to iron of a heme   group. According to current theories is the
              step which initiates O-O bond   cleavage in these enzymes. By study of the
              resulting excited states   information will be obtained on reaction
              intermediates and the details of   the O-O bond cleavage mechanism. Systems to
              be investigated include   heme-cavity-modified forms of myoglobin, horseradish
              peroxidase, and   mutants of yeast cytochrome c.     Oxygen is a powerful and
              readily available oxidant, yet man-made   catalysts that effectively utilize
              oxygen are rare. The best examples of   oxygen activation and utilization are
              found in biochemical systems. Iron   containing enzymes are responsible for a
              large portion of biochemical   oxygen activation. Nonetheless, the exact way in
              which these iron   containing biomolecules are able to activate oxygen is
              unclear. This   project is designed to probe the mechanism of the critical
              oxygen-oxygen   bond cleave process which must lie at the heart of the process.
              An   understanding of how the biological systems operate may permit new ways  
              of directly utilizing oxygen in a variety of laboratory and industrial  
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
