Title       : Dissertation Research: Interactions of Plant Forms in Water and Energy Balance
               of Arctic Tundra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9508333

Award Number: 9508333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508333  Chapin  A Doctoral Dissertation Award to the University of California
              Berkeley will support a project to determine the mechanisms by which different
              plant growth forms integrate to control water and energy balance at the
              ecosystem level in Arctic tundra on the Alaskan North Slope.  This study is
              important because it will provide an explanation of how plant growth form
              properties can be scaled up to ecosystem level water and energy fluxes.     
              The study will take place in conjunction with a larger Global Climate Change
              study that is examining the regional flux of greenhouse gases from the tundra. 
              This project provides a unique opportunity to determine the role of plant
              growth habit on energy balances in the climatically sensitive Arctic tundra
              within the context of the regional output/uptake of greenhouse gases.  The
              study amy provide new information on ecosystem response to climatically-induced
              changes of greenhouse gases.  ***    9422292  Gawarkiewicz  Investigators at
              the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will undertake research to increase
              the complexity of computer model simulations of the formation of dense
              high-salinity water that leaves the Arctic continental shelf and flows to the
              deep Arctic Ocean.  The flows are capable of carring nutrients and sediments
              from the continental shelf to the deeper ocean and may play a major role in the
              transfer of heat between the atmosphere and deep ocean.  Fluctations in the
              formation of the cross-shelf flow could affect the transfer of heat from warm
              deep water in the Arctic Ocean that is produced in the Atlantic Ocean.  Heat
              from that warm deep flow controls the formation of sea ice in the climatically
              sensitive Arctic Ocean.    The improved computer models will for the first time
              take into account the effects of coastal currents, topographic complexities,
              and water-mass stratification of the continental slopes so that the models may
              begin to approach real world conditions.  The improved models are necessary to
              understand how the Arctic  ocean-atmosphere-ice system operates to affect, and
              be affected by, global climates.  ***  ??
