Title       : Generation of Multicellular Structures in Aspergillus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9508088

Award Number: 9508088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Miller bmiller@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9508088  Miller    The long term goal of this project is to address
              mechanistic  questions concerning the orderly differentiation and spatial 
              organization of diverse cell types into morphologies specific for  a tissue or
              developmental state. Conidiation in the filamentous  fungus Aspergillus
              nidulans offers the unique opportunity to  investigate molecular mechanisms
              that control multicellular  development in eukaryotes.  Conidiation is
              characterized by its  highly synchronous nature and the spatial organization of
              a limited  number of differentiated cell types. A genetic hierarchy consisting 
              of five essential regulatory genes controls 1) the transition from 
              multinucleate filamentous growth to uninucleate budding growth, the  assembly
              of a multicellular reproductive structure  (conidiophore)and 3) the production
              of dormant conidia (spores).  Complex regulatory interactions provide a
              mechanism for  establishing overlapping spatiotemporal gradients in the 
              transcription factors which, in turn, coordinately activate  hundreds of
              conidiation specific genes. The objectives of this  proposal are to begin
              elucidating mechanisms that integrate  spatiotemporal control of developmental
              gene expression with  alterations in cell cycle regulation. Dr. Miller is
              approaching  this problem through a molecular analysis of the modifier genes 
              Medusa (medA) and Stunted (stuA). The medA protein is required for  commitment
              to the developmental program, functioning as a co-  activator of a subset of
              target genes. The stuA protein belongs to  a family of transcription factors
              that control cell cycle  progression and fungal development. The specific
              objectives are to  1) identify, isolate and characterize regulatory gene(s)
              required  for competence dependent stuA transcription, one of the earliest 
              events of the developmental program; 2) identify and characterize  gene(s)
              required for early induction dependent, brlA-independent  medA transcription;
              3) functionally characterize the medA and stuA  proteins; 4) isol ate stuA
              target genes and 5) characterize  extragenic suppressors of stuA mutations and
              extragenic mutations  that mimic the Stunted phenotype.  ***
