Title       : Development of Climate Relationships-Decision Models for Environmental and
               Economic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9508038

Award Number: 9508038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83593              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Changnon changnon@geog.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9508038  Changnon, David  Northern Illinois University  Title:
              Development of Climate Relationships-Decision Models for           
              Environmental and Economic Applications    Currently, in the field of applied
              climatology a "gap" exists between  climatologists, who develop and use climate
              data and information, and weather-  sensitive users, such as those in
              utilities, agriculture, water resources,  recreation, and transportation, who
              either do not understand climate information  or know how to apply it to their
              environmental and economic models.  To bridge  this critical gap, this study
              will incorporate non-traditional educational  methods where students in an
              applied research environment will collaborate with  weather-sensitive user
              groups to develop and test relationship models.  This  project represents a
              model, to be developed and tested locally, which has great  potential for
              application at regional and national levels.    The goal of the research
              component of this project is to develop a broader  understanding of what types
              of climate information can be utilized by various  weather-sensitive users in
              decision-making processes relating to environmental  and commercial situations.
               The goal of the education component is to create a  unique educational
              experience in a class room-laboratory setting where  undergraduate students in
              meteorology/geography can develop relationship models  through a collaborative
              process with those employed in weather-sensitive agencies  and firms.    In the
              research activity, the P.I. will identify, through an intensive literature 
              search and by interviews with users of climate information, the needs of
              weather-  sensitive user sector groups for climate information.  The principal
              investigator  will work with the National Weather Service and the Midwestern
              Climate Center to  assess the adequacy of available climate data and
              information to meet the needs  of these user groups.  Based on the data
              obtained he will develop climate-effect  relationship mod els and disseminate
              them to weather-sensitive users and  climatologists.    The education plan will
              involve course research projects, where students under  the P.I.'s supervision
              will work hand-in-hand with users in government agencies  and in the private
              sector to develop and test the computer-based models that will  relate climate
              information to environmental and economic applications.  Students  will receive
              research experience and important job training, i.e., where the  students
              applies the educational experience developed in class room-laboratory  settings
              to address problems similar to those they may encounter after  graduation.   
              Developing continual information flow between climatologists and weather- 
              sensitive users will assist applied climatologists by identifying the types of 
              climate information that will be incorporated into decision models.  This
              linkage  will also help direct the research focus of climatologists as they
              develop their  careers.  Furthermore, it is critical that meteorology
              department expand their  curriculums to include such course(s) that will
              provide not only exciting  opportunities to understand the theoretical
              background associated with climate  but also to apply it in a real world
              situation.  These applications would be  facilitated by partners from outside
              the university in government agencies and  private sector positions.
