Title       : Biotic and Abiotic Mechanisms for the Maintenance of Variation in Flower Form of
               an Alpine Wildflower
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9508741

Award Number: 9508741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace E. Galen galenc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Carl Gerhardt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508741  Gerhardt     Explaining how genetic variation arises, is distributed
              among organisms, and is maintained over time is a major goal of evolutionary
              biology.  Genetic variation in the characteristics that determine an organism's
              reproductive success is especially important, because it underlies the capacity
              of species to perpetuate themselves successfully under new environmental
              challenges.  For animal-pollinated plants, one such attribute is flower form. 
              Flower morphology is a complex trait that simultaneously influences plant
              resource use, the behavior of enemies, and the likelihood of pollination.  This
              proposal addresses the environmental factors maintaining morphological
              variation in the flowers of one of the most abundant and ecologically dominant
              flowers of the Rocky Mountains, Polemonium viscosum.  Specifically, experiments
              will test whether the large showy flowers preferred by animal pollinators exact
              a high cost in resources for future growth and survival and/or make plants more
              apparent and susceptible to flower predators.  Such ecological tradeoffs could
              explain why genetic variation in flower form persists over time in P. viscosum
              and nearly every other natural and agricultural plant species that has been
              studied.     Current farming expenditures on crop fertilization, irrigation and
              chemical pest management are considerable.   The research described here could
              reduce such costs by suggesting how flower form can be genetically optimized to
              alleviate the amount of resource diverted from plant growth and the number of
              ovules lost to pest damage, while continuing to ensure adequate pollination. 
              In this way, the proposed studies have the potential to make the cultivation of
              sunflowers, blueberries, strawberries, alfalfa and rapeseed, among myriad other
              animal-pollinated crops, more economical and environmentally sound.
