Title       : Japan STA Program: Rapid Instrument for Determining Organic Compounds in Air and
               Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9508781

Award Number: 9508781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: J W. HILLS whills@beta.tricity.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508781  Hills    This award supports a 24-month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Ward Hills of the  Department of
              Chemistry at Washington State University.  Dr.  Hills will work with Dr. Yoko
              Youchi of the National  Institute for Environmental Studies in Tsukuba, Japan. 
              The  investigators propose to collect and concentrate organic  compounds on
              selective adsorbents.  The adsorbent will be  charged with analyte compounds by
              flowing samples of air or  water through the sorbents.  The purpose of this
              project is  to demonstrate that sorbent trapping, followed by  quantitative
              transferring of analytes with fluid carbon  dioxide to a portable gas
              chromatograph, is a practical and  rapid field analysis technique for detecting
              organic  compounds in air, water, and soil.  The Department of  Energy's
              Hanford site, with its many types of contamination,  offers an excellent
              environment to test a field portable  instrument.  After the instrument is
              developed in Japan, it  will be brought to and tested at Hanford.    As a
              postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Hills will have the  opportunity to become familiar
              with research techniques and  equipment at the National Institute for
              Environmental  Studies  while contributing to the overall research effort. 
              Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the  Program in its
              exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge  through an international
              collaboration.  ***
