Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Molecular Biology and Transport
               Physiology of Cation Exchange Proteins in Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9508338

Award Number: 9508338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Ahearn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz G. de Couet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5936,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Gregory Ahearn and two graduate students of the
              University of Hawaii to collaborate with Professor Helmut Wieczorek of the
              University of Munich in a study of cation transport by crustacean
              gastrointestinal and renal cells.  Professor Wieczorek is an expert in
              molecular techniques for investigating the mechanism of ion regulation,
              particularly potassium secretion, by intestinal epithelial cells in insects. 
              His current research focuses on the physiological properties of the cation
              antiporter protein in the secretory process.  Dr. Ahearn's group has developed
              complementary expertise in applying radioisotopic tracer methods to assess the
              exchange kinetics of the antiporter protein in crustacea. The cooperating U.S.
              and German groups will link their research effort through reciprocal exchanges
              of graduate students for two three month periods per year.  This should be an
              effective way to transfer their complementary expertise in molecular biology
              and transport physiology studies, and to save time and other resources in
              pursuing their research goal.  This collaborative work is directly related to
              and enhances Dr. Ahearn's ongoing NSF-funded research on the transport
              physiology and molecular biology of the invertebrate cation exchange process. 
              Sodium-proton exchange is an important physiological process which regulates
              intracellular pH and cell volume.  While this fundamental ion movement occurs
              in similar fashion across the plasma membrane of both vertebrate and
              invertebrate cells, it is effected by very different exchange proteins.  The
              molecular structure and function of the vertebrate exchange proteins or
              `transporters` are now well understood, but we know very little about the
              analogous sodium and calcium transporters in invertebrates.  In crustacea, for
              example, such transport proteins are involved in the processes of food
              digestion, heavy metal sequestration and calcium regulation associated with the
              molt cycle.  The analogous proteins in vertebrate cells has none of these
              functions.  The collaboration between the University of Hawaii and the
              University of Munich will produce a major contribution to our knowledge of the
              molecular biology and the physiological roles of the sodium-proton transport
              protein in crustacea.  Considering the significance of these transporters in
              the molt cycle and growth rate of the lobster, for example, one can imagine
              potential practical applications to aquaculture from this new knowledge.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
