Title       : Physical and Chemical Properties of Atmospheric Organic Aerosol
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9508051

Award Number: 9508051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Spyros N. Pandis spyros@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508051  Pandis        Organic aerosol is an important component of ambient
              particulate matter, whether in urban, rural, or  remote areas. Organic
              compounds represent on average 35% of the fine aerosol mass in urban polluted
              areas like  Los Angeles and their sources on a global scale are estimated to be
              similar to those of sulfate. They are an integral  part of the direct and
              indirect radiative forcing of climate by aerosols. Atmospheric aerosol pose
              significant  environmental risks (health problems, visibility degradation) in
              part because of these organic compounds. The in-situ  formation of secondary
              organic aerosol by condensation of low volatility products of the
              photooxidation of  hydrocarbons remains poorly understood.        This project
              will investigate the mass transfer of organic compounds from the gas to the
              aerosol phase. The  equilibrium partitioning of the major organic aerosol
              components between the gas and aerosol phases will be studied  by measuring the
              vapor pressures of their mixtures. The condensation rates of these organic
              compounds will be   quantified on a variety of model inorganic and organic
              aerosol substrates and the accommodation coefficients  calculated. The effects
              of the organic compounds on the evaporation rate of NH4NO3 will be determined,
              as well  as the influence of organic films on the rate of growth of organic and
              inorganic aerosols. The proposed experimental  system is based on the Tandem
              Differential Mobility Analyzer technique. The results will be incorporated into
              a  state-of-the-art aerosol model and the model output will be tested with the
              best available urban air quality data set.        The educational efforts of
              this project will focus on the development of environmental classes for
              engineers.  A textbook in atmospheric chemistry will be developed and used for
              one of these classes. The application of  computer technology to the education
              of chemical engineers will be explored. Undergraduate students will be 
              involved in research both directly through  year long senior research projects
              and indirectly through the Engineering  and Public Policy project courses.
              Finally,  the development of environmental modules through the  Environment 
              Across the Curriculum  program of Carnegie Mellon University will contribute to
              the environmental education of  all engineers.
