Title       : Robust Performance: Multi-Dimensional Systems Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9508620

Award Number: 9508620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nirmal K. Bose nkb1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508620  Bose         The spark generated by Kharitonov's result on root 
              clustering of interval polynomials has influenced the robust  control field in
              a significant manner in a relatively short time.  The property studied in the
              setting of Kharitonov theory and its  various generalizations is primarily
              concerned with robust  stability of continuous-time and discrete-time one
              dimensional  systems and, to a lesser extent, multidimensional systems.  The 
              achieving of robust stability is crucial in the design of control  systems when
              a plant, possibly of high order and with uncertain  parameters present is
              targeted for stabilization by a low order  compensator.  In the control of
              flexible large space structures  such as solar power satellites and orbiting
              telescopes,  for example, the objective is to achieve robust control of a 
              plant of high order with a controller of lower order.  Robust  control is
              necessary because of elastic mode truncation  (modelling error) and parameter
              uncertainty.  The effect of mode  truncation is possible instability due to the
              incorporated either  in the plant transfer matrix representation or the
              state-space  representation.  Usually, the coefficient perturbations will not 
              be independent of each other so that the Kharitonov-type results,  if used
              without any modification, would have the advantage of  simplicity in
              application but the disadvantage of yielding only  sufficient conditions, which
              may not be as tight as desired for  robust stability.  Furthermore, though
              robust stability is  crucial to performance evaluation of control systems,
              other  measures of performance like robust frequency response, robust  pole
              placement, and minimax control or rate feedback systems are  necessary in
              important applications like control of large space  structures.  ***
