Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models for Simulated Annealing and the Genetic
               Algorithm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9508700

Award Number: 9508700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508700 Lee  Abstract      The investigator is interested in the analysis of
              stochastic processes which are connected to two widely-used algorithms for
              global optimization: simulated annealing and the genetic algorithm.  In one
              dimension, classical simulated annealing can be modeled in continuous time as a
              certain diffusion process with drift.  Given a function to be minimized, the
              drift term is the negative of the derivative of that function; and the
              infinitesimal variance, also called the rate of cooling, is inversely
              proportional to the logarithm of time.  Under mild assumptions, it has been
              shown that such a diffusion converges in distribution to a random variable
              whose distribution is concentrated on the global minima of the function to be
              minimized.  The investigator is studying the conjecture that if one uses a
              symmetric stable process in place of Brownian motion as the source of noise in
              the model, then one can cool at a rate proportional to time to a certain
              negative power, which is much faster than the logarithmic cooling required in
              the classical model.  The genetic algorithm, as might be guessed from its name,
              is based on ideas from genetics. The investigator is investigating the
              efficiency of the genetic algorithm for the optimum partitioning problem.  She
              is also comparing the performance of the genetic algorithm with deterministic
              algorithms.    Optimization problems occur in almost every human endeavor.
              Businesses want to maximize profits and minimize cost.  Many industrial robots
              are programmed so that the robot will accomplish its assigned task with a
              minimum amount of energy within a finite time period.  This research studies
              ways to improve the performance of  two widely-used computer-intensive
              algorithms for optimization: simulated annealing and the genetic algorithm.
              Simulated annealing has been used, for example, in computer-aided design of
              integrated circuits, in image processing, and in modeling the structure of
              proteins.  As its name suggests, simulated annealing is an  algorithm based on
              concepts from the physical process of annealing, where a substance is heated
              and then cooled slowly.. The genetic algorithm imitates the concept of
              "survival of the fittest" from Darwinian evolution.
