Title       : Chemistry of Platinum and Palladium Complexes Bridged by
               Phosphinocyclopentadienyl or Diphosphine Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1995   
File        : a9508228

Award Number: 9508228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon K. Anderson ganderson@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  
              Chemistry Program, will support studies by Professor Gordon Anderson of   the
              University of Missouri, St. Louis, on two types of bimetallic   complexes of
              platinum and/or palladium.  The first type are homonuclear   diplatinum alkyl
              complexes that are bridged by   (diarylphosphino)cyclopentadienyl ligands. 
              These complexes will be used   as a platform for the investigation of
              mechanisms of carbonylation and   alkane elimination reactions within the
              dinuclear unit.  The second type   of dinuclear complexes to be investigated
              are hydride bridged homo- and   heteronuclear palladium and platinum complexes
              whose dinuclear structures   are based upon bridging
              bis(diphenylphosphino)methane and related   ligands.  Alkyl derivatives of the
              heteronuclear complexes will be used   to study competitive reductive
              elimination (of alkane), and competitive   electrophilic M-C bond cleavage
              reaction.  The homonuclear dipalladium   complexes provide a unique opportunity
              to study the chemical properties   of palladium hydride complexes, which are
              normally highly unstable.  NMR   spectroscopy will be used extensively for
              investigating these reactions.  Catalysis is necessary to increase the rates
              and often the selectivity of   many industrial processes. The rational design
              of new, or even improved,   catalytic systems requires detailed knowledge of
              the individual steps   that participate in the catalytic cycle.  This work is
              aimed at   developing the fundamental understanding of some reactions of
              complexes   of metals that are frequently involved in catalysis.  The results
              of   these studies may ultimately be used to develop new catalytic processes  
              of industrial importance.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
