Title       : Phosphorus Dynamics: Relative Contributions by Bacteria and Zooplankton to
               Recycling Processes in Lakes Michigan, Huron and Erie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9508087

Award Number: 9508087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300607             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Lehman jtlehman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508087  Lehman    Differences in availabilities and rates of supply of 
              phosphorus to the ecosystems of the Great Lakes of North  America are known to
              be major factors controlling rates of  productivity, biomass development, and
              species composition.  Nonetheless, epilimnetic concentrations of phosphate are 
              uniformly low in all the Great Lakes during summer, and  radiotracer studies
              demonstrate that turnover times of the  ambient pools are minutes to tens of
              minutes, as the result  of biological processes.  In situ concentrations during
              the  productive summer months have generally proven intractable  to accurate
              measurement, but it appears that,  in common  with oceanic observations of
              ammonium dynamics, bacteria  dominate fluxes at ambient levels, whereas
              phytoplankton  dominate when concentrations are modestly increased.  There  are
              differences between turnover dynamics and equilibrium  partitioning of tracer P
              in Great Lakes of differing trophic  condition, and along inshore-to-offshore
              gradients within  individual Great Lakes.  The main hypothesis to be tested in 
              this research is that the relative magnitudes of microbial  recycling
              processes, and of P recycling by zooplankton,  change predictably with overall
              primary production, and with  an index of P deficiency, such that different
              proportions of  recycled P are incorporated by algae versus bacteria in 
              different lakes.  This research effort will combine explicit  kinetic models
              for P fluxes with experiments designed to  quantify the relative contributions
              of bacterial, protozoan,  and metazoan recycling rates in Lakes Erie, Huron and
               Michigan.  A new analytical method adapted from sea water  for fresh water
              investigations (magnesium inducted  coprecipitation of P) now makes tractable
              the investigation  of P dynamics and regeneration rates by is tope dilution 
              methods.
