Title       : LTREB: Responses of a Saline Lake to Environmental Change from Seasonal to
               Decadel Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9508733

Award Number: 9508733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250689             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Melack melack@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Jellison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lakes constitute nearly half of inland waters by volume and provide ecologically
              important habitats in arid regions. They often have high rates of productivity
              which support higher trophic levels, especially birds. At Mono Lake,
              California, environmental concern has focused on the threat to increasing
              salinity accompanying diversions of freshwater streams out of the watershed. 
              State agencies have now conditioned Los Angeles water rights to raise and
              maintain the surface elevation of Mono Lake at a level significantly higher
              than the present. The ecological response to different lake levels and
              salinities is uncertain. During the past 16 years, Mono Lake s plankton
              dynamics were dominated by large changes in nutrient availability. Salinity
              bioassays on individual organisms and modeling studies predict higher primary
              and secondary productivity at the lower salinities accompanying higher surface
              elevations. However, recent analysis of sediment cores indicate little
              correlation between changes in salinity over the past 170 years and organic
              matter accumulation in the sediments. Thi s research will determine the
              response to change in salinity through key limnological measurements during the
              anticipated period of rising lake levels and decreasing salinity,will directly
              compare the resulting long-term record of plankton dynamics to the sedimentary
              record, and includes analysis of a 150-200 year sedimentary record for which
              lake level and salinity estimates are available. The comparison between the
              21-yr record of plankton dynamics and organic matter accumulation in the
              sediments will be enhanced through contemporaneous measurements of sinking
              fluxes.  Saline lakes are increasingly threatened by human-caused changes in
              salinity. The proposed research not only addresses the impact of changing
              salinity at Mono Lake, but also contributes to interpreting the sedimentary
              record of other lakes. Additionally, this research will advance efforts
              at.understanding the effect of species diversity on basic functioning of
              ecosystems. There are no  comparable records for large, temperate, relatively
              deep, species poor lakes with which to compare to  well-studied, species-rich,
              temperate lakes. This research will help to fill that void.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
