Title       : Genome Evolution in Allopolyploid Wheats: Evidence from Low Copy DNA Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9508686

Award Number: 9508686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luther E. Talbert usslt@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew T. Lavin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9508686  Talbert   Many plant species, and some animal species as well, have
              originated following hybridization between two or more progenitor species.  In
              many cases, both sets of chromosomes in each of the parental (diploid) species
              are retained in the hybrid, which thus becomes a tetra(allopoly)ploid organism.
               Many of our common crop plants like wheat, oats, cotton, and tobacco are
              allopolyploids.  The evolution of these species may proceed along pathways that
              are not open to diploid species.  For instance, it has been suggested that
              allopolyploids are buffered against deleterious mutations more effectively than
              diploids.  One complication in tracing the ancestry of polyploid plant species,
              however, lies in the finding that some diploid species are themselves hybrid
              derivatives of past crossings.  It is for this reason that polyploid hybrids
              can be hypothesized to combine multiple parental lines.   Drs. Luther Talbert
              and Matthew Lavin of Montana State University are making imaginative use of new
              methods of DNA analysis to study the origins of polyploid wheats, and in
              particular the group designated as 'B' genome wheats.  Their work builds upon
              three converging research enterprises: 1) the development of specific markers
              of genes on the two arms of each chromosome in wheats; 2) the use of breeding
              stocks of polyploid wheats that lack a specific chromosome (so-called
              nullisomic lines); and 3) the search for and maintenance of wild diploid wheats
              collected in the Middle East.  Their studies will test the hypothesis that each
              genome is actually a composite of chromosomes from several progenitor species,
              and if so, from which progenitors.  The use of single or low copy-number
              nuclear DNA markers on chromosomes should prove adaptable to other plant
              systems, in helping to solve the problem of hybrid origins of polyploids.
