Title       : Synthesis of Main Group Element Ring and Cage Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9508668

Award Number: 9508668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Paine rtpaine@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Robert T. Paine, Chemistry Department, University of New Mexico, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program of the Chemistry Division for the study of phosphorus-boron cage  
              molecules and closely related species in which a phosphorus or boron atom   is
              substituted by another main group element. The basic objective of the   project
              is  to determine if new polycyclic boron-phosphorus cage   compounds can be
              formed from cyclic and acyclic phosphinoborane molecules   by sequential
              addition and elimination chemistry. As a portion of the   investigation,
              polycyclic B-P cage molecules which contain a heteroatom    will be prepared
              and the extent to which the size and  composition of the   cage can be tailored
              will be assessed. Finally, these species will be   utilized as precursors to
              electronic material including quantum confined   semiconductors.  While boron
              phosphide (BP) is a semiconductor with potentially valuable   electronic
              properties, it is currently only available as  an impure   material, which
              displays low electron mobility and which is hard to   process. These features
              have retarded commercial  development of BP. In   this project molecular cage
              molecules, which are composed of a three   dimensional B-P framework, will be
              prepared. These compounds, together   with closely related molecules that
              incorporate small amounts of yet a   third element into the cage, will be
              examined as precursors from which BP   can be made more easily and cleanly. As
              small fragments of BP will be    preformed in the core of the molecules,
              precise control of the size of   the resulting BP may be possible, leading to
              the possibility of obtaining   very small particles of BP for use as
              `quantum-confined semiconductors.`                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
