Title       : Studies of Two-Dimensional Superconductors and Multilayers in Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9508419

Award Number: 9508419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aharon Kapitulnik ak@loki.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm R. Beasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9508419  Kapitulnik    A  wide  range of experiments will be conducted in
              order  to  obtain a better understanding of the global Temperature  vs. 
              Magnetic  field  phase  diagram, as  well  as  the  kinetics  associated  with 
              various  phases  of  two  dimensional  and  layered   superconductors  such  as
                the   high-temperature  superconductors.  The thermodynamics of the 
              superconducting  transition  near  the  mean-field line,  and  the  range  of 
              validity   of   the  Lowest-Landau-Letel  approximation   to  multilayers  with
               various anisotropy will be  investigated.  Experiments  on  the  melting of
              the two-dimensional  vortex  lattice  will  focus on different crossovers in 
              the  vortex  dynamics   as   the   length   scales   are   being   tuned. 
              Superconductor-insulator  transitions  will  be  studied  by  varying 
              systematically the degrees  of  screening  and  the  Coulomb  potential. The
              nature of the zero-field  superfluid  transition with increasing amount of
              disorder will  also  be  investigated. The difference between weak and strong
              pinning  will  be sorted out by studying the role of disorder on  the 
              resistive  transition and vortex dynamics.  The  variety  of  transport and
              magnetic measurements in the above experiments  will  provide  the global phase
              diagram of the  multilayers,  this  may  uncover  new  glass phases  and  their
               incipient  correlation.  %%%  High temperature superconductors are layered
              materials where  superconductivity occurs in the copper-oxygen  planes.  They 
              exhibit  peculiar properties due to this two-dimensionality.  This  proposal 
              investigates  the  resistive  transition  in  magnetic fields, and the role of
              vortex structure and motion  causing    energy    dissipation   in    high   
              temperature  superconductors  and  two  dimensional  superconductors   in 
              general. A broad range of experiments will be conducted on a  model system of
              molybdenum-germanium/germanium multilayer in  which the PI's have extensive
              expertise and capabilities  of  co ntrol  and  characterization. These 
              experiments  together  will provide a better understanding of the phase diagram
               as  well  as the kinetics associated with the various phases  of 
              two-dimensional and layered superconductors.  ***
