Title       : CAREER: Magmatism in the African Western Rift: Lithospheric Structure and
               Melting Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9508112

Award Number: 9508112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Hart                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tanya Furman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508112  Furman  The goal of this project is to understand the genesis of
              alkalic volcanic rocks associated with continental extension in the African
              Western Rift.  This research will use the geochemistry of young volcanic rocks
              to document interaction between asthenospheric and lithospheric melts and
              characterize the relative contributions from these two source reservoirs.  The
              results of this project will help constrain global geodynamic models of source
              reservoir mixing, and will also advance understanding of the relationships
              between metasomatism, magmatism and rifting in continental environments.  This
              proposal is part of a long-term research program that integrates field,
              geochemical, isotopic, experimental and geophysical data to determine the
              dynamics of melting and melt extraction in continental rifts.  The African Rift
              was selected for detailed study because it is the type locality for
              rift-related magmatism.  Comprehensive analysis of appropriate samples is
              critical to interpretation, and this research will provide the most robust data
              set for assessment of magma dynamics in the continental rift environment.  The
              educational component of this proposal represents a focused effort to encourage
              participation of African-American students in the earth sciences.  A
              middle/high school instructional unit (grades 7-9) will be developed on African
              geography and resources.  This unit will be provide a counterbalance to current
              foci on the creative aspects of African heritage, by presenting a vehicle
              through which African-American students can express enthusiasm for science
              while still developing a sense of cultural identity.  A college course for
              non-science majors will be developed with the same goal, but the material will
              be significantly more detailed and rigorous.  Modern and creative pedagogical
              techniques will be used in developing educational materials for both courses.
