Title       : Energy Partitioning Following Light Absorption by Organic Chemicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9508308

Award Number: 9508308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Wagner wagnerp@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This renewal award, made in the Organic Dynamics Program, provides continued
              support for  Dr. Peter Wagner's research on energy partitioning in photoexited
              organic molecules.   Photoexcited ketones with limited structural flexibility
              will be studied to determine how atomic  and orbital orientations affect
              hydrogen atom transfer.  Temperature studies with substituted  ketones will
              reveal whether substituents affect the rate of hydrogen transfer by enthalpic
              or  entropic considerations.  The application of these reactions to the
              synthesis of benzofurans and  other heterocycles from o-acylphenyl ethers will
              be explored.  Intramolecular hydrogen  abstraction produces intermediates which
              have one unpaired electron on each of two carbon  atoms, leading to a variety
              of products including cyclic products.  The geometry of cyclization  as well as
              how intersystem crossing of biradicals with the same spin occurs will also be
              pursued.   Other reactions to be studied are the photoinduced cleavage of
              halogen atoms in halogenated  phenyl ketones and the cycloaddition of alkenes
              to triplet benzenes.    This research addresses basic questions of how
              molecular structure of compounds affects the  localization of energy when
              exposed to light and the chemical reactivity of the resultant excited 
              intermediates.  The localization of energy in specific parts of molecules
              allows for selective  reactions of synthetic interest and addresses questions
              of the effects of light on systems of  biological interest.
