Title       : University - Industry Cooperative Research in Mathematical Sciences:
               Industry-Based Grad. Research Fellowship for Finite Element Anaylsis of
               Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9508656

Award Number: 9508656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Flaherty flaherje@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9508656   Flaherty   The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in
              the Mathematical   Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
              exchange of mathematical   scientists between academia and industry at
              different stages of their careers. These   programs will strengthen the links
              between industry and academia and identify and   encourage new avenues of
              research in the mathematical sciences. The University-Based   Graduate Research
              Assistantships provide the opportunity for graduate students to spend   part of
              their time in the classroom and part of their time in an industrial setting.
              These   awards are a means of contributing to the future vitality of the
              scientific effort of the   nation.     Adaptive procedures are among the most
              efficient, reliable, and robust   computational techniques for solving problems
              arising in solid and fluid mechanics.  High-  performance parallel computation
              is an essential performance ingredient when solving   modern three-dimensional
              transient and steady problems.  The difficulty is that adaptive   mesh and
              order modification upset the load balance of a parallel computation.  Balance  
              must be restored by dynamic procedures that work in conjunction with
              adaptivity. Micro-  electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) are micron scale
              mechanical devices fabricated by   using technologies developed for integrated
              circuits to perform functions as sensors and   actuators. This award will
              provide funding for a Research Assistant, working with   InterScience, Inc., to
              develop appropriate elasticity models for MEMS and implement   them within the
              adaptive-parallel software system.  Models will be varied to appraise the  
              effects of different forces and constitutive relations.
