Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Industry-Based Graduate Research Assistantships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9508725

Award Number: 9508725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15209              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wierman wierman@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508725  Wierman   The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
              Mathematical   Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
              exchange of mathematical   scientists between academia and industry at
              different stages of their careers. These   programs will strengthen the links
              between industry and academia and identify and   encourage new avenues of
              research in the mathematical sciences. The University-Based   Graduate Research
              Assistantships provide the opportunity for graduate students to spend   part of
              their time in the classroom and part of their time in an industrial setting.
              These   awards are a means of contributing to the future vitality of the
              scientific effort of the   nation.   One important function of the Office on
              Smoking and Health (OSH), Centers for   Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
              is to estimate the number of people who die each   year from smoking, or
              smoking attributable mortality (SAM).  SAM is a function of the   attributable
              fraction (AF) associated with smoking and the total number of deaths.  The   
              attributable fraction, in turn, is a function of the relative risk (RR)
              associated with smoking   and smoking prevalence. One of the relevant
              methodological issues in estimating SAM is   how to properly adjust the SAM for
              confounding factors such as age, sex, race,   occupation, etc.  Methodology
              does not yet exist for adjusting the SAM when the SAM is   estimated using two
              independent data sources. One aspect of this research is to study a  
              quasi-likelihood based method of estimation. Another area of research will be a
              study of   the relationship between exposure to acrylontrile and cause-specific
              mortality, particularly   cancers of the lung, brain, prostate and stomach.
