Title       : Peptide Bond Synthesis at Monolayer Film Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9508066

Award Number: 9508066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Oliver John_Oliver@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   6   7   8 
               9   :   ;   <   =   >   ?                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    @       @                                                
                                    @   p                                                    
                                            @                                   Oliver
              9508066 The primary objective of this research is to demonstrate that peptides
              can be synthesized from suitably derivatized and aminoacylated nucleotides
              which are suspended as a monolayer film at a water/air interface. Successful
              peptide synthesis at a monolayer surface may be a good mimic for ribosomal
              peptide synthesis as well as an efficient method to synthesize certain
              peptides. The formation of amide bonds from ester bonds is energetically
              downhill. However, biological systems find it necessary to catalyze peptide
              synthesis from activated amino acids with proteins or protein/RNA complexes.
              The catalysts perform at least two functions. The first role is to accelerate
              amide bond formation so that it competes with non-enzymatic hydrolysis of the
              activated amino acids. In addition the catalyst imposes order on the synthesis
              so that only a defined polymer is produced.  We have now demonstrated that
              lipid derivatized nucleotides form monolayer films and these films can be
              compressed to densities similar to those seen in solids.  This provides a
              compelling motivation to investigate the possibi lity of synthesizing peptide
              bonds at the monolayer. Nucleotides conjugated to lipids at the 5'-phosphate
              and aminoacylated at the 2',3'-position will be used to form a monolayer film. 
              The surface pressure and packing density in the monolayer can be controlled by
              physically changing the surface area of the interface. At high packing
              densities we expect to see amide bond fomlation with rates higher than
              background hydrolysis. It is expected that the results obtained from this
              research will be both general and important, with significant implications for
              enzyme mechanisms and chemical peptide synthesis. %%% The goal of this award is
              to demonstrate that polypeptides can be synthesized in a non-enzymatic system
              at rates approaching those seen with ribosomes. We intend to synthesize
              derivatives of amino acids which will incorporate physical characteristics
              required to lock them at an air-water interface. Reaction rates at this
              interface will be controlled by varying the surface pressure andl thus the
              density of the amino acid derivatives.  Infrared spectroscopy will be used to
              monitor the progress of the reaction. These preliminary experiments coupled
              with methods to preorganize the amino acid derivatives may allow us to design a
              method of rapidly synthesizing polypeptides of defined sequence. ***          @
                  @                         ;                                                
                     Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l    
                                                        D       h                            
                      S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (        
                                                        5                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      jack cohen                  @     { R                  
                      @    G                              @    ug                            
                                                                                      @     u
                                                  Microsoft Word 6.0                         
                                          7                                                  
                                e =       e                                                  
                                          j       j   j       j       j       j       j      
                                                                              g   =          
                                                                                             
                      )               I           T       (   g                       j      
                                                                                g            
                j       j                                                                    
                j               j                                       ~               j    
                j       j       j                           a                                
                                                                              Oliver 9508066
              The primary objective of this research is to demonstrate that peptides can be
              synthesized from suitably derivatized and aminoacylated nucleotides which are
              suspended as a monolayer film at a water/air interface. Successful peptide
              synthesis at a monolayer surface may be a good mimic for ribosomal peptide
              synthesis as well as an efficient method to synthesize certain peptides. The
              formation of amide bonds from ester bonds is energetically downhill. However,
              biological systems find it necessary to catalyze peptide synthesis from
              activated amino acids wit
