Title       : Ecological Interpretation of Hydrogen and Oxygen Isotope Ratios in Tree-Ring
               Cellulose
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9508671

Award Number: 9508671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Ehleringer ehleringer@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guanghui Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9508671    The  relationship between seasonal and regional patterns  of 
              precipitation  and the use of those water inputs  by  plants  has ramifications
              at several levels and time scales that are  of  both  basic  and  applied
              interest.   Identification  of  measurements  that  can provide quantitative 
              assessment  of  specific  water use patterns (that is, use of  precipitation 
              versus   groundwater)  by  plants   would   make   a   major  contribution  to 
              understanding  that  relationship.    This  research will test the hypothesis
              that stable isotope  ratio  analysis  of hydrogen and oxygen isotopes at
              natural  levels  in  wood  will provide that information, at both  short-term 
              and  long-term  scales.  Its goal is to develop,  test,  and  apply 
              quantitative  models of the  factors  that  influence  isotope  ratios of
              cellulose in tree rings.  The  tree  ring  information will allow
              reconstruction of seasonal and annual  patterns  of  water use and humidity
              conditions  during  the  growing season over the life of the tree.  The model
              will be  developed through laboratory experiments using four  species  of 
              trees common in the western United States.  It  will  be  tested  through 
              field observations at sites chosen  because  they  differ in water sources and
              humidity conditions.   The  model  will then be used to reconstruct the history
              of water  use   (precipitation   versus  ground  water),   atmospheric 
              humidity  (leaf  to  air gradients) and relative  water  use  efficiency 
              (through carbon isotope discrimination)  by  the  four  species  in  Utah from
              seedling establishment  through  maturity.   Once quantitative, mechanistic
              models  of  tree-  ring  isotope ratios are developed, they can be  applied  to
               unraveling   historic  patterns  of  seasonal  precipitation  across the
              landscape, sensitivity of physiological processes  to  changes in moisture
              sources and humidity, and aspects of  water relations that contribute to the
              long-term changes  in  tree  community  structure.  This r esearch  will  allow
               for  scaling  of  physiological  parameters  from  individual  to  landscape 
              levels  and will provide a  direct  link  between  physiology  and global-level
              studies of biosphere-atmosphere  interactions.
