Title       : Systematic Means for Controlling Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9508675

Award Number: 9508675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herschel A. Rabitz hrabitz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Herschel Rabitz is supported by a grant under the Optical   Science
              and Engineering initiative in the Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program to perform theoretical studies of laser techniques for   controlling
              molecular dynamics.   The research will emphasize: 1) the   establishment of
              bounds of possible control over molecular systems; 2)   the determination of
              the essential features of laser pulses for achieving   practical control; 3)
              the development of advanced laser field design   techniques for molecular
              control; and 4) a full exploration of the role   of adaptive laboratory
              feedback as a means of overcoming inherent design   uncertainties and
              laboratory errors.  Although the research is   theoretical in nature, it will
              be closely coordinated with parallel   laboratory efforts at Princeton and
              elsewhere.   The outcome of this   research is expected to lay the broad
              foundations for performing   optically controlled molecular manipulations, as
              well as opening up a new   means to probe the complex physical processes
              occurring during molecular   dynamics.  Since the invention of the laser
              chemists have dreamed of selectively   exciting regions within a molecule thus
              causing a controlled chemical   reaction to occur.  It was long ago realized,
              however,  that   intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution occurrs so
              rapidly that   it is impossible to concentrate enough energy in a selected bond
              to cause   it to break.  Now,  with the advent of laser pulse modulation
              techniques,   and the application of control theory, it appears that the dream
              of laser   selective chemistry may become a reality.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
