Title       : Acquisition of a Computer Server for the GeoClio Electronic Bulletin Board of
               the U.S. National Committee on the History of Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9508309

Award Number: 9508309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9290               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Dunn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore S. Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9508309  Dunn     The PI's will  establish GeoClio, an electronic  bulletin
              board accessible through the Internet computer  network, for the U.S. National
              Committee on the History  of Geology at the University of Southern Mississippi.
               The bulletin board will facilitate communication  between geologists and
              oceanographers doing research on  historical topics in the Earth sciences, with
               historians of science. It will serve as a means of  communication between
              geographically-widespread  historical researchers on all the continents and 
              Australia.  In addition to assisting communication by  serving as a "bulletin
              board" for researchers to post  announcements of their particular research
              topics and  requests for collaboration or assistance, GeoClio will  provide
              space for listings of upcoming meetings,  conferences, and symposia with
              historical themes. It  may also contain summaries of recent historical 
              meetings and symposia, and possibly the table of  contents of publications in
              Earth history, to assist  beginning researchers in becoming more familiar with 
              the historical literature. GeoClio might also be used  as an "electronic
              archive" in which text of  historically- oriented research papers and journal 
              articles may be stored, if this use does not violate  appropriate copyright
              laws.  The university currently  operates a link with the Internet computer
              network  (whale.st.usm.edu) through the Academic Computing  Center of its
              College of Science & Technology, and this  computer server will connect with
              the existing link to  provide access to the Internet. The GeoClio computer 
              bulletin board will be accessible in text mode (via  Gopher) or in graphic
              mode, using the MOSAIC software  package of the National Center for Super
              computing  Activities to establish GeoClio as a site on the World-  Wide Web
              (WWW). By combining both text and graphics  access, GeoClio will be available
              both to users who  have only low-speed Internet access (in text mode), and  to
              users with high-speed computers able to acc ess WWW  "home pages" through
              MOSAIC.    ***
