Title       : Siliceous Paleoceanography: (Ge/Si) OPAL-IV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9508072

Award Number: 9508072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Froelich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9508072  Froelich    Recent advance in our understanding of minor biological 
              fractionation of Ge/Si by oceanic diatoms suggest that  (Ge/Si) opal variations
              measured in late Pleistocene piston  cores and Cenozoic drill cores are
              recording whole ocean  (Ge/Si) seawater variations driven by rapid and large 
              glacial to interglacial changes in continental weathering  intensity and river
              fluxes to the sea.  If so, then it is  clearly important to produce high
              resolution records of  (Ge/Si) opal in cores with well-established 18 O and 14
              C  stratigraphies across transitions to establish the shape and  timing of the
              oceanic Ge/Si response relative to other  climate and weathering indicators. 
              In addition, in order to  resolve whole ocean changes in the face of small
              biological  fractionation effects, it is necessary to carefully evaluate  and
              remove the effects of Ge/Si fractionation in local  records.  With the
              development of a rapid and highly-  sensitive HG-ICP-MS Ge-method, these
              problems can be  addressed and unraveling the causes and timing and ocean 
              chemical variations can begin.  As a result, this is aimed  at accomplishing
              two major goals: (1) Produce high  resolutions late Pleistocene (Ge/Si) opal
              records in cores  that contain abundant diatoms and forams in collaboration 
              with others' measurements of the appropriate  paleogeochemical tracer in the
              same cores (e.g. 87Sr/86Sr);  and (2) Provide tests to refine the effects of
              Ge/Si  biological fractionation with diatom cultures, hydrographic  and core
              top transects, and runs of the Hamburg ocean Ge/Si  model.  In addition, opal
              paleoproductivity work in the  Antarctic (expanding into the North and South
              Pacific  Oceans), and other ancillary programs will be continued.
