Title       : Combustion Synthesis of Powders for Advanced Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1990  
File        : a9061243

Award Number: 9061243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hartwell F. Calcote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AeroChem Research Labs
	      P. O. Box 12
	      Princeton, NJ  085420012    609/921-7070

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              Fine, ultrapure, spherical particles are desirable starting                    
              materials for producing high performance afvanced ceramic                      
              products.  AeroChem has a unique flame synthesis process for                   
              preparing such high quality powders, including silicon                         
              nitride.  This process differs from the usual combustion                       
              synthesis in that no oxygen is used:  the particle-producing                   
              reactants also support the flame.  For silicon nitride,                        
              silane, ammonia, hydrazine, and nitrogen are burned on a flat                  
              flame burner.  A high quality powder is produced of which a                    
              sample, without additives, was successfully subjected to hot                   
              isostatic pressing.  However, the use of hydrazine makes the                   
              process commercially unacceptable because of the cost,                         
              explosive nature, and toxicity of hydrazine.  While                            
              thermodynamic and other considerations indicate that ammonia                   
              should support a flame without hydrazine present, we have not                  
              been able to operate without some hydrazine.  A computer                       
              modeling study is proposed to understand why the                               
              ammonia/silane system does not support a flame under the                       
              conditions which have been employed, and to define the                         
              conditions under which a flame could be supported.                             
              Experiments will then be performed to determine the practical                  
              feasibility of operating under the defined conditions.                         
              Successful completion of this program would make available for                 
                                                                                             
              advanced ceramic manufacture a higher quality powder than is                   
              currently available.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The final product of the proposed research would be an                         
              economical process for the preparation of a high quality                       
              silicon nitride powder for use in advanced ceramics.  Present                  
              progress in advanced ceramics is limited by the unavailability                 
                                                                                             
              of a US made high quality powder.
