Title       : High Temperature BCSCO Superconducting Films on Si Substrate at Low Processing
               Temperature for Possible Applications in Hybrid Opto-Electronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1990   
File        : a9061129

Award Number: 9061129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rama Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Excel Technology Inc
	      101-2 Colin Drive
	      Holbrook, NY  11741    516/563-7067

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1762,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the Proposed program, for the first time, epitaxial growth of               
              thin film of high temperature Bismuth-calcium-strontium-copper-                
              oxide (Bi-Ca-Sr-Cu-O) superconductor on Silicon (Si) substrate                 
              at low processing temperature by laser induced deposition is                   
              examined.  The first most important step in successful                         
              application of these highly promising materials in micro-                      
              electronics and hybrid opto-electronics, is the fabrication of                 
              high quality thin films on semiconductor substrate.  Thin film                 
              will be prepared by plasma assisted laser deposition technique                 
              using 265 nm UV laser at 10 Hz.   In this technique, a high flux               
              of UV photons is directed onto the Bi-Ca-Sr-Cu-O superconducting               
              target which is in close proximity to Si substrate.  This                      
              technique has been successfully adopted at Excel for depositing                
              thin films of high temperature superconductor on various                       
              insulating oxide substrates.  One advantage of this technique is               
              that precisely controlled thin films of desired stoichiometry can              
              be deposited at low processing temperature without the need of                 
              any high temperature (900 degree C) post annealing.  This low                  
              temperature processing has implications relating to how thin (10-              
              20 nm) a film can be deposited on Si before introducing                        
              substrate-film interaction.  Once a high quality thin film is                  
              produced, the next logical step is to produce patterns in these                
              films for device fabrication and also the measurements of                      
              critical current density.  Traditional wet processing methods                  
              commonly used for patterning may have a detrimental effect on                  
              the properties of the film.  Thus in the present work, a dry                   
              processing method, namely laser induced etching, will be utilized              
              to fabricate 10- wide line using 532 nm laser at KHz rep. rate.               
              Suerconductivity in the grown film will be confirmed by perfect                
              conductivity at transition temperature.  Critical current density              
              across the micro-bridge will be measured by four probe resistive               
              technique.
