Title       : Improving Productivity by Dose Equivalency Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1990  
File        : a9061181

Award Number: 9061181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48518              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Essex Corporation Florida
	      1430 SPRINGHILL ROAD
	      McLean, VA  221023000    407/894-5090

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1186,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will apply classical test theory to address a                    
              human performance measurement problem:  Screening workers for                  
              performance impairment may aid in removing drugs from the                      
              workplace and improve productivity.  The most straightforward way              
              to measure performance would seem to be under actual working                   
              conditions.  In  cases where this has been attempted, however,                 
              job performance measures were found to be generally insensitive                
              to all but the most powerful effects.  A central problem is the                
              lack of reliability of on-the-job measures.  However, tests which              
              possess robust psychometric properties (stability, reliability,                
              etc.) have been shown to be sensitive to alcohol, sleep loss,                  
              hypoxia, halon, and other chemical agents.  Therefore, this                    
              research will index human performance decrements on a battery of               
              perceptual, cognitive and motor tests to alcohol dosage (for                   
              which federally mandated standards already exist for some                      
              occupations).  Then calibration algorithms would be derived for                
              comparing performance changes in blood alcohol concentration                   
              units to losses from other agents, treatments and stressors for                
              which there may be a concern in the work place.  A fully up-and-               
              running, special purpose test station will be produced.  The                   
              prototype will contain these algorithms so that they can be set                
              to predetermined levels.  In Phase II, additional experimental                 
              work will be conducted to refine the algorithms, add other                     
              treatments, and improve the design of the test station by                      
              conducting test and evaluation at laboratory and work sites.                   
                                                                                             
              The availability in an occupational setting of a test station                  
              which could index performance loss from any cause to a standard                
              such as alcohol would have immediate application in industry in                
              screening for fitness for duty.  Additionally, monitoring by                   
              agencies, laboratories, or oneself can be useful in the study of               
              toxic elements (e.g., asbestos, fluorocarbons), environmental                  
              agents (motion, radiation), illness (AIDS, dementia), work                     
              conditions (shift work, exercise), and personal states (aging,                 
              fatigue, emotional stress).
