Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Remote Characterization of Buried Objects
               Using Scattered Acoustic or Electromag- netic Waves and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9415493

Award Number: 9415493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Angell angell@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph E. Kleinman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Fadil Santosa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1038,5918,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in applied
              mathematics between the University of Delaware's Center for Waves, directed by
              Ralph Kleinman, and Dominique Lesselier of the Division of Waves at the French
              National Center for Scientific Research, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. The
              participants include postdoctoral researchers and graduate students from both
              countries.  The objective of their research is to develop theoretical aspects
              and practical numerical codes for the detection of the size, shape, location
              and properties of objects embedded in inhomogeneous or layered materials.  They
              will apply mathematical techniques to the following problems:  (1)
              nondestructive detection of cracks or other faults in a known host medium;  (2)
              location and identification of objectives buried near the earth's surface
              (pipelines, land mines, or cables); and  (3) remote determination of the
              composition of the structure of the earth's crust.  The proposed collaboration
              takes advantage of complementary mathematical techniques developed by the U.S.
              and French groups and access to experimental data which will be supplied by the
              French group.  The project will advance theoretical understanding and may
              result in new computational techniques for studying problems in remote sensing
              and electrical engineering.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
