Title       : Renovation of Merrill Hall (Chemistry Building)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  2000 
File        : a9415062

Award Number: 9415062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1074850            (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver R. Delk  (Principal Investigator former)
              Troy L. Story  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse College
	      830 Westview Drive S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303101427    404/681-2800

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Morehouse College, a historically  black institution, has a long tradition  in
              the development of African American men  for careers in science.  A majority of
              these men have been trained  in Merrill Hall, home to the chemistry department.
               Constructed in 1952, the present  facility is devoid of the required physical 
              infrastructure required to support modern chemical research and research
              training activities.  Deficiencies include: inadequate ventilation and air
              conditioning, leaking pipes, inoperable fume hoods, poor lighting, and
              inadequate chemical storage facilities.  Laboratories are in violation of
              federal safety regulations and building codes.  Not only are conditions
              hazardous to students and faculty, but they are potentially damaging to
              research instruments.  This Academic Research Infrastructure award will provide
              funds to assist Morehouse College  in its endeavors to renovate the second and
              third floors of the Merrill Chemistry Building.  Laboratories will be
              reconfigured into functional areas where research in analytical, physical, 
              inorganic, and materials chemistry can be conducted.  In addition to upgrading 
              infrastructural systems, the renovation will involve the installation of new
              fume hoods, benches, and casework.  Morehouse's role in undergraduate science
              is particularly significant in light of the rapidly declining numbers of
              students, especially minorities, who enter scientific fields.  The shortage  of
              scientifically trained African Americans has serious implications for the
              future of a nation increasingly dependent on scientific  and technological
              advances.  A renovated Merrill Hall will strengthen the institution's role in
              developing young scientists  to meet this challenge.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
