Title       : Renovation and Consolidation of Astronomical Support Facilities for Ground Based
               Observing and Instrument Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9415101

Award Number: 9415101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart L. Mufson mufson@mimosa.astro.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Kent Honeycutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               A partnership between NSF and Indiana University will renovate facilities for
              the Astronomy Department within 34 year-old Swain Hall West.  The renovation
              activities will develop a high-performance local observing station and a modern
              instrument development laboratory for the design and fabrication of
              state-of-the-art electronic and electro-optical instrumentation.   Coupling
              today's computer controlled telescopes and electronic instrumentation with
              high-speed digital communication capabilities, it is possible to do interactive
              observations from locations that are remote from the physical location of the
              telescope.  Indiana University researchers expect to conduct observations from
              the university facility utilizing the Wisconsin, Indiana, Yale and National
              Optical Astronomy Observatories (WIYN) telescope at Kitt Peak, AZ and the more
              local, and recently funded, robotic telescope at Morgan Monroe State Forest, 15
              miles from the Bloomington campus.  The new Remote Observation facility will
              include a network of powerful computer workstations, and will enable research
              programs to be far more cost effective and efficient.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students will be able to participate in modern astronomical
              research utilizing large telescopes without the expense and time involved in
              traveling to the telescope sites.     A second emphasis of this renovation
              effort is the creation of an electronics and electro-optical fabrication
              facility for the continued development of instrumentation for the two
              telescopes.  The development activities will assure the incorporation of the
              latest technology in the WIYN and Morgan Monroe State Forest robotic
              telescopes.   The Astronomy department plans to make the renovated facility the
              central focus for departmental research and research training.  Project
              beneficiaries include 7 faculty, 2 post docs, 18 graduate students and 15
              undergraduates.  Renovation activities will include                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
