Title       : Renovation of the HH Dow Library for the Establishment of anIntegrated Systems
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9415192

Award Number: 9415192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Galip Ulsoy ulsoy@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jun Ni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen C. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yoram Koren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery L. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Debasish Dutta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Endres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elijah Kannatey-Asibu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
               The University of Michigan and the National Science Foundation will jointly
              participate in the replacement of facilities for an interdisciplinary program
              in manufacturing research.   NSF support will help establish a new Integrated
              Machining Systems Laboratory  in the Dow Building. The project is designed to
              promote new innovations in all aspects of machining systems, including machine
              design, process design and planning, tooling, system design and integration,
              computer control architectures, information networks, and measurement and
              control systems.  These efforts are interdisciplinary in nature and will be
              facilitated through proximity of engineers, scientists and students in
              renovated space.  The machine tool industry is the backbone for all durable
              goods manufacturing, including the production of automobiles, airplanes, farm
              machinery and construction equipment.  Just a decade ago, the U.S. was the
              world leader in the machine tool industry; today it is ranked fourth.  To
              regain its competitive position, the U.S. machine tool industry needs to rely
              on technological innovations and a well-trained workforce.   NSF-sponsored
              renovations will include installation of increased electrical power, and
              computer networks with fiber optic cabling to support the integrative machining
              system.  In addition, modifications will be necessary to reconfigure some of
              the space and to increase the HVAC capability.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
