Title       : Renovation of Medical Research Laboratory (MRL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9415109

Award Number: 9415109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $914099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Shank peter shank@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Noonan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence Laxon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Ormsby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy F. Renaghan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               NSF and Brown University will jointly fund the renovation of the Medical
              Research Laboratory (MRL) for the benefit of researchers in both neuroscience
              and ecology and evolutionary biology.  The building, constructed in 1965, will
              be renovated to upgrade HVAC and energy systems; to bring hood exhaust,
              electrical distribution, and fire suppression systems into code compliance; and
              to replace deteriorated cabinetry, lighting and floors.  The renovation will
              provide a safe, and more functional laboratory environment for faculty and
              student use.     The research activities of the majority of the twelve faculty
              within the MRL focus on neuroscientific studies including parallel organization
              through anatomical and physiological studies of the mammalian retina and brain;
              the source of electrical energy for neuronal function; the physiology of
              neurons, synapses and transmitters within the neocortex and the patterns of its
              synaptic connections; the function of ion channels in electrical signaling in
              the nervous system; molecular neurobiology and neuronal aging.  The MRL also
              provides the environment for research in ecology and evolutionary biology. 
              Faculty and students in this area address questions associated with evolution
              and population biology of DNA;  the interface between ecological and
              evolutionary processes in natural plant populations; and behavioral ecology and
              sexual selection.    The renovation project will require approximately two
              years to complete as all the original major building systems will be replaced,
              and the laboratories will be gutted, reconfigured, and brought up to meet the
              demands of modern science including the addition of centralized facilities. 
              The end result of this activity will greatly enhance the research possibilities
              and funding opportunities for faculty and students.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
