Title       : Modernization of Advanced Instrumentation Area; Renovation of Research Space and
               Greenhouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9415244

Award Number: 9415244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434250             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Beveridge dbeveridge@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Wesleyan University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program to repair, renovate and modernize key facilities for
              research and research training in chemistry and the life sciences. 
              Specifically, a large moribund spectroscopy research laboratory will be
              modernized into a multipurpose advanced instrumentation facility, and selected
              research laboratories and a greenhouse will be renovated.  The effected
              laboratories are located in the basement and ground floors of the connected
              Hall-Atwater and Shanklin buildings that comprise part of the Wesleyan Science
              Center.  The advanced instrumentation facility will support research
              initiatives in physical chemistry, biochemistry and molecular biophysics. 
              Investigative projects that will benefit from the renovations include:  NMR
              studies of the structure and base pair opening events in nucleic acids and NMR
              studies of damaged DNA, molecular dynamics of DNA and protein-DNA interactions,
              studies of chemical intermediates in total synthesis, electrochemical
              mechanistic and synthetic studies, and EPR studies of metalloproteins and model
              complexes.  In a parallel initiative, in conjunction with faculty development
              in the area of plant genetics and evolutionary biology, the greenhouse and
              related research space in the Biology Department will be upgraded and renovated
              to support research in ecophysical and evolutionary studies of plant phenotypic
              plasticity.    Renovations will involve reconfiguring space, upgrading
              mechanical, electrical, environmental control, and plumbing systems; and
              installing benches and fixed cabinetry in research laboratories.  The
              improvements for the greenhouse will consist of resurfacing  concrete floors,
              replacing defunct vent motors, actuators, and pad coolers; cleaning and
              re-sealing the glazing of windows; providing emergency power, and prep and
              equipment areas.  The renovations will have several immediate implications
              including the consolidation of advanced instruments in a centralized location
              that will create a locus of research activity. The renovated laboratories will
              provide a modern  environment for faculty, graduate and undergraduate students
              to conduct research, and will foster  collaborative interactions among research
              personnel across disciplinary lines.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
