Title       : Renovation of Research Facilities at the College of Engineering, University of
               Puerto Rico, Mayaguez
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9415119

Award Number: 9415119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112575             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Serrano d serrano@rumac.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis M. Bocanegra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pranab K. Mazumdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Antonio Estevez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              *** 9415119 Serrano The University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez is the recipient
              of funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation
              of engineering research laboratories.  The College of Engineering, being the
              largest in Puerto Rico, attracts the best students on the island.  Increased
              enrollments in the various graduate programs in engineering have prompted the
              institution to re-evaluate their infrastructual requirements, including the
              physical facilities where research and research training activities are
              conducted.  Currently the Mayaguez campus trains approximately 11,000 students
              including 600 graduate and 4,000 undergraduate engineering students mostly of
              Hispanic ethnicity.  Over twenty percent are female students.  Recognizing the
              need for the renovation, the University  and the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program will jointly provide the resources to see the
              improvements to fruition.  The following six laboratories will be renovated:
              Heterogeneous Catalysis and Electrochemistry, Biochemical Engineering,
              Anemometry, System Dynamics and Control, Fatigue and Fracture, and Material
              Science.   Renovations will involve upgrading temperature and humidity control
              and air conditioning systems, installing fume hoods,  laboratory benches and
              cabinets, and equipping labs with proper safety mechanisms. The remodeled
              facilities will sustain the current growth trend in graduate programs and house
              modern instruments needed to pursue advanced training in engineering. The
              renovation will immediately have an impact on the Department of Chemical
              Engineering as it establishes a Ph.D. program. New perspectives for the future
              of chemical and mechanical engineering will occur by the renewed experimental
              scientific capabilities the renovated facilities will provide.  Collaborative
              interactions within  various departments will be promoted as well as with 
              other universities and national laboratories. With the prolific promise of
              academic achievement, the project will enhance research  programs that will
              draw prospective undergraduate and graduate students from Puerto Rico, the
              Caribbean, and South America.     ***
