Title       : Renovation of the Environmental Engineering and Sciences Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9415112

Award Number: 9415112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1015000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Snoeyink snoeyink@cern.ce.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9155,9186,9188,9189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 NSF and the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign will jointly fund the
              renovation of the Environmental Engineering and Science Research Laboratories
              of the Department of Civil Engineering.  The facilities are located on the
              fourth floor of the Newmark Civil Engineering Laboratory which was built in
              1967.  The original space was designed as traditional chemistry laboratories
              for use in water quality research.  However, current and proposed research
              activities in the Environmental Laboratories have changed substantially over
              the past 28 years, and the existing facilities have become completely
              inadequate to address increasingly stringent regulations for drinking water,
              wastewater and solid waste, efficient, low-cost clean up strategies for
              hazardous waste spills and dumps, and aerosol science and air resources
              engineering.     Renovation activity will focus on the enhancement of the HVAC
              and systems, and facilities for safe handling of hazardous materials. 
              Temperature, particle, and humidity control are necessary for delicate
              electronic instrumentation, carefully controlled experiments and sample
              analysis.  Many areas of environmental research have not been pursued, because
              facilities were not available to safely handle hazardous materials.  Space
              reconfiguration and the addition of fume hoods and solvent storage will address
              this need.  In addition, installation of an enhanced system for
              inter-laboratory data communications and re-design and improvement of bench
              configurations and casework will be important work undertaken with NSF support.
                The renovated facility will be a significant asset to research and research
              training efforts in four main areas:  environmental microbiology and biological
              process engineering; physical/chemical treatment processes; aerosol science and
              air resources engineering; and biological monitoring and environmental resource
              management.  The new facilities will aid researchers in the development of an
              in-house capability to apply molecular biology techniques to water quality
              control research, preparation of field studies and sample analysis, and for the
              safe and efficient handling of organic compounds and environmental pathogens. 
              The beneficiaries of the project include 9 faculty, 50 masters and 25 Ph.D.
              students.  Twenty percent of the graduate students are women, and 5% are Black
              or Hispanic.  Wishing to encourage participation by a greater number of
              under-represented minorities in the Ph.D. program, the college has developed an
              effort to recruit and retain an increased number of these students.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
