Title       : Renovation of UNLV Department of Geoscience Mineral Seperation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9415134

Award Number: 9415134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanda J. Taylor wjt@unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clay H. Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy E. Wallin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) and the NSF will jointly fund
              renovation of the Mineral Separation Laboratory facilities for the program in
              Geosciences.  The renovations are concurrent with the institution's transition
              from a predominantly undergraduate campus to a major urban research-oriented
              environment.  Faculty utilizing the Mineral Separation Laboratory conduct
              nationally and internationally competitively funded research with collaborators
              at institutions that have facilities for state-of-the-art isotopic and
              geochemical analyses.  Thus the ability to rapidly isolate individual mineral
              species from rocks is critical to ongoing investigations of petrology,
              diagenesis, and ultimately to tectonic and climatic processes.   The current
              facilities at UNLV are plagued with sample contamination problems.   Processing
              of rocks to isolate minerals involves numerous steps, and contamination of
              mineral separates may occur during each of the more than 6 individual steps. 
              Even relatively low levels of contamination can preclude accurate age
              determinations.  NSF support will enable replacement of fume hoods, the
              installation of additional laboratory benches and counters, renovation of
              windows, installation of a new HVAC system, replacement of windows, plumbing of
              water, vacuum and compressed air lines and installation of a dropped ceiling. 
              Modifications to the electrical system will be included, as will enhancements
              to the walls and flooring.   The renovation will increase mineral separation
              purity, laboratory safety and research efficiency within the Mineral Separation
              Laboratory.  These are benefits that will directly impact 7 faculty, 14
              graduate and 6 undergraduate students at UNLV, as well as two institutional
              partners in the Nevada Consortium for Geology, Geochemistry, and Geophysics.
              Finally, the completed renovation will form an important component of the
              implementation of the Ph.D. in Geoscience, as UNLV seeks to provide an
              increasingly research-oriented environment.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
