Title       : Renovation of Wetlab Facilities at the University of Southern Mississippi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9415155

Award Number: 9415155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Ross Stephen Ross@bull.cc.usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. D. Ellender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia M. Biesiot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bobby L. Middlebrooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Southern Mississippi at Hattiesburg, is the recipient of
              funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of
              research laboratories in the Walker Science Building.  Constructed in 1959, the
              basement was modified for use as laboratory space, including wetlab areas in
              1971 for the Department of Biological Sciences.  However, due to deterioration,
              the space is unsuitable for research.  The prevalence of formalin, and problems
              with access, ventilation, lighting, and temperature control has led to the
              cessation of use of the facility as a wet laboratory.  Presently, wetlabs are
              dispersed in various buildings on campus, but almost invariably are located in
              spaces not originally designed for laboratory use, which limits the
              capabilities of the department-s aquatic research programs. Research and
              training efforts are directed towards marine and freshwater environments, and
              the renovation of the underutilized space is critical to the development of
              core departmental programs.  The laboratory modernization project will provide
              a centralized wetlab facility  adjacent to research and teaching areas.  The
              renovated facility will comprise of:  1) five separate wetlabs, each with
              independent temperature regulation; 2) one dry lab which will house electronic
              equipment and microscopes; 3) a zooplankton and phytoplankton culture facility;
              4) one-walk-in freezer, work area, and a storage room.  In addition to
              providing space for present wetlab activities, the renovation will allow for
              additional research approaches that are not possible under the current
              conditions.  One laboratory will be equipped with a built in stream system that
              will facilitate researchers in their efforts to investigate the effect of
              physical and biotic factors on habitat used of native southeastern stream
              fishes.  The project will increase the department-s effectiveness in graduate
              training by facilitating an expanded program in laboratory studies on the
              ecology, behavior, and physiology of aquatic organisms.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
