Title       : Hierarchical Specification, Analysis, and Testing of Real-Time Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9415346

Award Number: 9415346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Insup Lee lee@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                As computers become ubiquitous, they are increasingly used  in  safety
              critical environments. Typical safety  applications are control systems, 
              monitoring systems and  communication systems. Any failure of such computer 
              systems  may cause a great financial loss, environmental disaster or  even the 
              loss of lives.  The  potential high cost  associated with an incorrect
              operation  of  these systems  has created a demand for a rigorous framework in 
              which  various design alternatives can be formally specified and  rigorously
              analyzed  and tested before implementation. It is  commonly believed that
              future safety  critical systems uill  be more complex due to increased demands
              on their  functionalities, as well as, the size of the problem  domain.  Thus,
              it will be  difficult to analyze and  test the correctness without 
              computer-aided  tools. One  common aspect of all safety critical  systems is
              that they  must  respond under stringent realtime constraints.  That  is, their
              correctness  depends not only on how concurrent  components interact, but also
              on the time at  which these  interactions occur.  These systems are costly  to 
              prototype, requiring careful prediction of timing  properties  before 
              implementation and evaluation of design  alternatives.  Thus, it is important
              to  develop a formal  framework that supports automatic and computer-aided 
              analysis  and testing to effectively cope with increased  complexity.    The
              major thrust  of this research is to develop analysis  and testing techniques
              for timing  properties, and to  implement supporting software tools based on
              real-time  temporal logic and state machine models. The proposed tools  will
              provide an  environment in which software engineers can  generate tests from
              behavioral  specifications and  performance requirement constraints and
              simulate and test  to validate the specification.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
