Title       : Renovation/Replacement of Science Laboratories in Snyder Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1997   
File        : a9415036

Award Number: 9415036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Henry dhenry@scvax.wvnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Hulse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene J. Volker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shepherd College
	      
	      Shepherdstown, WV  25443    304/876-2511

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              20        Mathematics                             
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Shepherd College, founded in 1871, is part of the West Virginia State College
              System, that serves approximately 3500 students.  The institution is moving
              vigorously toward improving the academic performance of its students, and
              increasing the number of graduates who enter graduate and professional schools.
               In commitment to this effort,  and in response to changes in research and in
              the science and mathematics curriculum,  Shepherd College has begun a major
              multi-phase renovation project of Synder Hall, the science building, and
              construction of a new science addition. Research space in Synder Hall, assigned
              to biology  and chemistry, will be relocated to the new wing. NSF funds,
              however, will be used to partially support the consolidation and renovation of
              research and research training spaces dedicated for archeology, geology,
              environmental science, mathematics, computer sciences and engineering. 
              Laboratories currently used for faculty investigations and student research
              projects are located in insufficient areas void of adequate ventilation, and
              compliance to safety requirements.  Due to the multi-use of laboratory space,
              research activity is limited for practical and safety reasons.  In order for
              students to remain competitive, Shepherd College must provide an environment
              commensurate with the protocols of contemporary research required. By
              renovating Synder Hall, students and faculty will have new opportunities to
              meet their research and research training needs and the needs of the modern
              technology based industries in the Eastern Panhandle of West Virginia.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
