Title       : Studies on FokI (a Type IIS) Restriction Enzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9415861

Award Number: 9415861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Chandrasegaran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective is to understand sequence-specific recognition of DNA by
              proteins using restriction-modification (RM) enzymes as simple model systems.
              The plan here is to study the FokI RM system. FokI is a Type IIS restriction
              endonuclease which recognizes the pentanucleotide duplex, GGATG  CATCC and
              cleaves about 9/13 bp away from the recognition site. This implies that
              presence of two separate protein domains in this enzyme: one for
              sequence-specific recognition and the other for the endonuclease activity. Once
              the DNA binding domain anchors at the appropriate site, a signal is transmitted
              to the endonuclease probably through allosteric interactions and the cleavage
              occurs. Studies on  proteolytic fragments of FokI endonuclease have defined an
              N-terminal DNA-binding domain and C-terminal domain with non-specific cleavage
              activity  PNAS 89:4275-4279 (1991) . These results have been confirmed by the
              study of the C-terminal deletion mutants of FokI endonuclease  Gene 133:79-84
              (1993) . Furthermore, introduction of additional amino acid residues between
              the recognition and cleavage domains of FokI can alter the cleavage distance
              from the recognition site within its DNA substrate  PNAS 90:2764-2768 (1993) .
              These studies suggest that the two domains of FokI are connected by a linker
              region which appears to be amenable for repositioning of the DNA-binding domain
              with respect to the catalytic domain. More recently, successful engineering of
              the first chimeric restriction endonuclease by linking the Ubx homeodomain to
              the catalytic domain of (FN) of FokI was reported  PNAS 91:883-887 (1994) . The
              objective here is to continue the study on the FokI RM system. The goal here is
              to construct several additional C-terminal deletion variants of FokI to
              precisely define the recognition domain and linker/catalytic domain and to
              engineer chimeric restriction enzymes with novel sequence-specificities by
              linking other DNA binding proteins (e.g. zinc finger motifs) to the cleavage
              domain of FokI endonuclease. The aim is also to alter the sequence-specificity
              of FokI recognition domain by random mutagenesis and affinity selection of
              mutants with altered sequence-specificities using the phage display system; and
              hence alter the sequence specificity of FokI endonuclease. This work could lead
              to the development of an array of artificial nucleases with tailor-made
              sequence-specificities desirable for various applications.   %%%  Since their
              discovery nearly 25 years ago, Type II restriction enzymes have played a
              crucial role in the  development of the recombinant DNA technology and the
              field of molecular biology. A long term goal in  the field of RM enzymes has
              been to generate restriction endonucleases wi th novel sequence-  specificities
              by mutating or engineering existing enzymes. Our studies on proteolytic
              fragments of  FokI endonuclease (belonging to the Type IIS class) have revealed
              an N-terminal DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal domain with nonspecific
              DNA-cleavage activity. The modular structure of FokI endonuclease suggested
              that it might be feasible to construct hybrid endonucleases with novel
              sequence-  specificities by linking other DNA-binding proteins to the cleavage
              domain. Recently, we reported the  construction of the first `chimeric`
              restriction endonuclease by linking Ubx homeodomain to the  cleavage domain of
              FokI. Our goal here is continue our work on the hybrid endonucleases. This work
               could lead to the development of an array of artificial nucleases with
              tailor-made sequence-  specificities desirable for various applications.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
