Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Catalytic Activation of Lower Alkanes:
               Dehydrogenation and Alkylation Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9415590

Award Number: 9415590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Resasco resasco@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,5911,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This U. S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Award supports travel  expenses and
              some expendable research   supplies related to the visits of Drs. D. Resasco,
              Univ. of Oklahoma, Norman, OK  and G. Larsen, U. of    Nebraska, Lincoln, NE to
              Argentina.  The purpose of the visits is to perform research on the activation
              of   lower alkanes to produce olefins, oxygenates and higher hydrocarbons.  The
              Argentine co-P.I. is Dr. J.   Parera, of INCAPE, Universidad Nacional del
              Litoral .  Dr.  A. J. Rouco, Universidad del Sur, Bahia   Blanca, will also be
              involved in the research.    The project consists of two parts. The first will
              deal with the dehydrogenation of  lower alkanes over Pt-  based catalysts.  The
               research will attempt to demonstrate that the addition of promoters alters the
              surface   concentration of H under certain reaction conditions. The effect of
              the alteration on the activation and   stability of alkane dehydrogenation
              catalysts will be investigated, and the catalytic materials will be fully  
              characterized.   The second part of the project will examine the activation of
              alkanes over solid superacid catalysts.  Several  reactions, such as
              methane-olefin alkylation isobutene-isobutylene alkylation and n-butane
              isomerization  will be studied.  The effects of Mn and Fe as promoters for  the
              catalytic activity of sulfated zirconia will be investigated.  The research
              will attempt to determine whether such promotion results in highly active acid
              materials able to convert methane at low temperatures.  The effects of Pt and 
              Sn as promoters for improving the life of the catalyst will also be
              investigated.  The research will focus on elucidating deactivation mechanisms,
              and on determining whether the presence of Pt and Sn modifies the nature and
              rate of coke formation.   Such promotion may result in a catalyst with a very
              high activity and, in consequence, able to operate at relatively low
              temperatures at which equilibrium conversions are high.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
