Title       : The Preparation and Characterization of Well-Dispersed Copper/Carbon Systems for
               Use as Selective Hydrogenation and Nitrous-Oxide Decomposition Catalyst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9415335

Award Number: 9415335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515751             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Albert Vannice mavche@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Terry K. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1401,9146,9197,9223,EGCH,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9415335  M. Albert Vannice      Copper crystallites dispersed on
              three allotropic forms of carbon are prepared, characterized, and examined as
              catalysts for selective hydrogenation of conjugated systems and decomposition
              of nitrous oxide.  Both very small and large copper particles are placed on
              high-surface-area graphitized carbon fibers, diamond films, and activated
              amorphous carbon.  The influence of pretreatment on the size, morphology, and
              chemical state of the copper particles is investigated.  Characterization is
              accomplished using controlled-atmosphere electron microscopy (CAEM),
              high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, chemisorption, X-ray
              diffraction, diffuse-reflectance Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
              (DRIFTS), electron spin resonance (ESR), and copper-63 solid-state nuclear
              magnetic resonance.  Microwave techniques to measure the electron ability and
              conductivity of carbon are used  to guage the effect of pretreatment on the
              electrical properties of the three forms of carbon and the influence of small
              adsorbed molecules.  Test reactions  include hydrogenation of furfural to
              furfurol, hydrogenation of crontonaldehyde to crotyl alcohol, and decomposition
              of nitrous oxide.  A commercial copper-chromite catalyst is studied for
              comparison.  The effects of copper crystallite size and type of carbon support
              on specific activity are determined.    These new copper/carbon catalyst have
              three potentially significant industrial applications:  replacement of
              commercial copper-chromite catalyst because spent chromite catalysts are a
              hazardous waste and hen e a disposal problem; development of new copper
              catalysts to reduce unwanted byproducts from selective hydrogenations; and
              decomposition of nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas, produced as a byproduct in
              certain industrial processes such as production of adipic acid, a precursor of
              nylon.  This award is part of the Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis and
              Processing Initiative.  ***
