Title       : Renovation of Carr Hall to Improve Research and Research Training Space for the
               Physics Department at Allegheny College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9415187

Award Number: 9415187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Lombardi jlombard@alleg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Located in northwestern Pennsylvania, Allegheny College is a private liberal
              arts college that is one of the outstanding science colleges among the top
              private liberal arts institutions in the United States.  For the past 75 years,
              Allegheny has ranked in the top five percent among liberal arts colleges in the
              number of its graduates going on to receive a Ph.D. in science and mathematics.
               To maintain this position of achievement,  the College has created and
              implemented a science facilities' renewal plan to support research and research
              training activities of faculty and undergraduate students.  Currently in the
              final phase of the plan, the institution, with support from the National
              Science Foundation, will renovate laboratory space for the Department of
              Physics in Carr Hall.  The project involves the reconfiguration of existing
              spaces for faculty-students research areas and research training laboratories. 
              The Physics Department is presently using space that was designed for
              chemistry, or for physics research as it was conducted thirty years ago, when
              Carr Hall was erected. It is imperative that the electrical, mechanical,
              temperature control, and fire protection systems be upgraded to conform to
              safety codes, and provide a conducive environment where modern research
              methodologies can be performed.  With redesigned labs to support their research
              and collaborative work, five physics faculty members will be able to further
              enhance the quality and increase the quantity of research they conduct in the
              areas of low temperature microwave spectroscopy, nonlinear optics, atomic and
              nuclear physics and astronomy.  The renovation of  research space in Carr Hall
              will strengthen the Physics Department's capabilities in its efforts in
              preparing competent students that will positively impact upon the nation's
              scientific workforce.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
