Title       : ROW: Anaerobes and Anaerobic Processes in Marine Microbial Assemblages:
               Zooplankton Digestive Tracts as a Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9415688

Award Number: 9415688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lita M. Proctor proctor@ocean.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415688  Proctor    Many important microbial processes in the marine environment
               are anaerobic.  Nitrogen fixation,  sulfate reduction,  methanogenesis and the
              availability of many trace elements  are but a few of the processes which are
              mediated by either  anaerobic bacteria or enzymes which are active only under 
              anaerobic conditions. There is paradoxical evidence that  anaerobic processes
              occur in the water column with chemical  signatures of anaerobic microbial
              activity such as methane  peaks present in marine waters.  Where are these
              anaerobic  microbial assemblages?  How can anaerobes or anaerobic  processes
              occur in a well-oxygenated water column.    Microbial assemblages associated
              with the digestive systems  of marine zooplankton may be important
              microenvironments for  anaerobic processes in the water column.  From a 
              microbiological point of view, the gut represents a high  nutrient, low oxygen
              environment within the high oxygen but  low nutrient environment of the water
              column.  Nitrogen  fixation and methanogenesis are two of the metabolically- 
              demanding processes which require large sources of carbon  and energy that
              could be supplied in the digestive tracts of  marine zooplankton. The primary
              goal of this ROW planning  award is to select a model organism for a
              physiological and  ecological study of anaerobes and anaerobic processes in the
               gut microflora of marine zooplankton.  One of the immediate  objectives is to
              survey the gut contents of marine  zooplankton in order to estimate the
              abundance and  variability of bacteria found within the gut of a variety of 
              zooplankton and select a suitable candidate species for  further study.  The
              key to success in this study of gut  anaerobes and anaerobic processes will be
              the use of strict  anaerobic technique, a procedure which has not been 
              routinely used in other studies of marine anaerobes.  ***
