Title       : Renovation of Engineering Science Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9415141

Award Number: 9415141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Smith eedept@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Constructed in 1938, the Engineering Science Building is one of three
              buildings that houses the Department of Electrical Engineering at the
              University of Mississippi.  However, the majority of research and research
              training activities are performed in the Engineering Science Building.  Faculty
              research in the department can be broadly described as Applied Electromagnetic
              Theory, which is based on the extensive use of high performance computers and
              instrumentation.  Current research is conducted in the areas of dielectric
              resonator antennas, antennas near lossy media, crosstalk on IC
              interconnections, material properties measurements, and microwave hardware
              description languages and development.  Faculty members are, however, severely
              limited by inadequate conditions in their pursuit of research because of
              insufficient heating and cooling systems,  poor acoustics, and deficient
              lighting.  The most serious problem that impedes research performance is
              related to the poor control of temperature and humidity within research
              laboratories, which is detrimental to the operation and maintenance of
              computers, workstations, and equipment. Funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program will be used to assist the University of Mississippi in
              its effort to renovate research and research training space in the Engineering
              Science Building, the center for all electrical engineering research. 
              Renovations will consist of:  reconfigured space,  an upgrade of heating,
              cooling and electrical systems, improved lighting,  and installed acoustic
              tile.   The new facility will eradicate an enduring  impediment to the
              performance of quality research, and the recruitment, retention, and training
              of students and faculty for research careers.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
