Title       : Upgrading of Operations of the National Phytotron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9415541

Award Number: 9415541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1429612            (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Reynolds jfreynol@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boyd R. Strain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Siedow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Schlesinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Duke University requests funds to enhance the National Phytotron.  To obtain
              fundamental understanding and to develop predictive models of the processes
              that mediate plant activities and exchanges requires access to sophisticated
              controlled environment conditions.  The Phytotron, an NSF-supported national
              research facility established in 1968, consists of 40 artificially lighted CE
              growth chambers and 6 glasshouses that provide more than 477 M2 of controlled
              environmental space for advanced research in environmental plant biology.  The
              Phytotron hosts students, postdoctoral scientists, and senior scientists, most
              of whom are off - campus users. The CE units are used to reproduce different
              types of environments -- ranging from the arctic to the desert to the tropics. 
              This allows researchers to have precise control over environmental conditions,
              e.g., air temperature, irradiance, carbon dioxide, relative humidity, and
              nutrient concentration, thereby allowing for research on the complex
              interactions between plants and their environment, which is virtually
              impossible to do under natur al uncontrolled field conditions.  This proposal
              would provide for new monitoring equipment for the CE units, new growth
              chambers to meet newer demands for environmental controls, upgraded glasshouse
              materials and control units, and salaries for technical and oversight needs. 
              The continued support of the National Phytotron enhances NSF s investment in
              ecological research, including graduate and postgraduate education, and will
              allow the National Phytotron to remain one of the most important centers for
              controlled environment research in ecology in the United States.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
