Title       : Barbados Accretionary Prism Hydrogeologic Characteristics: Submersible-Based
               Tests at ODP Sealed Boreholes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1998   
File        : a9415924

Award Number: 9415924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bobb Carson bc00@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Carson  9415924  This program, led by Dr. Bobb Carson of Lehigh University,
              involves researchers from Indiana University, from Scripps Institution of
              Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego, and from the French
              marine research laboratory IFREMER.  The study follows Ocean Drilling Program
              Leg 156, whose primary goal was to assess the hydrogeologic conditions along
              the decollement (a fluid pathway deeply buried in the sedimentary wedge) of the
              Barbados accretionary prism.  During that drilling program on JOIDES
              Resolution, sealed boreholes ("CORKs") with temperature and chemical sampling
              systems were emplaced at two drill sites  to isolate the section across the
              decollement, allowing future study of this horizon along which pore waters are
              hypothesized to migrate.  The present project will carry out hydrogeologic
              studies and pore water sampling for geochemical study in the summer of 1995,
              approximately one year after drilling, at one of the two borehole sites; French
              researchers will conduct similar experiments during the same field program at
              the second site.  The field program will be carried out on the French research
              submersible Nautile.  The research program seeks to determine in situ
              hydrogeologic characteristics and conditions that will provide realistic
              parameters to the next generation of fluid flow models for accretionary prisms.
               The overall objective of this research, as well as that of the ocean drilling
              leg which emplaced the casings and sampled the sediments, is to understand the
              nature of the processes by which sediments are transformed in the process of
              subduction, and how the transport of fluids affects the chemistry of the
              sediments and the ocean.  The Barbados region is one of the best studied
              accretionary prisms in the world, and it provides a natural laboratory for the
              investigation of subduction, deformation and lithification of sediments in the
              context of plate tectonics.  Understanding the processes involved in plate
              subduction is a high priority of the Oce an Drilling Program.  ***
