Title       : Biotechnology Academic and Research Facilities Modernization Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9415096

Award Number: 9415096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley A. Kovacs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Sy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno
	      Maple and Shaw Avenue
	      Fresno, CA  93740    209/294-4240

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The California State University, Fresno (CSUF), is the only state-supported
              university serving the rapidly growing central San Joaquin Valley with a
              metropolitan population that includes a significant proportion of minorities. 
              To begin to meet the needs of a scientifically skilled workforce for the next
              millennium, CSUF has implemented an interdisciplinary  program in
              biotechnology, with a research training component to provide students,
              educators, and community scientists with additional opportunities to learn
              advanced technology for academic and industrial pursuits.  The desire for
              laboratory research experiences, coupled with increasing interest in exploring
              the realms of biochemistry and molecular biology among students for Master-s
              and undergraduate degrees, has strained the research space limitations of the
              architectural design of the original building.  This award from the Academic
              Research Infrastructure Program will augment and reorganize a small portion of
              current space in the Biology and Chemistry Departments into viable
              biotechnology research space.   In conjunction to remodeling space, renovations
              will include reconfiguring work benches, upgrading a coldroom and environmental
              room, and consolidating space for a sterilization and washroom facility.  The
              renovated areas will increase the quality of space for students to conduct
              biotechnology experiments and analysis, and provide better access to research
              equipment throughout the year.  CSUF serves as a research resource for the
              central California region, and the Biotechnology Program in addition to
              developing strong academic research programs, incorporates community outreach
              efforts as an important component to its research activities.  This project
              will not only enhance the Biotechnology Program, but will also stimulate
              minority students to pursue careers in this scientific discipline.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
