Title       : Renovation of Cordley Hall Biology Research and Training Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9415065

Award Number: 9415065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $890000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stella M. Coakley coakleys@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Coakley  Oregon State University is the recipient of ARI funds for the
              renovation and repair of   the  controlled environment facilities in Cordley
              Hall, home to the Departments of  Botany and Plant Pathology, Entomology, and
              Zoology.  The research and research  training performed in the departments
              focuses on increasing the knowledge and  understanding of biological responses
              to the environment.  Research programs of 28  faculty that will benefit from
              the renovations are grouped into four categories:   environmental biology,
              cellular and molecular biology, host-parasite interactions, and  genetics,
              developmental, and evolutionary biology.  Environmental biologists  investigate
              issues of global environmental change and their effect on biological  diversity
              and biological productivity in animal and plant species.  Cellular and 
              molecular biology research includes developing methods for using biotechnology
              to  manage the effects of global change. Investigative studies, in genetics,
              developmental  and evolutionary biology, include research on the genetic and
              hormonal regulation of  morphogenesis and gene expression, and how these
              control the development in plants  and animals.  The goal of the research
              program is to gain a better understanding of  the processes that contribute to
              more sustainable ecosystems and maintenance of  biological diversity.  The
              absence of sufficient controlled environment rooms  currently limits the scope
              of  projects that faculty can undertake.  Due to antiquated systems and absence
              of  protective and back-up mechanisms, valuable experiments have been lost
              following  power failures. Renovations of these rooms and of the sea water and
              fresh water  aquariums will have a major impact on the ability of the faculty
              to conduct research  and research training.  Several capabilities not
              available, including dedicated space for  plant and insect studies, dew
              deposition, photobiology, seed storage and containments  of transgenic plants,
              will be available once renovations are comple ted.  Such  improved facilities
              will enhance the Department to pursue new research opportunities.
