Title       : Renovation of Hodge Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9415033

Award Number: 9415033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1131980            (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Payne jpayne@scsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Carolina St Univ
	      300 College Street NE
	      Orangeburg, SC  29117    803/536-7000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              50        Engineering                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                South Carolina State University (SCSU) is the only state supported
              Historically Black College or University in South Carolina.  The university
              ranks tenth in the nation for sending African Americans on to graduate schools
              in science and mathematics.  Recognizing the need to improve the physical
              infrastructure on campus, SCSU and the Academic Research Infrastructure Program
              will jointly provide resources to renovate Hodge Hall, the science building.
              Current research and research training are hampered by the physical and
              environmental limitations of  laboratories and computing facilities. 
              Constructed in 1928, the building was not designed initially to house
              scientific programs and, therefore, lacks the utilities required to support
              research investigations in Engineering, Biology, Physics, and Chemistry. As a
              major part of the renovation, the heating and cooling system, water drainage
              and plumbing systems, ventilation, electrical, and mechanical systems will be
              upgraded.  Safety, energy conservation, and special needs will also be
              addressed.  Upon completion, the renovated facility will provide a conducive
              research environment necessary to move the university effectively towards its
              goal of increasing research emphasis and capabilities in established programs.
              Quality space will be provided for faculty as will dedicated research training
              space for students.   Laboratories, dedicated to studies in plant science,
              genetics, microbiology, ecology, trace metal analysis,  porphyrin chemistry,
              and high temperature superconductivity, will be housed in the newly renovated
              Hodge Hall.  Research training space will also be provided for the NSF-Alliance
              for Minority Participation Program.  These improvements will be  instrumental
              in assisting the science department in attracting new faculty and increase the
              number of  high caliber  minority students pursuing careers in science and
              engineering.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
