Title       : Calcification by Hermatypic Corals: Regulation of the Calcium Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9415936

Award Number: 9415936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich M. Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9415936  Mueller    Reef-building corals display two modes of calcification, 
              that which occurs in the light and that taking place in the  dark.  Calcium
              carbonate deposition is greater  in the  light, a phenomenon attributed to the
              photosynthetic  activity of algal endosymbionts (zooxanthellae).  There is 
              evidence that the two modes may differ in mechanism as well  as quantitatively.
               In spite of numerous studies, the link  between coral calcification and
              zooxanthellae photosynthesis  remains unresolved.  The significance of  this
              link can be  succinctly stated: the partnership of corals and their 
              zooxanthellae is essentially responsible for the existence  of the world's
              living (and most fossil) coral reefs.    A major question is whether either of
              the calcium carbonate  substrates, calcium and dissolved inorganic carbon
              dioxide,  are limiting to calcification and, if so, under what  conditions. 
              The importance of calcium to living systems has  led to a variety of
              well-conserved calcium regulatory  mechanisms, however, very little coral
              research has examined  such regulation.  This strategy has a large base of 
              information from research on other biomineralizing organisms  and in many areas
              of cellular physiology.  Such an approach,  coupled with recent advances in
              coral culture, promises  substantial progress in a research area that has made
              little  during the past decade.  This research project will focus on  whether
              coral calcification is limited by calcium  availability at the site of
              skeletogenesis (not in seawater)  and how availability may be affected by
              symbiont  photosynthetic activity.  Using a combination of  pharmacologic and
              kinetic approaches, the calcium pathway  from seawater to skeleton will be
              compartmentally  characterized.  Calcium movement and regulation between 
              compartments by membrane transport systems and messenger  systems (i.e. cAMP, 
              calmodulin ) will be of central  interest.         While this basic research
              question may be sufficient  justification for this projec t, there are benefits
              of more  practical value as well.  Optimization of coral culture  could have
              far reaching implications for coral reef  conservation.  Directly, it offers a
              means for propagation  of corals to repair damaged reefs.  Use of coral culture
              in  the aquarium trade could indirectly help natural reefs by  reducing the
              rapidly increasing wild harvest.  Understanding  the light-enhancement of coral
              calcification would allow  manipulation of culture conditions to produce
              skeletons with  consistent physical properties.  Such skeletons would be of 
              value for use in bone reconstruction where natural coral has  been successfully
              employed.  ***
