Title       : Performance and Safety of Current Versus Bi-Level Design Procedures-Impact of
               Northridge Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1994  
File        : a9415726

Award Number: 9415726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. K. Wen y-wen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9415726  Wen  Building design procedures in this country have been aiming at
              life  safety under a design earthquake of a given return period.  It is 
              basically a single-level design.  A valuable lesson learned from  recent
              earthquakes, in particular the Northridge earthquake, is  that damage and
              economical loss may be just as an important issue  as life safety.  Design for
              more than one level of earthquake has  been used in other countries of high
              seismicity such as Japan and  New Zealand in which serviceability and ultimate
              limit states are  explicitly considered.  The extensive data collected from the
               Northridge and other recent earthquakes in Southern California  provide and
              opportunity for us to take a critical look at the  safety and performance of
              the current procedures versus alternative  bi-level procedures.  The research
              projects is under taken here  with the following specific objectives: (1) To
              evaluate and compare  the performance and safety of buildings designed in
              accordance with  the current and alternative procedures.  (2) To evaluate the
              long-  term risk implications of the above design procedures and develop 
              strategy implication of the above design procedures and develop  strategy for
              formulating more rational, risk-consistent code  procedures.      To achieve
              the above objectives the following tasks are necessary;  (i) Analysis of
              Northridge data to update, the seismic risk and the  site specific ground
              motion models used in current reliability  evaluation of structural performance
              in which dependence on seismic  source, path, and site characteristics is
              considered.  (ii) Design  of low-rise (under 12 stories) steel and reinforce
              concrete  buildings according to the 1991 UBC and alternative bi-level 
              procedures at selected sites in the Los Angeles area.  (iii)  Perform dynamic
              response analyses of the building and compare  response behaviors and response
              statistics of these two designs.   (iv) Perform long-term risk analysis of
              designs according to the  two procedures us ing the updated seismic risk and
              ground motion  models and compare risk implications.  (v) Identify advantages
              and  shortcomings of alternative versus current design procedures and  suggest
              areas for improvement in future codes.     The research conducted will provide
              insight to this important  problem which has a profound implication in research
              as well as  practice in US and abroad.      This is a Northridge Earthquake
              Project.
