Title       : Dissertation Research: Steatite Vessel Manufacture in Eastern North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1994   
File        : a9415470

Award Number: 9415470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8920               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dunnell Dunnell@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dunnell    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dunnell, Mr. James Truncer will 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct both  neutron
              Activation and electron microprobe analysis on a series  of steatite samples
              collected from a number of prehistoric  quarries in the U.S. Middle Atlantic
              States. He will also conduct  similar analyses on archaeological objects
              manufactured from this  material. Steatite is a soft rock which was widely used
              by  prehistoric peoples and was carved into cooking vessels and  nonutilitarian
              objects. Because steatite is fairly uncommon in  nature, because it is located
              in discrete outcrops which are  often widely separated and because chemical
              composition is  variable, Mr. Truncer hopes to develop a means to chemically
              and  mineralogically distinguish outcrops. This would allow steatite  artifacts
              recovered in archaeological sites to be linked to  source areas. Preliminary
              work he has conducted suggests that  such a goal is feasible.    Archaeologists
              have learned that even early hunter and gatherer  groups did not live in
              isolation but were linked into regional  networks. Just how these larger
              organizations functioned, how far  they extended and how they changed over time
              is unknown. The  study of trade networks provides direct insight into this
              process  and steatite, if it can be sourced, can be used for this purpose. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide  information of
              interest to archaeologists who work in the U.S.  Mid-Atlantic states. It will
              help to develop a technique of  widespread potential use and it will assist in
              the training of a  promising young scientist.
