Title       : Renovation of Laboratory Space in Young Hall for Psychology and Psychobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9415148

Award Number: 9415148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent C. White bcwhite@centre.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Centre College of Kentucky
	      West Walnut Street
	      Danville, KY  40422    606/236-5211

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              70        Psychology                              
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Centre College, a private undergraduate institution in Kentucky, is the
              recipient of ARI funds to remodel research and research training space in Young
              Hall for the departments of Psychology and Psychobiology.  This project is the
              third and final phase of the College's master plan to modernize the science and
              mathematics facilities.  Research topics, investigated by researchers span from
              animal behavior, and psychophysiological research to cognitive science.
              Currently, five faculty members and student researchers share four rooms to
              conduct research. The renovation will comprise of replacing chemistry
              workbenches with a flexible physical environment required to accommodate
              psychological research.  Three of the rooms will be partitioned to produce a
              total of seven smaller rooms, providing visual and auditory isolation for
              experimentation.  The modernization will also include the renovation of an
              animal facility,  located in the basement of the building, to allow for the
              maintenance of a variety of animal species.  As a result, the departments will
              have improved space conducive for the undertaking of research activities.   The
              impact of the renovation will extend beyond the institution.  Presently
              two-thirds of the majors are women and 15% are minorities; thus such additional
              improvements will successfully advance these groups, traditionally
              under-represented in the sciences.  Of the 74% of the students who pursue
              advanced studies, over half pursue graduate programs in neuroscience,
              mathematical psychology, biophysics and biochemistry.  The renovated facilities
              will increase more research opportunities for student researchers and faculty,
              and enhance the prospects of majors seeking admission to quality graduate
              programs in science.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
