Title       : Renovation and Replacement of Psychology Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9415165

Award Number: 9415165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1316954            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet M. Gray grayj@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse G. Kalin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Bolanos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Vassar College, one of the premier undergraduate liberal arts colleges in the
              country, is the recipient of ARI funds for the renovation and replacement of
              research and research training space in Blodgett Hall.  Constructed in 1927, 
              Blodgett Hall houses six departments, including the Psychology Department,
              which is the target beneficiary of the modernization project.   As an academic
              field, psychology has become progressively more complex and technologically
              sophisticated in its application of the scientific method to the study of
              behavior and its physiological and environmental correlates.  The existing
              space arrangement in Blodgett Hall is not flexible or efficient, lacks required
              laboratory utilities, and impedes research progress. Though not conducive for
              supporting research activities, the department has managed to maintain a
              rigorous program exemplified by active student-faculty research collaborations,
               quality scientific instrumentation, and a wide range of research training
              courses for students.     The renovation focuses on the reconfiguration and
              modernization of three laboratory suites in the research intensive areas of: 
              physiology and animal behavior;  human neuropsychology, cognition, and
              perception; and social, personality, and developmental psychology.  The
              replacement and renovation of these research areas will consolidate animal
              quarters and bring them into full compliance with federal and state guidelines,
              create a support facility for instrumentation, and improved, accessible spaces
              for faculty and students.  This project will have an enormous impact on
              ensuring the future quality of faculty research and undergraduate research
              training programs.  As part of the master renovation plan for Blodgett Hall,
              the improved psychology research facilities will ensure that faculty members
              remain active and productive research scholars, enabling the recruitment of the
              highest caliber of new faculty.  In turn, Vassar will sustain its efforts to
              train and excite the next generation of professionals in the behavior and
              neural sciences.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
