Title       : Stratospheric Infrared Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9415388

Award Number: 9415388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Murcray murcray@ram.phys.du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Blatherwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415388  Murcray     Infrared remote sensing instruments have provided a wealth
              of information about the atmosphere.  Because nitrogen and oxygen are almost
              completely transparent in the infrared, radiative transfer is dominated by
              minor and trace gases.  Many of these gases are chemically active, and infrared
              techniques provide methods of measuring their concentrations.  Changes in the
              chemical balance in the atmosphere also affect the Earth's radiative budget. 
              Since most of the planet's cooling takes place in the mid infrared, accurate
              measurements are needed both to detect changes, and to verify model
              calculations.   This project will continue infrared measurements of the
              stratosphere and upper troposphere using balloon and ground-based instruments. 
              The very high resolution solar absorption spectrometer will make one flight per
              year from the US.  This instrument has been flown several times previously to
              obtain solar absorption spectra.  The spectra taken as the balloon ascends show
              the change in atmospheric transmission with altitude.  Once the balloon is at
              float altitude (approx. 40 km), changing geometry as the sun sets provides very
              long optical absorption paths entirely at high altitudes.  These data allow
              chemical concentrations of several species to be measured simultaneously as a
              function of altitude, provide tests for models which calculate atmospheric
              radiative transfer, and verify the molecular parameters database necessary for
              the models.   Data from a very high resolution ground based solar spectrometer
              (operated by the DOE) will be used to recover information on chemical
              concentrations in the stratosphere and upper troposphere.  DOE is accumulating
              a long term data set for the study of clouds and radiation, which will contain
              a long record of stratospheric and upper tropospheric chemical compounds.
