Title       : Small Signal Stability of Electric Power Systems, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9415419

Award Number: 9415419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13548              (Estimated)
Investigator: D P. Sen Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
              K R. Padiyar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Science
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9415419  SenGupta    9302565  Pai  Description:  This research will investigate 
              small signal stability of electric power  systems as affected by the addition
              of High  Voltage DC (HVDC) lines and control devices  such as Static Var
              Compensators (SVC), Power  System Stabilizer (PSS) and other Flexible AC 
              Transmission System (FACTS) devices.  The  objective will be to develop an
              overall  linearized model to include the above mentioned  devices and to
              examine their relative influence  on dynamic stability.  This research is 
              important in determining the causes of low  frequency oscillations and voltage
              collapse.   Both of these are operating problems faced by  utilities in the
              U.S. and India.  Prof. M.A.  Pai, University of Illinois Urbana will 
              collaborate with Profs. D.P. Sen Gupta & L.R.  Padiyar, Indian Institute of
              Science,  Bangalore.  The research team is exceptional.   Pai is an
              internationally recognized leader in  the use of direct methods for power
              system  stability, Sen Gupta and Padiyar have done  state-of-the-art system
              studies involving FACTS  and adaptive PSS and are highly respected.    Scope: 
              This research will address a problem in  the area of power systems that is of
              importance  in the U.S. and India.  While there is much  accumulated experience
              in the U.S., the Indian  academic institutions are very good at keeping  up
              with state-of-the-art, and the power  industry there quite mature in terms of
              their  absorption of technology.  The results expected  from this collaboration
              include research  papers, course development at the University of  Illinois,
              and an advanced level monograph  emanating from the research.     ***
