Title       : Renovation of Advanced Thin Film Smart Materials Processing Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9415038

Award Number: 9415038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristos Christou christou@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              18        Materials NEC                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                NSF funds will support the development of a clean room as part of the Advanced
              Thin Film Materials Laboratory for the Materials and Nuclear Engineering
              program at the University of Maryland, College Park.  The renovated facility
              will be located in the 30-year old J.M. Patterson building and will be a
              critical resource for film deposition and sample preparation of -smart+
              materials.  The facility will enable breakthroughs for advanced interconnects
              for the next generation of ferroelectric devices and micro-electromechanical
              (MEMS) structures.  Materials processing requires a dust-free environment with
              filtered recirculated de-ionized water and vibration-free flooring.  The
              existing space lacks these necessities and is incompatible with the capital
              equipment already owned and utilized by the department for this work.  The
              renovation of space to house the equipment and the research activity promises
              to remove a major impediment to scientific breakthroughs.  The current space
              has exposed ceiling pipes for water and does not include access to de-ionized
              water.  Power to the equipment is provided through dangerous hanging cords, and
              the rooms are without an air recirculation filtration system.  The windows,
              walls and doors are not adequately sealed against particulate matter.  The
              existing hoods are insufficient in number and do not function within acceptable
              standards of safety.  The renovation effort will provide a class 1,000 clean
              room environment with laminate finish chipboard wall panels and doors,
              suspended ceilings and a new vinyl floor finish.  Vertical wardrobe-type air
              conditioning units will be placed adjacent to the facility to assure internal
              temperature and humidity stability, and absolute H.E.P.A. filters will be
              mounted in the ceiling to assure almost 100% efficiency in particulate removal
              in air recirculation.  The new facility will provide new opportunities in
              materials processing for graduate student training.  Research activities will
              include thin film martensite, ferroelectric oxides, and rapid thermal
              processing of thin films.  Thin film martensite investigations emphasize
              elastic and anelastic properties of thin film composites and will lead to the
              development of unique micro-mechanical devices.  The activities in
              ferroelectric oxides will feed directly from ferroelectric films optical
              memories and optical signal processors.  Rapid thermal processing will allow
              the researcher to tailor surface and interface material properties.  Seven
              faculty and their graduate researchers will be the direct beneficiaries of the
              new laboratory facility.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
