Title       : Distribution, Biomass and Ecological Role of Macrozooplankton and Fishes in the
               Arabian Sea and Equatorial Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9415601

Award Number: 9415601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence P. Madin lmadin@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Craddock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Bollens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9415601  Madin         The goal of this project is to determine the abundance 
              and distribution of macrozooplankton and fishes in the  Arabia Sea, and to
              estimate their contribution to the  vertical flux of organic matter in these
              environments.  The  monsoonally forced Arabian Sea ecosystem is one of the most
               productive in the world, but with sharp, seasonal contrasts  in production and
              sedimentation.  The system is unusual  in  the distribution and comparison of
              its fauna, and in the  pathways by which surface production is distributed into
              the  water column and sea floor.  The Somali coastal upwelling  zone is a
              productive region supporting a high-biomass, low-  diversity pelagic fauna, and
              the equatorial Indian Ocean is  a typical oligotrophic zone with a high
              diversity of  inadequately  known species.  Many questions remain to be 
              answered on the role of such processes as defecation and  diel vertical
              migration of large organisms in regulating  vertical fluxes of material in
              these contrasting regimes.        Specific objectives of the study include: 1) 
              determination of distribution and abundance of  macrozooplankton and fishes; 2)
              determination of the extent  and timing of diel vertical migration of
              zooplankton and  fish; 3) examination and quantification of stomach contents 
              and egestion rates of macrozooplankton; 4) use of trawl  collections to provide
              ground-truth calibration of  concurrent acoustic sampling by other
              investigators; and 5)  analysis of the species diversity and zoogeography of 
              macrozooplankton and fishes in the Arabian Sea and adjacent  equatorial Indian
              Ocean.       Our results will contribute to understanding community  structure
              and trophic dynamics in the Arabian Sea and Indian  Ocean pelagic ecosystems. 
              The cruises will be concurrent  with two of the JGOFS Pelagic Process cruises,
              and our data  will bear on JGOFS objectives of measuring and understanding 
              vertical fluxes in the Arabian Sea.
