Title       : Biogeochemical Cycling and Authigenic Mineral Formation in Amazon Shelf
               Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9415611

Award Number: 9415611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Aller raller@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine Y. Aller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9422470  Savin         The Amazon River delivers about 1.2 billion metric tons
               of sediment annually to the eastern tropical continental  shelf of South
              America.  The potentially reactive layer of  amorphous iron, manganese, and
              aluminum oxides coating much  of this sediment  is exposed on the continental
              shelf to  seawater, mixed with labile organic matter derived from  marine
              plankton, and then deposited in shelf sediments where  it undergoes a variety
              of diagenetic (burial-related)  biogeochemical reactions.  Having documented a
              variety of  such diagenetic processes in their past work, the PIs will  now
              look in more detail at the variety of minerals in Amazon  Shelf deposits and
              attempt to distinguish those of  continental origin from those which have been
              formed in situ  by diagenetic reaction.  Mineralogical analysis will involve 
              transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and  electron microprobe
              to determine particle structures and  composition -especially to
              newly-precipated minerals from  those of  continental origin and to document
              the formation  and/or dissolution of surface coating over originally  deposited
              particles.  Oxygen, strontium, and boron isotope  analyses will be used help
              establish the origin (continental  or marine) of the variuos mineral phases.   
                 This research is geophysically provocative for two main  reason.  Some
              authigenic Amazon Shelf minerals like siderite  (a reduced iron carbonate) are
              found in ancient sedimentary  deposits whose paleoenvironmental characteristics
              are  unclear and have long been in dispute; determining the  origin of such
              minerals in present-day deposits could help  solve such problems.  Secondly,
              the Amazon River is a major  contributor of fresh water, solutes, and sediments
              to the  world ocean; thus understanding the fate of materials  delivered to its
              delta is important for understanding a  large part of global marine
              geochemistry.
