Title       : Unified Constitutive Modelling, Testing and Computer Design for Semiconductor
               Devices with Emphasis on Interfaces Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9313204

Award Number: 9313204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra S. Desai csdesai@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tribikram Kundu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9313204  Desai       Competitive and innovative designs for semiconductor and  
              packaging manufacturing are dependent on the knowledge and   understanding of
              the thermo-mechanical behavior of materials and   interfaces in various
              chip-substrate and packaging systems.  The   currently available constitutive
              models and computer software to   characterize such behavior are not adequate
              to allow for various   important design factors such as elastic, plastic and
              creep   strains, damage, degradation and softening, relative motions  
              (slippage, delamination and warping), fatigue and cycles to failure   under
              thermal, mechanical and other environmental (e.g., moisture)   loadings. 
              Appropriate laboratory testing devices and procedures   that can allow macro
              and microlevel measurements leading to   determination of realistic material
              constants for both solid ( chip   and substrate) and interface materials are
              also not readily   available.  The objective of this research is to develop: 
              (1) a   unified constitutive modelling approach that can permit inclusion   of
              the above factors for solids and interfaces, in a common   mathematical
              framework that can permit selection of simple to   advanced models depending
              upon the specific application need, (2)   to perform comprehensive laboratory
              tests.  (3) to determine   material constants for the proposed models using the
              test data, and  to verify the models with respect to the test results,  (4) to 
               implement the models in nonlinear, time dependent finite element   procedures
              with attention to their robustness and reliability, and   (5) to develop
              software that can be used for improved and optimized   designs and
              manufacturing.       The availability of the proposed computational tools will 
               allow the design of more reliable and higher performance packages   for
              semiconductor devices.
