Title       : Accelerational Forces in Breaking Waves: Their Nature and Biological
               Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9313891

Award Number: 9313891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Denny mwdenny@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,1650,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dennny  9313891    Surf-zone flows on rocky shores are characterized by rapid 
              velocities and large accelerations, with important consequences for  wave-swept
              benthic organisms. In particular, accelerations beneath  breaking waves can
              exceed 40 times gravity, inducing substantial  acceleration forces that have
              been hypothesized to set both  distribution limits and mechanical size limits
              in a variety of  intertidal organisms. However, information on surf-zone 
              accelerations is presently inadequate to predict the likelihood of 
              encountering accelerations of given magnitude.     In response to these issues,
              this research project will address  four major goals: (1) Surf-zone
              accelerations will be measured at  a representative rocky intertidal site, and
              their relationship to  concurrent, instantaneous velocities will be described.
              (2) The  shape factors that determine the force experienced by an organism 
              encountering a given velocity and acceleration will be measured in  the
              laboratory. Experiments will focus on testing a representative  variety of
              algal species. (3) The ability of the laboratory-derived  shape factors to
              predict forces on algae in the field will be  tested by comparing the forces
              acting on actual plants in the field  to forces predicted on the basis of the
              laboratory data. (4) Using  the laboratory and field measurements, the
              theoretical implications  of the accelerational force to wave-swept algae will
              be explored.  To this end, strength distributions of several algal species will
               be measured, and existing mathematical models will be used to  predict
              survivorship as a function of size and wave exposure.   Together, these data
              will be used to estimate distributional and  size limits in these species,
              results that have significance and  applicability to intertidal community
              ecology in general.    Additionally, experiments will be carried out to
              quantify the  effect of turbulence-induced shear stress on fertilization and 
              early development. The majority of intertidal invertebrate an imals  reproduce
              by external fertilization. However, because breaking  waves quickly sweep away
              gametes shed by spawning animals, life in  the highly turbulent surf zone poses
              a severe challenge to  reproduction. Recent experiments have shown that
              turbulent mixing  caused by breaking waves rapidly dilutes the gametes,
              resulting in  low fertilization success. But exposure to turbulence has 
              consequences other than gamete dilution: there are some indications  that
              turbulence-induced shear stresses may mechanically damage  gametes and could
              hinder egg-sperm binding.  Furthermore even when  eggs are fertilized, exposure
              to turbulence may retard and alter  development. Fertilization in the highly
              turbulent surf-zone will  be simulated by exposing gametes and embryos to the
              high shear  stresses developed in liquid sheared between two rotating cylinders
               (Couette flow). The longer-term effects of the low to moderate  levels of
              shear stress found in the near-shore mixed-layer  environment will be studied
              using a tank in which turbulence is  created by vortices shed from an
              oscillating grid.  ***
