Title       : Renovation of Research Laboratories in the John S. Alfriend Chemistry Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9313452

Award Number: 9313452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $870273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Scully   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Eck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion University
	      5115 Hampton Boulevard
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-3159

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313452  Scully  This ARI award will provide funding for the renovation of 
              research space in the Alfriend Chemistry Building which houses  the Department
              of Chemistry and Biochemistry on the campus of Old  Dominion University.  The
              number of graduate and undergraduate  students involved in research activities
              in the department has  grown tremendously since the construction of the
              building in  1967.  The department has experienced an increase in extramural 
              support, making it the second department to receive the most  research funds in
              the College of Sciences.  Research conducted in  the facility encompasses five
              major areas of chemistry:  analytical chemistry, biochemistry, environmental
              chemistry,  organic chemistry,  and materials chemistry.  In addition to 
              awarding the B.S. and M.S. degrees in chemistry, the department  shares a new
              Ph.D. program in the Biomedical Sciences with the  Biology Department and the
              Eastern Virginia Medical School.  Increases in research faculty, funding, size
              and maturity of the  graduate program have reached a level where the department
              is  proposing to implement a Ph.D. program in Applied Chemistry.    In addition
              to refurbishing laboratory space, renovations will  include: upgrading the
              electrical power system, modernizing the  fire alarm system to state fire
              codes, providing a centralized,  deionized water system for the entire
              building, replacing the  original motors and ductwork for fume hoods, and
              replacing the  air handling system that is essential to protect sensitive cell 
              lines from contamination during biochemical experiments.  Completion of the
              renovations will improve the research and  research training enterprise, at Old
              Dominion University, by  improving the research environment, providing research
               opportunities for high school students, and students enrolled at 
              predominately minority institutions, and in the retraining of  military
              personnel at the graduate and undergraduate levels.  ***
