Title       : Renovation of Research Laboratories in Higgins Laboratory Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9313491

Award Number: 9313491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammad N. Noori   (Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Durgin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9155,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Noori    Higgins Laboratory, a multidisciplinary research facility, on the
              campus of Worcester  Polytechnic Institute (WPI), is home to the Department of
              Mechanical Engineering.   Constructed in 1941, the building has never been
              renovated or upgraded substantially. The  research activities presently
              conducted are in the areas of controls and vibrations, fluid  dynamics,
              biomechanics and biofluids, laser holography and metrology, and combustion. 
              Though organized around the traditional disciplines of mechanical engineering,
              the research  conducted addresses emerging area of Critical Technologies, such
              as Manufacturing,  Biomechanics and Thermal Science. Although WPI has an
              ongoing engineering effort,  critical infrastructural deficiencies exit which
              impinge on the research that is conducted in the  facility.    This award will
              provide funding for the renovation of research space for the lower level of 
              the Higgins Laboratory Building. Existing laboratories lack proper and adequate
              air quality  control, electrical power, accessibility, and waste management. 
              Space will be upgraded to  consolidate research activities that are currently
              scattered in small, outdated and  compartmentalized facilities. By organizing
              the available space to encourage exchange, the  improvements will facilitate
              interdisciplinary efforts between all groups.  The renovated  facility will
              provide ample space to meet the requirements of the growing numbers of 
              students in the Mechanical Engineering Program at WPI.  These trained students,
              a high  percentage of whom are U.S. citizens, will significantly contribute to
              the Nation's intellectual  capital in several Critical Technology areas.
