Title       : Magnetospheric Wave-Particle Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1996  
File        : a9313158

Award Number: 9313158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Thorne rmt@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9313158  Thorne  In the basically collisionless magnetospheric environment,
              wave-  particle interactions replace the role of particle-particle  collisions;
              they provide an important and often dominant mechanism  for pitch-angle
              scattering, energy diffusion and anomalous  crossfield transport.  The proposed
              study will consider such  processes and consequently make important
              contributions to our  understanding of the origin of waves and the source and
              loss  mechanisms for energetic particles in the radiation belts.  A principal
              objective of this proposed investigation is to  understand the origin of
              observed plasma waves and their dynamical  consequences on trapped particles in
              planetary magnetospheres.   Emphasis will be placed on terrestrial
              wave-particle interactions  but applications to related phenomena in other
              planetary  magnetospheres will also be considered.  A combination of 
              theoretical analyses and extensive numerical computation will be  employed to
              achieve these objectives.  The path-integrated growth  and ultimate damping
              mechanisms for plasma waves will be studied in  realistic model plasma
              environments using a unique hot ray tracing  code.  The mechanisms and
              conditions for significant wave gain will  be established and the effectiveness
              of energy transfer via the  waves to other components of the plasma will be
              determined.  Since  magnetospheric plasma usually contains a high energy tail
              that can  best be modeled with a Kappa rather than a Maxwellian distribution, 
              an investigation will be made of whether this feature significantly  modifies
              the growth or damping of waves and the stability  properties of the plasma. 
              The long term variability of inner zone  electrons will be investigated and
              theoretical models will be  developed for the rate of radial diffusion and
              scattering loss.   The effect of inner zone electron precipitation on the
              global scale  chemistry of the upper atmosphere will also be analyzed.  ***
