Title       : Theoretical Studies of Main Group Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9313717

Award Number: 9313717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Gordon mark@si.fi.ameslab.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9216,AMPP,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is supported by the NSF theoretical and computational   chemisty
              program.  Improved computational techniques will be implemented   in the
              General Atomic and Molecular Electronic Structure System (GAMESS)   program. 
              This includes the development and implementation of methods for   performing
              electronic structure computations for large molecules using   massively
              parallel computers, and computational methods for treating   solvent effects.  
              Electronic structure theory is combined with dynamics   to obtain a qualitative
              and quantitative understanding of both   thermodynamic and kinetic properties. 
              The theory is applied to: (a) the   elucidation of single and multiple bonds
              between main group and   transition metals, (b) theoretical analysis of
              strained rings and   hypervalent bonding, and (c) the computation of potential
              energy surfaces   for and the prediction of reaction mechanisms of main group  
              organometallic reactions.  Specific reactions include: (a) hydrosilation   and
              coupling reactions, (b) unimolecular decompositions and isomerations,   and (c)
              reactions of multiply bonded compounds.    Electronic structure theory treats a
              molecule, or a molecular assembly,   as a mechanical system of strongly
              interacting electrons and nuclei.  In   principle, all chemical behavior can be
              understood by solving the quantum   mechanical equations of motion of this
              many-particle system, but   experience shows that very heavy computations are
              required to achieve the   accuracy required to make reliable predictions of the
              chemical properties   of  moderately large molecules.  With the advent of
              modern   supercomputers, particularly, of massively parallel computers, this
              has   become an active field of theoretical chemical research.  This project is
                an example of such research.  It emphasizes the application of the theory  
              to compounds of Carbon, Silicon, and Titanium and the bonding of these  
              elements to organic molecules containing transition-metal atoms such as   
              iron.  Of particular i nterest are moderately small molecules with unusual  
              chemical bond structures such as strained rings or double bonds such as   C=Si
              or Si=Si.  Detailed study of the geometries and energetics of such   unusual
              molecules contributes to our ability to design much larger   molecules which
              possess these same bonding features or perhaps are formed   by chemical
              reactions involving transient species which possess them.
