Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on the Role of Phyto- chrome in the
               Regulation of Mitosis in Pea Epicotyls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9313805

Award Number: 9313805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley J. Roux sroux@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,5948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313805  Roux  This award supports Professor Stanley J. Roux of the University 
              of Texas at Austin and Dr. Gregory Clark, a postdoctoral  associate, to
              collaborate in developmental botany research with  Professor Richard E.
              Kendrick of the Department of Plant  Physiology, Wageningen Agricultural
              University, The Netherlands.   The objective of their research is to gain a
              better understanding  of the cause of the light-induced increase in the nuclear
              number  among pea cells, a phenomenon which was recently discovered by 
              Professor Roux and Dr. Clark.  Together with Professor Kendrick  and others at
              his institution, they are taking a  multidisciplinary approach to studying the
              biochemical basis  for the postulated role of the pigment phytochrome in the 
              stimulation of mitosis.  In particular, they are exploring  whether this role
              is mediated through GTP-binding proteins. Their  research depends on the
              complementary expertise of the two  groups.  Dr. Kendrick is a world leader in
              the physiological and  photobiological aspects of phytochrome research and a
              pioneer on  studies of G-protein mediation of phytochrome responses.  Others 
              in his institution will contribute expertise in the cytological  and
              morphological aspects of plant development.  Dr. Roux has  worked extensively
              on biochemical aspects of phytochrome, and is  an expert on enzymes regulated
              by phytochrome.    This research tests the important question of whether
              phytochrome  can regulate mitosis and whether this regulation requires the 
              mediation of GTP-binding proteins.  Verification of this  influence will help
              explain the dramatic effects of phytochrome  on pea plumule development and
              will represent a critically  important addition to the impressive list of
              events controlled by  phytochrome during photomorphogenesis.  Verification of a
              role  for GTP-binding proteins as mediators would be an equally  important
              finding, not only for plant sciences but for cell  biology in general, for
              almost nothing is known about the  regulation of GTP -binding proteins in
              nuclei.  ***
