Title       : Multidimensional Quantum Dynamics Via Improved Propagator Path Integral Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1995   
File        : a9313603

Award Number: 9313603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Makri nancy@makri.scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nancy Makri is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue her research in the   development of propagator
              path integral methodology.  Makri is using this   theory to treat systems with
              few quantum degrees of freedom in a heat   bath where the bath degrees of
              freedom can be treated classically.  This   is accomplished by expanding the
              time evolution operator in truncated   basis sets and results in propagators
              that are valid over large time   increments and which do not suffer from the
              usual highly oscillatory   behavior.  Proposed applications include hydrogen
              transfer reactions in   (and on) solids, tunneling, and non-adiabatic hopping
              probabilities of   quantum particles.    A great deal of progress has been made
              in the theoretical treatment of   gas phase chemical reactions of systems
              consisting of relatively few   atoms.  Using state-of-the-art theoretical
              methods, it is now possible to   explain a great deal of the experimental
              detail for such systems.    However, the large majority of reactions which are
              of interest to   chemists occur in condensed phase systems in the presence of
              solvent.    The theoretical models for treating such complex systems are in a
              much   earlier stage of development.  Makri is developing new theoretical  
              approaches for dealing with solvated chemical systems undergoing chemical  
              reactions where quantum effects may be important.
