Title       : Physiochemical Studies on Xanthine Oxidizing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9313781

Award Number: 9313781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Massey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313781  Massey  We have succeeded in isolating milk xanthine dehydrogenase in a
               stable state, which can be converted reversibly into the oxidase  form, where
              the preferred electron acceptor is 02, rather than NAD,  as it is with the
              dehydrogenase form.  Our work to date indicates  that the major effects of this
              reversible interconversion, which is  brought about by oxidation of spatially
              vicinal thiol residues in  the dehydrogenase to oxidase conversion, involve
              conformational  changes in the protein which affect mainly the flavin redox
              center.   However, there are indications from rapid reaction studies that the 
              molybdopterin redox center may also be affected by the  interconversion.  The
              major thrust of this proposal is to study in  detail the physicochemical
              properties of the two forms of the  enzyme, with the aim of defining the
              parameters that give the two  forms such different catalytic properties.  This
              study will involve  extensive use of rapid reaction spectrophotometry, EPR and
              EXAFS  measurements, flavin replacement studies, catalytic properties of  the
              enzymes with different classes of substrates, and examination  of the modes of
              binding of potent inhibitors of the enzymes.  %%%  The enzyme xanthine oxidase
              is commonly believed to be implicated  in the phenomenon known as oxidative
              stress, in which free radical  species of oxygen react with many essential
              components of living  tissues, including proteins, lipids and DNA.  Such
              oxidative damage  has been implicated in cancer, ischemia and the aging
              process.   Xanthine oxidase exists in two forms, the oxidase, which oxidizes 
              xanthine and a wide variety of purines and pyrimidines at the  expense of
              reducing oxygen to the superoxide radical (02-), and the  dehydrogenase, which
              oxidizes the same compounds, but uses NAD, a  coenzyme derivative of vitamin
              B3, instead of oxygen.  We have  isolated the enzyme from cow's milk, and shown
              that the two forms  can be interconverted in a reversible manner, depending on
              the  oxidation-reduction  state of the protein thiol residues.  The two  enzyme
              forms have many different properties, which are clearly due  to different
              protein conformations.  While the oxidase form has  been studied extensively in
              the past, comparatively little is known  of the dehydrogenase.  This study is
              to explore in detail the  differences in properties of the two forms, in order
              to provide a  firm scientific basis for concepts regarding their physiological 
              functions.  ***
