Title       : Mathematical Sciences:NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in Mathematical
               Sciences-Complex Dynamics in Higher Dimensions; June 13-18, 1994; Albany, New
               York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9313042

Award Number: 9313042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25718              (Estimated)
Investigator: R M. Range range@math.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313042  Range       Professor John E. Fornaess, a leading international  expert
              in the area of multidimensional complex analysis,  will present a series of ten
              lectures, centering around the  behavior of classes of holomorphic self-maps of
              complex n-  dimensional Euclidean spaces and projective spaces.  Just as  in
              the one dimensional case - widely known through stunning  computer generated
              visualisations - iteration of such maps  in higher dimensions reveals
              surprising phenomena, and new  properties of dynamical systems which need to be
              understood.  While some of the work in dimension two goes back to  classical
              work of Fatou and Bieberbach in the 1920's (Fatou,  together with Julia, is one
              of the pioneers of complex  dynamics in dimension one), most of the topics
              covered in  Fornaess' lectures are based on quite recent work.  The  field is
              the subject of many current investigations, and  there are many open problems. 
              The lectures are intended to  make this research area accessible to non-experts
              in  multidimensional complex analysis, and they should help  mathematicians new
              to this field to gain a deeper  understanding of the major problems and current
              directions  of research in this new and rapidly expanding research area.      
              The conference will take place June 13 to June 18,  1994, on the campus of the
              University of Albany, State  University of New York.  Albany is the center of
              the Capital  District in Upstate New York, a cast region which includes  among
              its many educational institutions the University of  Albany, Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute, Union College,  Skidmore College and Siena College. 
              Multidimensional  complex analysis is an active area of research at the 
              University of Albany, and many experts in classical function  theory, ergodic
              theory and (real) dynamical systems work in  the region.  A special effort will
              be made to attract  interested participants from neighboring institutions, who 
              may want to enter this research field.  It is hoped that  this series of
              lectures  will help to build new interactions  between mathematicians from the
              different institutions in  the region, and stimulate new research efforts in 
              multidimensional complex analysis in the region.
