Title       : Renovation of the McCullough Building at Stanford University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9313536

Award Number: 9313536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm R. Beasley beasley@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Nix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter A. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9155,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The McCullough building, erected in the 1960's, is the home for materials 
              research at Stanford University.  Currently the building houses the Center for 
              Materials Research, an NSF Material Research Laboratory.  It is the goal of the
               Center to created a new Laboratory for Advanced Materials that will bring 15 
              faculty from Applied Physics, Materials Science and Engineering, Electrical 
              Engineering, Physics and the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory to form 
              a multidisciplinary advanced materials research and education community.  
              However, present infrastructural conditions within the building have created an
               unsafe facility that lacks proper ventilation, electrical, plumbing and air 
              conditioning systems.  The building is not in compliance with existing codes
              for  the type of research activities it currently houses nor the for the
              planned program  activities in advance materials.      ARI funds will provide
              support to assist Stanford in its efforts to renovate  laboratory research
              space in McCullough, specifically, the HVAC, electrical and  plumbing systems. 
              The major objective is to ensure that the building is upgraded  to occupancy
              code to accommodate the research and research training activities  required in
              the facility.  The project is critical to the long-range plans of Stanford  in
              the area of materials research, a research area of national importance.  New 
              renovated space for advanced materials will be dedicated to research in the 
              synthesis, understanding and application of advanced materials, and to the 
              education of students from various science and engineering disciplines in the 
              multidisciplinary style essential in materials research.
