Title       : Exploratory Research: Towards a Social Geography of the Pyrenees Magdalenian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9313703

Award Number: 9313703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7267               (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret W. Conkey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313703  Conkey    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Margaret Conkey
              and  her collaborators will conduct a survey to locate Magdalenian 
              archaeological sites in the Pyrenee Mountains of the Ariege region  of France.
              The group has selected a 45 km. stretch between 600 and  900 meters above sea
              level and will walk this region in a  systematic manner to look both for
              potential caves and rock  shelters which may contain archaeological remains and
              also to  examine fields and other open areas where materials may be exposed  on
              the surface. They will make collect exposed material and, if  permission can be
              obtained, excavate small test trenches to  determine if in situ deposits are
              present. The project will be  conducted in collaboration with a French
              geomorphologist with the  goal of setting the cultural component into a broader
              environmental  context. Samples for palynological (pollen) and sedimentological
               analysis will be collected. On this basis one can determine when  these upland
              areas first became ice-free at the end of the  Pleistocene (Ice Age) and how
              vegetation communities developed.     The term "Magdalenian" refers to a
              culture which flourished in  Western Europe at the end of the Pleistocene ca
              14,000 years ago.  The level of Magdalenian achievement is marked by painted
              caves  such as Lascaux and Altimera, by highly developed bone industry and  by
              a intensive subsistence specializations on minor highly seasonal  resources
              such as migrating salmon. It is likely that the stage was  set during this
              period of the domestication of plants and animals.  The research proposed by
              Dr. Conkey is important because it  examines the level of Magdalenian technical
              competence. While  several caves with paintings are known from the Pyrenees
              region, it  is unclear whether Magdalenian peoples had the ability to occupy 
              this difficult mountainous terrain on a long term basis. Very  little is known
              about the archaeology of the region and this  project will provide the
              groundwork for future resear ch.    This work is important for several reasons.
              It will provide data of  interest to many archaeologists. It will also shed new
              light on  human-environmental interactions and the development of human 
              competence. Finally, the knowledge gained will provide the base for  a larger
              long term research project.
