Title       : Ballistic Electron Emission Spectroscopy of Heterostructures Using Metal and
               Degenerately-Doped Semiconductor Tips
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1993 
File        : a9313610

Award Number: 9313610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkatesh Narayanamurti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,9237,
Abstract    :
              9313610  Narayanamurti  A unique variable temperature, ultra high vacuum (UHV)
              compatible  Ballistic Electron Emission Microscope (BEEM) apparatus is 
              currently under development in the PI's laboratory.  This  exploratory proposal
              is directed at fabricating tips for the BEEM  to perform spectroscopy on
              quantum semiconductor heterostructures  and superlattices. Properly prepared,
              heavily doped, semiconductor  tips should cause a sharply focused and
              monoenergetic beam of  electrons or holes to be injected into the sample under
              study. The  ability to perform variable temperature UHV studies using BEEM 
              spectroscopy could lead to the observation of quantum mechanical  tunneling and
              interface reflection effects, local determination of  dopant density, minority
              carrier mean free paths, and single  particle charging effects (Coulomb
              blockade regime) with possibly  the first studies of discrete light emission
              from the dimensionally  confined pn junction. Development of this technique
              will be  particularly important for the spectroscopic study of dimensionally 
              small systems such as nano-scale wires, quantum dots, resonant  tunneling
              devices and narrow bandgap infrared detectors.   %%%  A unique variable
              temperature, ultra high vacuum (UHV) compatible  Ballistic Electron Emission
              Microscope (BEEM) apparatus is  currently under development in the PI's
              laboratory.  This  exploratory proposal is directed at fabricating probes for
              the BEEM  to perform spectroscopy on complex semiconductor structures. 
              Properly prepared, heavily doped, semiconductor probes should cause  a sharply
              focused and monoenergetic beam of electrons or holes to  be injected into the
              sample under study. The ability to perform  variable temperature UHV studies
              using BEEM spectroscopy would  provide valuable physical measurements and could
              lead to a better  understanding of the electronic states in so-called quantum
              dots  and semiconductor heterostructures and superlattices. It is clear  that
              such studies become increasingly important as  characteristic  dimensions of
              semiconductor devices approach the nano-meter scale  regime.  ***
