Title       : Disjunctive Logic Programming and Non-Monotonic Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9313061

Award Number: 9313061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teodor C. Przymusinski teodor@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Halina Przymusinska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313061  Przymusinski       This is the first year funding of a three-year
              continuing  award.  The main goal of the proposed research is to conduct a 
              comprehensive study of non-monotonic formalisms and logic  programming
              semantics for the purpose of developing and  implementing formalizations that
              achieve greater expressive power  by allowing various forms of disjunctive
              reasoning.  Specifically,  the following objectives will be achieved:  1) Study
              the basic  principles on which disjunctive reasoning should be based and 
              develop extensions of non-monotonic formalisms capable to properly  represent
              disjunctive information.  Investigate relationships  between different
              approaches and determine their application  domains.  2) Bridge the gap between
              non-monotonic reasoning and  disjunctive logic programming by investigating and
              developing  semantics for disjunctive logic programs and deductive databases 
              that naturally correspond to non-monotonic formalisms.  Attempt to  develop
              proof-theoretic characterizations and computational  techniques for these
              semantics and identify classes of theories in  which they are tractable.  3)
              Develop methods of translation of  broad classes of non-monotonic formalisms
              into disjunctive logic  programs and implement an experimental inference engine
              for non-  monotonic reasoning based on translation into disjunctive logic 
              programs.  4) Apply the resulting techniques to the domain of  software
              engineering by using disjunctive logic programming as a  tool for software
              specification and verification of program  correctness.  If successful, the
              proposed research program should  not only improve our understanding of basic
              foundations of non-  monotonic reasoning, but it also should move us closer
              towards the  actual implementation of common-sense reasoning systems by
              applying  the increased expressive and computational power of disjunctive 
              logic programming.  It should also facilitate the extension of the  logic
              programming paradigm to the class o disjunctive programs.
