Title       : Prediction and Detection of Submolecularly-Ordered Fluid Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9313714

Award Number: 9313714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Donohue mdd@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT        Proposal Number:  9313714  P.I.:  Marc D. Donohue  Institution: 
              The Johns Hopkins University    The behavior of complex fluids of interest
              because of the intriguing range of phenomena they exhibit and because of the
              variety of industrial processes that can take advantage of this behavior. The
              research proposed here will advance our knowledge of submolecular environments
              within a microstructured fluid.  Additionally, experiments will be carried out
              to probe these submolecular environments.    Over the past twenty years,
              significant advances in the thermodynamics of fluid phases have occurred;
              despite these improvements, most theoretical and predictive treatments of
              micellar solutions, liquid crystals, and microemulsions depend strongly on
              specific physical models of the microscopic ordering.  The proposed research
              will employ a new technique (kuespert and Donohue, 1993a) to modify advanced
              equations-of-state for use with complex fluids to predict microphase equilibria
              such as those observed in micellar solutions and in computer simulations.    An
              experimental program to qualitatively and quantitatively study microphase
              equilibria also will be conducted, focusing on nonintrusive spectrometric
              investigations.  The polarity and polarizability of microscopically-ordered
              fluid phases will be examined using Fourier transform infrared spectrometry. 
              Separation of a nonordered bulk fluid into two or more ordered microphases will
              be studied using that salvatochromic shifts observed in various IR spectral
              bands.  Quantification of the polarity and polarizability of such microphases
              will allow interference of their compositions.  The compositions thus
              determined then will be compared with those predicted by theory.  As a
              cross-check on the FTIR methods, nuclear magnetic resonance measurements of
              solvent shifts and lanthanide shift reagent effects will be used to estimate
              the phase splits between microphases.
