Title       : Replacement of Biological Research Laboratories and Herpetology Collection
               Storage Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9313427

Award Number: 9313427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Theriot   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank B. Gill  (Principal Investigator former)
              Louis E. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gill       The Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia is one of the oldest
              natural  history museums in the U.S., and it has a long tradition of research
              in biology and  environmental science. This long tradition brings with it an
              aging facility, and several  additions to the building have been constructed
              over the years to provide new space  for research, education, and public
              exhibits. The Academy has recently constructed  new space in what was an
              interior courtyard. Several new research techniques in  molecular biology have
              the potential to make significant contributions to the  Academy s research
              programs, but the lack of suitable facilities has been an obstacle  to using
              these techniques. The Academy plans to dedicate a portion of the newly 
              constructed addition to research laboratories with these capabilities. Space 
              modifications will create ideal environments for the sensitive instruments used
              in  molecular biology and DNA sequencing. The renovation will also provide:
              controlled  environment growth chambers for microbial cultures and for
              ecological experiments;  safe storage areas that are in compliance with fire
              codes for alcohol-preserved  specimens; adequate ventilation and fume hoods;
              and capabilities for safe storage,  use, and disposal of hazardous research
              materials.       This renovation project will solve a variety of safety issues,
              and will enable  researchers at the Academy to broaden their research programs
              through the addition  of new laboratory techniques. Irreplaceable specimens in
              the reference collections will  have safer storage facilities, and sensitive
              research instruments will be given suitable  settings. The overall research and
              education productivity of the institution will  increase as a result of this
              renovation.      The Department of Agricultural Engineering, Oklahoma State
              University, is  recognized as one of the nation's leaders in Biosystems
              Engineering research, the  application of engineering principles to biological
              systems.  While agriculture remains   an integral aspect of the research
              program, Biosystems  includes environmental,  natural resources and biological
              applications.  To reflect this broader scope, the  Department will be renamed
              Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering.  In addition to  the programmatic
              changes, the facilities housing ongoing research activities will be  renovated
              and replaced to complement the new priorities of the Department as it 
              completes its transformation to Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering.   
              Existing facilities were built in an era when agricultural mechanization
              research  primarily involved the construction of heavy mechanisms and soil and
              water research.   These facilities are inadequate to perform Biosystems
              research that requires high  quality labs with special provisions. This award
              will provide funding for the  modernization of laboratory space that will allow
              for the proper support of programs  in machine vision, sensors and controls,
              intelligent machines and bioenvironmental  engineering.  The relocation of the
              shop facility to the main campus will be adjoined  to the research laboratory,
              providing more effective and efficient shop services for  faculty.  Specific
              renovations will include upgrading the HVAC, electrical, and  mechanical
              systems.  The modernization of the research facilities at Oklahoma State 
              University will have maximum impact on the human resources needed for the
              nation's  continued leadership in science and engineering into the twenty-first
              century.
