Title       : Renovation of the Department of Ornithology Research Laboratories, American
               Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9313493

Award Number: 9313493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $855500             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Barrowclough gfb@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel L. Cracraft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Whitney Building, of the American Museum of Natural History, constructed
              in 1932, consists of eight floors used for research activities, research
              specimen storage and public exhibits. In 1971, half of the sixth floor was
              renovated as a research facility, housing the Department of Ornithology.  Since
              the Museum has possession of the largest collection of birds in the Western
              Hemisphere, it is the goal of the Department to develop a premier research and
              training program in systematic ornithology by upgrading current facilities to
              increase available research space and create modern laboratories for ongoing
              studies in molecular systematics and evolution.  Concurrently, the Museum is
              establishing a Center for Biodiversity and Conservation that will expand the
              Museum's research and educational commitment to the study and preservation of
              biological diversity.  The renovation will facilitate the development of a
              critical component of the Center's research and training program, the
              capability to apply modern molecular systematic methods to conservation
              biology.   Present research facilities used by the department to conduct
              ongoing investigative projects cannot support modern molecular research. 
              Serious inadequacies, such as no climate-controlled and filter air, lack of
              purified water, poor space configuration and no safe area to use radioactive
              chemicals are some of the impediments researchers and students confront when 
              performing modern molecular research.  This award will provide support to
              assist the American Museum of Natural History in its efforts to modernize the
              research facilities for the Department of Ornithology.  Once the renovations
              are completed, the potential to increase research productivity,
              interdisciplinary research  and graduate and postgraduate training programs in
              molecular systematics and conservation genetics will be attainable.
