Title       : U.S.GLOBEC: Seasonal Development of Stratified Water on Georges Bank: Dynamics
               of Zooplankton and Larval Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9313671

Award Number: 9313671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2607346            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Beardsley rbeardsley@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cabell S. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Lentz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio Candela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Gallager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               WPC4               2           B     V   P     Z                 Courier 10cpi 
                   ? x x x ,      {   x   6 X      @   8  ; X @                              
                   HP LaserJet III-Change               HPIIILAS.PRS   x            @       
              ,   \ ,    ||X @Courier 10cpi     2           @     Z                   F   P  
               #| x                    x            @   8  ; X @                             
                    HP LaserJet IIID hange               HPLASIII.PRS   x            @       
              ,   \ ,     MX @ #| x               2           2                              
                       9313671 Beardsley  Present evidence indicates that the recruitment and
              survival of commerically important fish larvae within the Georges Bank region
              depends critically on the development of stratification during the spring and
              summer period.  Predicted climate change scenarios are likely to significantly
              influence the evolution of stratification and thus impact larval survival over
              Georges Bank.  As part of U.S GLOBEC Georges Bank Study, Dr. Beardsley and
              collaborators will conduct an intensive field project during January August,
              1995 aimed at better understanding the development of stratification over
              Georges Bank and its influence of larval fish survival.  Preliminary studies
              will be initiated in 1994.  The project will have a moored instrument component
              will involve deploying meteorological sensors and instruments throughout the
              water column, with a heavy concentration in the surface and bottom boundary
              layers.  The data acquired will be used to resolve the stratification field and
              examine factors controlling its development.  The shipboard measurement
              component will consist of five cruises following a concentration (patch) of the
              target species: cod and haddock larvae and their copepod prey, Calanus and
              Pseudocalanus.  Using a variety of sampling systems, including drifters,
              MOCNESS, the Video Plankton Recorder (VPR), plankton pump, and multiple  high
              frequency acoustical samplers, measurements will be made of: (1) hydrography,
              micr oturbulence, and currents, (2) the vertical and horizontal distributions
              of the target species in relation to water column stratification, (3) passive
              particle motions and the three dimensional swimming behaviors of individual
              zooplankton, and (4) the feeding and growth of larval cod and haddock in
              relation to water column stratification and prey distribution.  The data will
              be used together with information from collaborative field and modeling studies
              to gain insights into the impact of stratification and turbulent mixing on
              growth and survival of zooplankton and fish populations.
