Title       : Renovation of the Engineering Research Center, College of Engineering,
               University of Arkansas, Fayetteville
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9313459

Award Number: 9313459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1029500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy L. Gattis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9146,9155,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Gattis    The University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, College of Engineering,
              offers programs in seven  engineering disciplines, the only institution in the
              State of Arkansas that offers a Ph.D.  program in engineering.  The College of
              Engineering occupies three buildings on the main  campus and one research
              complex, the Engineering Research Center (ERC).  All engineering  research, in
              the areas of Biological and Agricultural, Chemical, Computer Systems, Civil, 
              Electrical, Industrial, and Mechanical engineering, are housed and conducted in
              the ERC.   Rapid growth of research programs, coupled with deteriorating
              conditions of the ERC  building, have placed the College in dire need for
              modernized research space.  Renovated  space is needed immediately for new
              research programs and for several federally funded  Centers, including the
              Material Handling Research Center.  Presently, the ERC consists of  three
              buildings that have adequate space, but lack the infrastructure to allow for
              the optimum  use of the space.     Required renovations will entail modernizing
              electrical and HVAC systems and roofing.  The  renovation of the electrical
              power distribution system will involve the complete replacement  and conversion
              of the power feed.  A new closed-loop water source heat-pump system will 
              replace the inefficient  HVAC units, boiler and chiller systems.  The roof
              renovation will  involve the removal of old roofing materials and replacing it
              with new insulating materials.   This renovation project will facilitate
              faculty and student research to remain competitive by  providing functional
              research space.  Moreover, it will enhance the College's recruitment and 
              retention of talented faculty and quality students, including women, persons
              with disabilities,  and minorities from Arkansas and adjacent states.
