Title       : Integrated Tools for Automated Control Synthesis and Fault Diagnosis of
               Automated Manufacturing Systems using Discrete Condition Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9807106

Award Number: 9807106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Holloway holloway@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Agre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9807106
Holloway
Current practice in developing programs for automated
              manufacturing leads to code that is difficult to develop, debug, and maintain. 
              Discrete event system (DES) control synthesis techniques promise to automate
              this control development using analysis of system models.  However, many
              current DES techniques cannot be used for moderate or large systems because
              they explicitely rely on analysis of the state space which sufffers from state
              explosion.  Moreover, they require heavy investment in modeling due to an
              inability to reuse plug-and-play component models, and they assume unambiguous
              control specifications that are as detailed or are more detailed than the
              control sequences that would have to be developed for a manually coded control.
               For DES control synthesis to find use in industry for manufacturing control
              requires the development of techniques that critically address the limitations
              of current techniques.  In this proposal, we outline a research program for
              developing an integrated set of tools and techniques that directly target the
              application of automated model-based DES control synthesis to control of
              manufacturing systems.  The resulting techniques will be implemented together
              in an integrated software tool for demonstrating the use of control synthesis
              to industries

The control approach we propose will allow a user to assemble
              a system model using plug-and-play discrete-state component models that have
              well defined input and output structures.  The user then will enter high-level,
              ambiguous specifications of desired system behavior.  The control synthesis
              methods will use analysis of the system model to convert this specification
              into a controller that contains complete information on the control sequences
              necessary to achieve the specification while avoiding deadlock conditions.  The
              controller also will include fault detection and diagnosis information derived
              from the cause-and-effect relationships in the system model.  The size of the
              controller will be kept modest by the use of a library of reusable,
              automatically synthesized segments of control sequences.  The resultant control
              structure will be then automatically converted into C code or ladder logic code
              for compilation and execution. 

The research issues that will be addressed
              in the development of these techniques include the conversion of ambiguous
              specifications into unambiguous hierarchical structures of control sequences,
              the efficient control of synthesized heirarchical control components, the use
              of supervisory control to prevent deadlock and prevent contradictory control
              actions from these control sequences, the use of incomplete observation
              information in the control, and the incorporation into the controller of fault
              detection and diagnosis information derived from the system model.   
***  

