Title       : Analysis of the Inverse Effect in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9807802

Award Number: 9807802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Birchler birchlerj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Birchler
9807802
The long range goal of the proposed work is to understand the
              nature and mechanism of transacting regulatory genes that affect the expression
              of structural genes in a dosage sensitive manner, utilizing the white eye color
              locus of Drosophila melanogaster as a model system.  It is believed that this
              type of regulatory effect is involved in the developmental expression of most
              types of structural genes in multicellular eukaryotes.  Aneuploidy, or the
              change of individual chromosome number in an otherwise euploid genome, is
              associated with certain phenotypic consequences and it is thought that the
              dosage regulators play a significant role in the molecular basis of these
              syndromes.  Previous work has identified several genes that produce a dosage
              sensitive modifying effect on white expression.  Cloning, or other means of
              identifying these genes, revealed them to be various types of transcriptional
              factors and chromatin components.  The major type of dosage effect is an
              inverse correlation between the copy number of the regulator and the expression
              of the target locus.  If the regulator and the target are varied together, the
              effects cancel to produce dosage compensation.  In the proposed work, a study
              of the interactions of 20 molecularly defined regulatory genes that are
              effective on white will establish what types of regulatory genes predominate in
              establishing the overall level of gene expression when several regulators are
              varied together as would occur in large aneuploids.  This information will be
              of value for understanding regulatory gene circuitry, aneuploid syndromes,
              dosage compensation mechanisms and involvement of regulatory genes in the
              control of quantitative traits.  The second major direction will be to analyze
              a newly discovered global regulatory complex that appears to exist throughout
              multicellular eukaryotes.  The orthologous complex acts in yeast as a global
              negative regulatory system, but there are significant differences in the
              predicted protein sequences and action in Drosophila.  The functional tests
              proposed will begin work on how these genes produce their effect on gene
              expression in multicellular species.  Lastly, evidence was found in the
              previous funding period for nucleation sites for the association of the male
              specific lethal (MSL) complex on the male X chromosome.  The hypothesized
              nucleation site will be isolated and the mechanism by which it conditions
              binding to the X will be studied.  These experiments will address how the MSL
              proteins act to modify the action of the dosage sensitive regulatory genes. 
              The proposed project will contribute to an understanding of inverse dosage
              regulation and address whether there is a connection between the responsible
              regulatory genes and the biological effects associated with chromosomal dosage
              such as compensation, quantitative traits, aneuploid syndromes and position
              effect variegation.

A genome is more than a series of individual genes. It
              is a unit whose control of cell and organismal function is the result of
              complex interactions of those individual genes in a precise and patterned
              choreography. This work will give greater insight into some of those
              interactions and how they affect the regulation of individual target loci.

