Title       : Optically Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in the Quantum Hall Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9807184

Award Number: 9807184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean E. Barrett sean.barrett@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Barrett
9807184
This is a condensed matter physics project in the area of
              two-dimensional electron systems (2DES), fabricated with delta-doped gallium
              arsenide/aluminum gallium arsenide multiple quantum wells. Such 2DES exhibit
              complex electrical transport behavior, such as the fractional quantum Hall
              effect (FQHE),  when exposed to a magnetic field normal to the 2D planes. The
              2DES will be investigated using a new technique called optically pumped nuclear
              magnetic resonance (OPNMR). The objective is to understand the nature of
              electron-electron interactions that are responsible for the FQHE. The OPNMR
              method is unique in providing specific information about the role of electron
              spin in the many-particle ground states, and elementary excitations, that give
              rise to the FQHE. This information can be related to novel  geometrical
              magnetization distributions, called "skyrmions" that have been predicted in the
              2DES and discovered via the OPNMR method. The project represents a frontier of
              condensed matter physics. The sophisticated materials required for the FQHE
              research are provided via a collaboration with Lucent Laboratories. The
              research provides an outstanding opportunity for graduate students to study
              fundamental physics and to learn cutting-edge experimental techniques that have
              applications in a wide area of semiconductor physics and the microelectronics
              industry.
%%%
This is a condensed matter physics project that deals with the
              electrical properties of electrons that are largely confined to move in a
              two-dimensional plane. These are two-dimensional electron systems (2DES). When
              a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the plane of the electrons, and
              the electrical transport is measured, it is found that major changes occurs as
              a function of magnetic field. Some of this behavior is known as the fractional
              quantum Hall effect (FQHE). A full understanding of the FQHE is not available
              and the area represents a frontier of condensed matter physics. This project
              employs a unique nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) method that senses the
              magnetic properties of the electrons that underlie the FQHE. The results are of
              fundamental interest and provide important tests of competing theories of the
              magnetism associated with the FQHE. The sophisticated materials required for
              the FQHE research are provided via a collaboration with Lucent Laboratories.
              The research provides an outstanding opportunity for graduate students to study
              fundamental physics and to learn cutting-edge experimental techniques that have
              applications in a wide area of semiconductor physics and the microelectronics
              industry.

