Title       : The Reconstitution of Early Complex Society in Pacific Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9807304

Award Number: 9807304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Love   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love will analyze
              materials excavated at the archaeological site of Ujuxte, located near the
              Pacific coast of Guatemala. Currently supported NSF investigations indicate
              that Ujuxte began as a plannedcity at approximately 600 BC and grew to reach
              considerable proportions. Survey has shown that at its peak, it covered over 4
              sq kilometers and dominated a number of secondary centers which contained
              smaller copies of its ceremonial architecture. Through his work, Dr. Love
              wishes to understand the history of the site and how its social, economic and
              political organization developed and changed over time. Ujuxte has yielded
              large amounts of cultural materials - ceramics, lithics and animal remains. 
              Through the analysis of these artifacts it will be possible to reconstruct a
              social profile, determine the extent of economic differentiation and determine
              if a hierarchical form of organization existed.  Early complex societies are
              now recognized as fragile and subject to cycles of integration and 
              decomposition. Dr. Love will investigate one such cycle in a region which has
              remains of the earliest  complex societies presently known for Mesoamerica. The
              evolution of those societies has basic  importance for the understanding of
              Mesoamerican culture history and can shed light on the mechanisms responsible
              for the development of complex society. During the Middle Preclassic period,
              from ca. 900-600 BC, the region's first large regional polity, centered on the
              site of La Blanca, was constituted and collapsed. Soon after that collapse the
              nearby site of Ujuxte first developed. Dr. Love's research examines the
              transition from the La Blanca polity to that dominated by Ujuxte. It will
              compare the two entities in terms of social organization, economic structures
              and ideological basis of power. The research seeks to understand the extent to
              which the structures of the Ujxute polity recreated those of La Blanca. To the
              extent that the structures are distinct, the research will then ask what
              conditions enabled Ujuxte to endure and grow where La Blanca did not.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
