Title       : Phase Segregation in Multicomponent Polymer Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9807601

Award Number: 9807601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica Olvera m-olvera@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9807601  Olvera    This grant supports theoretical research on phase 
              segregation in multicomponent polymer mixtures.  Polymer  blends are highly
              immiscible viscous fluids.  Complex  microstructures are observed during the
              decomposition into  multiple phases.  The patterns of the decomposing fluids
              are  expected to be affected by flow.  Here a systematic study  will be
              conducted of hydrodynamic effects on the  decomposition process as a function
              of the concentrations  and degrees of polymerization of the blend components,
              as  well as of their net repulsive interactions.  Blends  decomposing into two
              and three phases will be analyzed.  Level set theory will be used to analyze
              interface behavior.  The time-dependent microstructures under externally
              applied  flow will also be studied.  Preliminary results suggest that  the
              break-up of the interconnected patterns found in ternary  blends is strongly
              nonlinear.  That is, the third phase rich  in the minority component growing at
              the interfaces of the  majority symmetric phases forms connecting fluid
              filaments  that break up into mother drops with satellite droplets.  This
              mechnaism greatly affects the growth rate of the  minority phase.  %%%  This
              grant supports theoretical research on phase  segregation in multicomponent
              polymer mixtures.  Polymer  blends are highly immiscible viscous fluids.  Most 
              commercially available polymers for applications are  actually blends.  Complex
              microstructures are observed  during the decomposition into multiple phases. 
              These  microstructures affect the properties of the blends.  The  patterns of
              the decomposing fluids are expected to be  affected by flow.  Here a systematic
              study will be conducted  of hydrodynamic effects on the decomposition process
              as a  function of the concentrations and degrees of polymerization  of the
              blend components, as well as of their net repulsive  interactions.  ***
