Title       : A Cooperative Analysis of Union Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a9807517

Award Number: 9807517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred C. Pampel                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis P. Hogan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances K. Goldscheider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is a comparative study of the factors influencing women's
              and men's entry into marriage and cohabitation over the past 30 years in the
              United States, Canada, Sweden, and Italy. It will analyze the effects of school
              enrollment, educational attainment, labor force participation, labor force
              experience, the earnings potential of women and men, and the occurrence of
              pregnancy and/or the presence of children on union formation. The study will
              determine how the availability of alternative forms of union (cohabitation and
              marriage), along with shifts in the lives of men and women, have altered
              traditional patterns of union formation across cohorts and among nations. The
              study will use newly available comparative data from the "Fertility and Family
              Surveys" of these nations between 1993 and 1995. Event history analyses will be
              employed, treating cohabitation and marriage as competing alternative outcomes,
              with fixed and time-varying independent variables measured at the individual
              and social institutional level. This research will contribute to a clearer
              understanding of the likely trajectory of this transformation in family life. A
              key theoretical concern is how compositional changes in the life histories
              women and men bring to union formation, on the cohort-specific roles and
              potentialities of women and men (absolutely and relative to each other), and
              changes in the process of union formation have contributed to this change in
              family life. An important concern for better understanding marriage as an
              institution is the project's analysis of how the determinants of marriage have
              changed with the rise in cohabitation, as an alternative union type. The
              research is of policy concern because of the changing role of children (already
              born or impending births) in the union formation process, and what this implies
              for the presence of a father or father-figure in the households and for family
              economic well-being and welfare dependence.


