Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Understanding the Language
               Policy Preferences of American Citizens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9807968

Award Number: 9807968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9424               (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry M. Bartels bartels@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Doctoral Dissertation Research project supports research on public
              opinion about language policies in particular and of competing notions of
              American identity and citizenship more generally.  The project develops and
              tests a theory that 1) explains why people hold opinions on language policy
              issues ad 2) highlights the conditions under which people are more or less
              likely to support restrictive language policies.  The project's central aim is
              to advance the state of knowledge in political science and political psychology
              on the ways in which symbolic attachments to images of national identity
              influence policy preferences.  It will do so by expanding the range of symbolic
              and ideological concerns that have been attributed to causing the widespread
              public support for English-only legislation, particularly by emphasizing the
              ways in which people think about American identity and citizenship and the role
              of the citizen in the polity.  American political culture is infused with the
              democratic image of the participating citizen in a cohesive community in which
              deliberation and compromise contribute to harmonious public life.  This
              research argues that this image, along with those images that have already been
              examined by other scholars, is essential for explaining patterns of public
              support for restrictive language policies.  The limited range of items that
              appear on existing surveys points to the need for a more detailed and in-depth
              approach to this issue domain.  The goals of this study require a strategy that
              includes new sources of data in which members of the public are allowed to
              develop their own statements on these issues and express them in their own
              words as they interact with other citizens.  This study collects data via focus
              groups and controlled group interviews.  These sources provide the data that
              are necessary to adequately build upon existing theories of how individuals
              make linkages between group identity, self-interest, and policy preferences.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
