Title       : The Kinetics of Phase Stability in Periodic 
Silica/Surfactant Nanostructured
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9807180

Award Number: 9807180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah H. Tolbert tolbert@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9807180
Tolbert

This project involves experiments which directly probe the
              thermodynamic and kinetic factors controlling stability in ordered
              silica/surfactant mesostructured composites.  These exciting new materials
              consist of an organized organic component, which controls long range
              periodicity, and an inorganic framework, which provides stability and strength.
               Importantly, the organic component can be removed to produce ordered
              mesoporous materials which have potential for a wide range of applications. 
              Kinetic phenomena appear to play a major role in the formation of these
              materials and thus understanding these kinetic effects would be enormously
              useful for the rational design of future materials.  Phase transitions in these
              materials will be followed in real time to gain insight into the driving forces
              and kinetic factors controlling structure. Two classes of experiments are
              envisioned:  The first set involves structural changes under hydrothermal
              conditions in response to thermal and chemical treatments.  By systematically
              varying the organic moieties and the degree of silica framework polymerization,
              transition kinetics reveal the interplay between organic packing and the rigid
              inorganic silica framework. Real-time X-ray scattering and solid-state NMR
              spectroscopy will be utilized to follow structural change and to learn about
              the evolution of both long range periodicity and local bonding.  The second set
              of experiments directly probe the role of packing constraints by examining
              phase behavior under high pressure.  Here, the ability of these composites to
              reorganize under non-hydrothermal conditions will be determined.  These
              experiments offer hope for separating the role of surfactant packing from that
              of silica polymerization.
%%%
Addressing the kinetics of phase stability in
              periodic silica/surfactant nanostructured materials will provide information
              that can be directly used to synthesize new classes of silica/surfactant
              composites, with the goal of learning how to kinetically trap or
              thermodynamically favor new composite or mesoporous structures for specific
              applications in catalysis, separations, or chemical sensing.
***

