Title       : Mechanisms of Ion Selectivity in Cloned Potassium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9807941

Award Number: 9807941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Korn korn@oracle.pnb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph LoTurco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-07941  KORN      Heart, brain, endocrine and muscle cells are called
              excitable  cells, and rely on the precisely coordinated action of many ion 
              channels for their function. These channels in the plasma membrane  of the cell
              open and close in response to physiological  stimulation, and allow the flux of
              ions into or out of the cell.  Flux of calcium and sodium ions through their
              respective channels  tends to subserve excitatory functions, and flux of
              potassium  through potassium channels underlies many inhibitory functions. 
              Although control of excitable behavior is extremely complex, the  magnitude and
              time-course of potassium flux through potassium  channels is often a critical
              factor in determining the duration of  excitatory events. There are many
              different potassium channels,  with subtly different structures. This subtle
              structural variation  among channels results in a large degree of functional
              diversity.  Both the magnitude and time-course of potassium channel activity 
              is sensitive to the concentration of potassium and sodium ion in  the
              extracellular space (the region just outside of a cell), and  this sensitivity
              also varies among channels. Two potassium binding  sites have been functionally
              isolated, a low affinity site that  underlies some channel functions and a high
              affinity site that  underlies others. In particular, the high affinity site,
              located  at the "selectivity filter," underlies the ability of potassium to 
              prevent sodium from passing through the cell. The low affinity  site is not
              involved in selectivity but is involved in several  other channel functions.
              Recent structural studies have identified  the molecular location of the
              selectivity filter, and the  associated high affinity site(s). These studies
              were unable to  identify a cation binding site external the site of
              selectivity.  Consequently, either one of these putative high affinity sites 
              contributes to the low affinity site functions or there is an as  yet unknown
              cation binding site, external to the st ructurally  described sites, which
              cannot be observed in structural studies.  The primary focus of these studies
              will be to determine whether  the structurally described selectivity filter
              site(s) interconvert  between low affinity and high affinity sites, or whether
              a low  affinity site exists external to and independent from the high  affinity
              site. The studies will combine molecular biological  techniques with
              electrophysiological recordings and biophysical  analysis to determine whether
              the different functionally-  identified binding sites are structurally
              distinct. Results from  this project will enhance our understanding of the
              nature of  cation binding sites in the channel pore, and will thus enhance  our
              knowledge of the molecular mechanisms that underlie phenotypic  diversity in
              potassium channels.
