Title       : SYMPOSIUM: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on the Early Development of
               Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9807918

Award Number: 9807918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81361              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dramatic progress in the field of developmental biology in recent years has
              resulted from the application of a number of new approaches to classical
              problems, and led to the need for advanced courses to train new investigators
              to study those animal models, such as Xenopus, that have been important in
              making new discoveries in this field. The PI proposes to continue the Cold
              Spring Harbor Laboratory course on "Early Development of Xenopus laevis", which
              has now been taught for five years as part of an integrated set of courses at
              Cold Spring Harbor in a number of areas of modern biology. This course provides
              extensive laboratory exposure to the biology and manipulation of embryos from
              the frog Xenopus laevis. Xenopus is a vertebrate uniquely suited for studies of
              early development, since large numbers of embryos, from fertilization onward,
              can easily be obtained. Development is rapid and the large size of the embryos
              facilitates their micromanipulation to allow analysis of such important issues
              as embryonic inductions, even at the single cell level, that are not feasible
              in mammalian, avian or fish embryos. The course is suited both for those who
              have a knowledge of molecular biology and developmental biology, but have had
              no experience with Xenopus, as well as those with some Xenopus experience who
              wish to learn newly developed, advanced techniques. 
