Title       : RUI: Regulation of Secretory Protein mRNA Stability in Heat-Shocked Barley
               Aleurone Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9807998

Award Number: 9807998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Brodl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,9141,9178,9198,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to understand the cell biology of higher
              plants' responses to environmental stress.  The model system for investigation
              is the heat shock response of the aleurone layer of barley grains.  The cells
              of this tissue are normally dedicated to protein secretion; however, heat shock
              dramatically redirects their cellular activities.  The synthesis of secretory
              proteins is abruptly arrested when the tissue is subjected to heat shock, yet
              the synthesis of nonsecretory proteins continues.  This is accomplished by the
              selective destabilization of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that code for the secretory
              proteins and that are otherwise stable.  Heat shock also causes a change in the
              organization of the intracellular membrane compartment that is the site of
              entry of proteins into the secretory pathway.  This compartment, the
              endoplasmic reticulum (ER), changes from a stacked cisternal lamellar
              arrangement to a tubular morphology.  Ribosome density on the ER also decreases
              by about half. 

The principal distinction between secretory and nonsecretory
              protein mRNAs is a region encoding an amino terminal signal sequence that
              directs the translation of secretory protein mRNAs to take place at the ER
              surface.  The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a protein-nucleic acid
              complex that interacts with the signal sequence of nascent polypeptides and
              brings the ribosomes that are translating the secretory proteins to the ER.  It
              has been found that heat shock inhibits the release of SRP from the ER
              following ribosome "docking."  This project addresses the question of what
              mechanisms operate during heat shock to selectively destabilize secretory
              protein mRNA.  Time course experiments will investigate whether degradation of
              secretory protein mRNA occurs from the ER-bound or free pools.  Binding of
              specific proteins to secretory protein mRNAs has been observed and may be
              increased as a result of heat shock.  Since this protein binding may be of
              importance in regulating mRNA stability, experiments will be performed to
              define the binding sequences in the RNA.  These candidate sequences will then
              be either deleted from secretory protein mRNAs or added to normally stable
              transcripts to determine if they confer heat shock instability.  Finally, the
              genes for the SRP receptor or docking proteins in the ER membrane of barley
              aleurone will be cloned.  The clones will be used to produce antibodies to
              monitor the effect of heat shock on the expression and distribution of these
              proteins.  

A plant's adaptive responses to environmental stress are crucial
              to its survival.  A fuller understanding of the impact of stress on normal
              cellular biology and of cellular mechanisms for stress adaptation are important
              to agricultural efforts aimed at enhancing plant productivity and utility. 
              Most studies on heat shock focus on the induction and function of heat
              shock-specific proteins.  This work focuses instead on the impact of heat shock
              on normal cellular processes, most specifically the suppression of normal
              cellular protein expression.  Understanding the post-transcriptional mechanisms
              by which plants regulate gene expression is fundamental to fully realizing the
              potential that genetic engineering offers.  

This project is also
              significant for its involvement of undergraduates.  Knox College has a strong
              track record for preparing students for graduate study in the sciences.  In
              addition, this project includes a novel teaching postdoctoral position,
              combining a more traditional research postdoctoral experience with
              undergraduate teaching experience.  This training in the integration of
              research and teaching is an experience tailored for the preparation of Ph.D.
              scientists seeking faculty positions at small liberal arts colleges.  

