Title       : Genetic and Molecular Studies of the Tad Transposon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9807236

Award Number: 9807236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Kinsey jkinsey@kumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      3901 Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66160    913/588-5238

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goals of this project are to determine the mechanisms and control
              of transposition of the LINE-like (Long INterspersed Element) genetic element
              Tad from Neurospora crassa.  Tad is a 7 kilobase retrotransposon.  It is
              present in active form in the Adiopodoume strain of Neurospora crassa, but only
              in inactive, multiply mutated form in other strains of Neurospora.  The active
              Tad elements lack terminal repeats, but contain two long non-overlapping open
              reading frames (ORFs) on the DNA strand, with the same polarity as the
              full-length message.  ORF1 shows homology with a small part of the "gag" genes
              of other LINE-like elements.  ORF2 contains blocks of homology that are
              considered diagnostic for reverse transcriptase, including one block that is
              characteristic of the reverse transcriptase domains of other LINE-like
              elements.  Tad is capable of transposing between nuclei in a heterokaryon, and
              an intron inserted into ORF1 has been used to demonstrate that Tad is a bona
              fide retrotransposon.  All LINE-like elements that have been studied appear to
              have an internal 5' promoter that is responsible for transcription of the full
              length message; however, none of these promoters have been thoroughly
              characterized.  The Tad promoter is more than 30 bp internal to Tad, and the
              region that contains the promoter is approximately 100 bp.  A  variety of
              techniques are being used to identify critical promoter elements and the genes
              whose products are responsible for Tad expression.  In addition there are a
              number of unique and interesting features of Tad:  1) Tad contains a unique two
              component silencer system.  One component, which is in a 1.2 kb fragment
              contained within the 3' end of ORF2, acts as a silencer of an adjacent gene. 
              The silencer itself is controlled by another element that is located within the
              5' end of tad.  This element is responsible for a reversible methvlation of the
              5' end of Tad.  When the sequences are heavily methylated the silencer is off. 
              When the sequences are lightly methylated, not methylated, or deleted, the
              silencer is functional.  The components of both elements of the silencer system
              are being characterized.  2) Tad contains an unusual 3' tail beyond the end of
              ORF2.  Certain sequences near, but not at, the 3' end of this tail are
              essential for transposition.  These essential sequences are being
              characterized.  3) Tad exists in a genus that has a very efficient mechanism
              for destroying active transposons.  Active Tad has been found  in only one
              strain of hundreds of strains collected from Africa; however all stains
              examined have Tad elements that appear to have been inactivated by the RIP
              process.  The Tad elements from the African strain are susceptible to RIP and
              that strain is not RIP deficient.  Soil-based PCR will be used to look for
              active Tad elements in order to try to determine the origin of Tad.  Mobil
              genetic elements have been found in organisms as diverse as bacteria and humans
              and are responsible for mutations when they insert into active genes.  These
              studies should lead to an understanding of how these elements arise and how
              some organisms protect their genomes from being damaged by potentially  large
              numbers of them.
