Title       : Dissertation Research: Tourists and Amazonian Host: Impacts on Economy, Values
               and Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9807511

Award Number: 9807511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8122               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne Schmink schmink@tcd.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Eco-tourism, where first-world tourists travel to ecologically attractive places
              in the developing world, is a relatively new development to a major world
              industry.  This dissertation research project involves a cultural anthropology
              student from the University of Florida, studying an eco-tourism project in the
              Peruvian Amazon.  The focus of the research is to analyze how the commercial
              tourism alters the economic activities and ecological values of the host
              community, a society of native Americans.  The student will examine the effects
              of eco-tourism wage labor on farming and foraging. The hypothesis to be tested
              is that wage work will divert time away from farming and foraging, while new
              income will lead people to by new technologies and intensify their foraging. 
              The project will also examine whether natives who participate closely in
              eco-tourism will adopt notions of cultural and identity and nature that differ
              from their non-participating peers.  The hypothesis to be tested is that
              participants in tourism will perceive and define cultural identity and the
              natural environment in ways that more closely match the expectations of
              tourists.  The methodology involves participant observation, semi-structured
              interviews with a sample of household heads previously interviewed in 1997, and
              in-depth interviews with a sample of community members.  This project will
              provide fine-grained ethnographic information on the impact of eco-tourism on
              the people who are permanently in charge of the forest. The results will shed
              light on the controversy over whether the commercialism of eco-tourism harms
              the resource by over-exploiting it, or maintains it by facilitating local
              management and conservation.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
