Title       : Chemical Defense in Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9807098

Award Number: 9807098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark E. Welker                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391968             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Fenical wfenical@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor William H. Fenical, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography,  
              Geochemistry, and Marine Chemistry at the University of California at San  
              Diego, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his studies of  
              chemical defense in marine organisms.  Professor Fenical explores the  
              chemical ecology of marine plants and animals in order to expand our  
              knowledge of the sources, types, and reactivities of molecules produced   by
              marine organisms and to explore the natural functions of these   molecules in
              interspecies interactions within marine habitats.  Following   isolation and
              structure determination of new bioactive natural products   from ascidians,
              gorgonians, bryozoans, and other marine organisms, the   regioselective
              reactivities and skeletal interrelationships of selected   secondary
              metabolites are explored.  This project, emphasizing   ecologically relevant
              testing of pure substances using natural predators,   seeks to explore the
              chemical behaviors of new classes of natural   products from marine organisms,
              to establish the specific roles these   compounds play in interspecies
              interactions, and to define the influence   of these organic molecules on the
              biological composition of tropical   marine environments.  Marine organisms,
              both plant and animal, produce an astounding array of   organic compounds. 
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program,   Professor William H.
              Fenical, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography,   Geochemistry, and Marine
              Chemistry at the University of California at San   Diego, explores the chemical
              means by which marine organisms effect their   defense.  Through isolation,
              structure determination, and testing of   molecules produced by various classes
              of marine organisms.  Professor   Fenical establishes the nature of the organic
              molecules used for chemical   defense and the influence of these organic
              molecules on the biological   composition of tropical marine environments.  In
              addition, these   fundamental studies of marine chemical defense are resulting
              in the   isolation of compounds of potential biomedical and commercial  
              significance, including antiflammatory agents.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
