Title       : Can Non-Random Mating Result in Evolutionary Change: A Selection Experiment
               Using Wild Radish as a Model System, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9807337

Award Number: 9807337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Marshall marshall@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807337  Marshall and Evans    Understanding plant reproduction is important for
              both basic and applied science.  We cannot understand plant ecology and
              evolution without knowledge of the causes of variation in plant reproductive
              success. From an applied perspective, plant reproduction is important because
              many of our agricultural products are the direct products of reproduction, so
              understanding of reproductive success is necessary to plant breeding programs. 
                 However, knowledge of plant reproduction has been limited because most of
              our information is about success of plants as seed parents, even though plants
              reproduce both as seed and pollen parents. If selection is occurring on the
              ability of plants to achieve reproductive success through pollen donation, then
              we may have misinterpreted or under-utilized some of the features of plants.   
               This study focuses on testing whether selection is occurring on plants that
              act as pollen parents. The investigators are using an artificial selection
              experiment to address whether pollen-donating ability is genetically based and
              to test whether selection on this ability alters other characteristics of
              plants. Results to date show that mating characters are heritable and that
              selection on mating ability affects other features of the plant.  The current
              work will replicate the experiment and learn more about how plants respond to
              selection.     The investigators will use wild radish as a model organism
              because it is very easy to work with. In addition, it is closely related to
              other species that are grown as crops. The study will directly address a
              fundamental issue in plant evolutionary ecology and may have rather direct
              agricultural implications as well. Because the research will involve selection
              of seeds from different regions of the fruits, it may be possible to discern
              whether this form of selection could be useful in plant breeding. A study of
              alfalfa has already shown that seeds selected from different regions of fruits
              have different growth and  reproductive characteristics.  The current work can
              be used to address whether the most vigorous seeds typically come from
              particular regions of fruits in an unrelated plant and thus whether this might
              be a generally useful method of selection in plant breeding programs.
