Title       : Sulfolipid Head Group Biosynthesis in Photosynthetic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9807943

Award Number: 9807943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Benning benning@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807943
Benning  
The abundant non-phosphorous sulfolipid sulfoquinovosyl
              diacylglycerol is specifically associated with photosynthetic membranes of
              bacteria and plants. The unique head group consists of a 6-sulfonate derivative
              of glucose called sulfoquinovose. Three major pathways contribute to the
              biosynthesis of sulfolipid: carbohydrate metabolism, sulfur assimilation, and
              fatty acid biosynthesis. There is good evidence for the final assembly of the
              sulfolipid by the transfer of the sulfoquinovosyl moiety from
              UDP-sulfoquinovose to the sn-3 position of diacylglycerol. However, very little
              is still known about the biosynthesis of the precursor UDP-sulfoquinovose and
              the mechanism for the introduction of the sulfonate group. It is the objective
              of this project, to elucidate the biosynthesis of UDP-sulfoquinovose, thereby
              determining the pathway of sulfolipid biosynthesis and possibly discovering a
              novel biochemical reaction crucial to the synthesis of sulfonates in biological
              systems. One approach is to characterize the proteins encoded by the sqdB
              sulfolipid genes of photosynthetic bacteria or by the orthologous SQD1 plant
              gene, and to elucidate the metabolic reaction catalyzed. These proteins are
              proposed to be involved in the biosynthesis of UDP-sulfoquinovose from
              UDP-glucose, because their amino acid sequence is similar to those of sugar
              nucleotide modifying enzymes. Recombinant SQDB or SQD1 proteins convert
              UDP-glucose to a new compound in vitro. The structural elucidation of this
              compound, presumably the sulfur acceptor for the formation of
              UDP-sulfoquinovose, is expected to provide clues to the reaction catalyzed by
              the SQDB or SQD1 proteins in vivo. A second approach is aimed at the
              identification of the possible sulfur donor for UDP-sulfoquinovose biosynthesis
              and, thus, the branch point between general sulfur metabolism and sulfolipid
              biosynthesis. For this purpose, four mutants of the cyanobacterium
              Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 deficient in different steps of sulfate assimilation
              and  reduction will be constructed by targeted gene disruption and will be
              tested for their capability to synthesize sulfolipid.    Sulfolipid is a
              constituent of photosynthetic membranes of bacteria and plants. The head group
              of the sulfolipid is unique, consisting of a sulfonic acid derivative of
              glucose called sulfoquinovose. It is the objective of this project to elucidate
              the crucial biochemical reaction(s) leading to the biosynthesis of this
              naturally occurring sulfonic acid. The genes encoding the enzyme thought to
              catalyze the biosynthesis of the head group are available from bacteria and
              plants. These genes are used to produce recombinant proteins in E. coli that
              can be studied in detail to elucidate the reaction mechanism. To address the
              question for the origin of the sulfur in sulfolipid, genes known to encode
              proteins involved in different reactions of the general sulfur metabolism in
              cyanobacteria will be inactivated. The resulting mutants will be tested for
              their competence for sulfolipid biosynthesis. The newly acquired knowledge
              about the biosynthesis of the sulfolipid head group will not only solve the
              pathway of sulfolipid biosynthesis, but may also provide clues towards the
              production of sulfonic acids by genetic engineering. It has been demonstrated
              in different laboratory tests that sulfolipid has anti-viral and anti-tumor
              activities. Thus, it may become desirable to produce large quantities of this
              compound in an inexpensive way in the near future.
