Title       : Composition and Bioavailability of Dissolved Organic Nitrogen in Atmospheric
               Deposition (EGB)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9807621

Award Number: 9807621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sybil P. Seitzinger sybil@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monica A. Mazurek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,4444,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807621
Seitzinger

Marked changes in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
              are occurring as a result of increased anthropogenic nitrogen (N) in
              atmospheric deposition.  N deposition is predicted to increase over twofold in
              the next 20 years.  To date, most studies of the magnitude, sources and effects
              of atmospherically deposited N have only considered inorganic-N.  However, a
              considerable portion of N in rainwater is in the form of organic-N, and almost
              nothing is known of the chemical composition, sources or ecosystem effects of
              the bulk of that organic-N.
	
	The proposed studies will: (1) develop to
              characterize the chemical composition of dissolved organic nitrogen (DOM) in
              atmospheric deposition; (2) characterize the chemical compositon of DOM in
              atmospheric deposition at a relatively perturbed site in the Northeastern U.S.
              over an annual cycle; (3) determine how much of the total DOM in the rainwater
              in spring is biologically available to coastal plankton communities and provide
              insight into potential changes in plankton production and community
              composition; and (4) begin to characterize the chemical composition of the DOM
              compound classes that are bio-available and thus contributing to ecological
              changes in receiving ecosystems.

	The approach will provide a mass balance
              of total N (organic-N and inorganic-N) and of the various forms of organic N in
              precipitation.  The chemical characterization studies will be integrated with
              ecological studies.  This study will generate information needed to help
              understand the continental pathways of pollutant and natural N atmospheric
              compounds in the Northeastern U.S.. Moreover, by linking the bioavailability
              studies with precipitation N loading and composition, atmospherically processed
              N compounds will be related to sensitive ecosystems.

	The project will
              provide research opportunities for undergraduates to Rutgers University
              Douglass  College.  Integration of undergraduate students in this research
              program will provide the framework for students and researchers to explore
              together important linkages among human activities/land use, atmospheric
              geochemical processes, and biogeochemical processes in aquatic
              ecosystems.
9807621
Seitzinger

Marked changes in both terrestrial and
              aquatic ecosystems are occurring as a result of increased anthropogenic
              nitrogen (N) in atmospheric deposition.  N deposition is predicted to increase
              over twofold in the next 20 years.  To date, most studies of the magnitude,
              sources and effects of atmospherically deposited N have only considered
              inorganic-N.  However, a considerable portion of N in rainwater is in the form
              of organic-N, and almost nothing is known of the chemical composition, sources
              or ecosystem effects of the bulk of that organic-N.
	
	The proposed studies
              will: (1) develop to characterize the chemical composition of dissolved organic
              nitrogen (DOM) in atmospheric deposition; (2) characterize the chemical
              compositon of DOM in atmospheric deposition at a relatively perturbed site in
              the Northeastern U.S. over an annual cycle; (3) determine how much of the total
              DOM in the rainwater in spring is biologically available to coastal plankton
              communities and provide insight into potential changes in plankton production
              and community composition; and (4) begin to characterize the chemical
              composition of the DOM compound classes that are bio-available and thus
              contributing to ecological changes in receiving ecosystems.

	The approach
              will provide a mass balance of total N (organic-N and inorganic-N) and of the
              various forms of organic N in precipitation.  The chemical characterization
              studies will be integrated with ecological studies.  This study will generate
              information needed to help understand the continental pathways of pollutant and
              natural N atmospheric compounds in the Northeastern U.S.. Moreover, by linking
              the bioavailability studies with precipitation N loading and composition,
              atmospherically processed N compounds will be related to sensitive
              ecosystems.

	The project will provide research opportunities for
              undergraduates to Rutgers University Douglass  College.  Integration of
              undergraduate students in this research program will provide the framework for
              students and researchers to explore together important linkages among human
              activities/land use, atmospheric geochemical processes, and biogeochemical
              processes in aquatic ecosystems.

