Title       : Quantum Fluids Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9807761

Award Number: 9807761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Packard packard@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                         9807761  Packard    This   is  low 
              temperature  physics  project  focusing  on   the  properties  of  superfluid 
              flowing  through  arrays   of   100nm  apertures. The work is based on the
              recent finding that  such  an  array  behaves  as  a Josephson weak link. A 
              main  part  of  the  project  will investigate the physics associated with the
              various  Josephson effects in such arrays. The experiments will:  (1)  Map  out
               the current-phase relation as a function of temperature  and  ambient 
              pressure,  (2)  Determine the  stability  of  metastable  states  of  non-zero
              quantum phase difference, (3) Determine  the  stability   of   metastable 
              state  of  non-zero  quantum   phase  difference,  (4) Look for phase mixing
              effects analogous  to  the  superconducting  Shapiro  effect, (5) Determine 
              the  dissipative  mechanism which exist a non-zero pressure head, and (6)
              Determine  the  effect  of flux trapping and textural structures within  and 
              near  the  aperture array. The second part of  the  project  will  focus  on
              detecting acoustic radiation associated with the  phase  slippage  when  He-4 
              passes through a submicron  size  aperture.  Techniques  to  detect the
              acoustic radiation will be  developed.  Subsequently,  the  acoustic spectrum
              will be  studied  to  learn  about  vortex  nucleation mechanisms and the
              Josephson  frequency  relation.  The project provides excellent training  for 
              graduate  students in both fundamental and experimental physics.  %%%  This  is
               a  low  temperature physics  project  that  focuses  on  understanding  the 
              dynamic behavior  of  superfluids  that  pass  through very small apertures. In
              the case of superfluid He-3,  an  aperture  smaller  than  1/10,000,000  meter 
              forms  a  so-called  quantum weak link. When the superfluid is forced through 
              such  a  small  aperture,  instead of flowing in  one  direction  like  an 
              ordinary  liquid, the fluid surges back and forth at a  frequency  proportional
               to  the  force   on  the  liquid.  These   Josephson  oscillations  indicate a
              sine-like relation  ship  between  fluid  current  and  quantum  mechanical
              phase difference.  The  planned  research  will  expand our understanding of
              the  consequences  of  this  relation.  In the case of superfluid He-4, theory 
              suggests  that   pressure  driven  flow  through  an  aperture  should   be 
              accompanied  by  a  sound  signal  at  the  so-called   Josephson  frequency.
              The sound spectrum will reflect the detail  of  vortex  nucleation  within the
              aperture. The relation between  the  sound  spectrum  and  the applied pressure
              head may lead  to  a  quantum  mechanical  pressure  standard. The  project 
              provides  excellent  training   for   graduate  students  in  both  
              fundamental   and  experimental physics.  ***
