Title       : Structural Studies on Heme Enzymes and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9807798

Award Number: 9807798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Poulos poulos@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Poulos
9807798
The purpose of this project is to use primarily x-ray
              crystallography to study structure-function relationships in heme containing
              enzymes and proteins.  So far the focus has been on peroxidases.  Peroxidases
              participate in a wide range of biological processes requiring oxidatiion of
              molecules and removal of peroxides.  Several peroxidase structures have been
              solved so the project will now move into a more detailed analysis of function. 
              In particular, the focus will be on chloroperoxidase (CPO), the most diverse of
              the known heme enzyme catalysts.  The goal is to couple mutagenesis, molecular
              modeling, and crystallography in order to understand how CPO catallyzes
              stereoselective epoxidation, sulfoxidtion, and hydrogen abstraction reactions. 
              In addition, the structure of the novel heme catalyst, heme oxygenase, will be
              determined.  Recently, it has been found that some peroxidase crystals when
              frozen in liquid nitrogen diffract to beyond 1A resolution using synchrotron
              radiation.  This provides a rare opprtunity for determining the structure of
              moderately large glycoproteins at true atomic resolution.  Studies also will be
              initiated on novel heme proteins that operate as biological sensors and
              transcription factors.  A transcriptional regulatory protein that senses carbon
              monoxide will be a particular focus.

The enzymes under investigation
              catalyze a variety of biologically important oxidations.  A common theme is the
              presence of a heme prosthetic group.  The remarkable feature in these proteins
              is the wide range of functions even though the hene group is exactly the same. 
              These functions include oxygen carriers (hemoglobin and myoglobin), electron
              transfer proteins (cytochromes), and the enzymes under investigation in this
              project which catalyze bond making and breaking reactions.  Some heme enzymes
              catalyze reactions that are important for degrading toxic environmental
              pollutants as well as stereospecific oxidations.  Such reactions are quite
              important in various industrial processes where the need for stereoselectivity
              is high.  Engineeering enzymes for this purpose is an area of considerable
              interest in thr synthesis of rare and expensive intermediates used in the
              production of important organic molecules.  In recent years, a number of these
              important enzymes have been cloned and expressed in bacterial hosts.  This
              opens the way for engineering these enzymes to tailor them for specific
              functions.  However, before such engineering efforts can move forward, it is
              necessary to determine the three dimensional structural.  Achieving this goal
              of structue determination using x-ray crystallography is the primary focus of
              this research.
