Title       : Evolution of Complex Life Cycles and Host Relationships in Pemphigine Aphids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9807076

Award Number: 9807076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol D. von Dohlen cvond@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807076  Von Dohlen    Ahids comprise a group of insects that tap plant sap as a
              sole food source.  As a consequence of this feeding mode, aphids have evolved
              sedentary life styles and simplified morphologies; several are devastating
              agricultural pests.  Some groups of aphids also have evolved complicated life
              cycles that incorporate obligate, seasonal migrations between unrelated plant
              hosts over several clonal generations.  In addition, members of these groups
              often induce deformations of their hosts, or galls, with simple to complex
              structure.  This collaborative project joins the expertise of Carol von Dohlen
              (molecular systematics) and two Japanese scientists, Shigeyuki Aoki and Utako
              Kurosu (aphid taxonomy) in applying molecular phylogenetic methods to
              reconstruct the evolutionary history of aphids with complex life cycles. 
              Methods of gene amplification (polymerase chain reaction), cloning, and
              sequencing will be employed to obtain DNA sequences of several genes for
              approximately 63 aphid species.  These data will be used to reconstruct
              evolutionary relationships among the most ancient aphid subfamilies, as well as
              relationships of taxa within the subfamily Pemphiginae.  Specific hypotheses
              concerning the historical transitions between life cycle types, host plants,
              and gall forms will be tested with current methods for reconstructing
              evolutionary trees.  Our research will address questions concerning the number
              of origins of complex life cycles among older aphid lineages, whether such
              cycles may have originated by different mechanisms, whether shifts among
              different host-plant taxa have been few or frequent, and whether origins of
              complex gall structure have led to increased species diversity.  This project
              will increase our understanding of the evolutionary interactions between
              insects and host plants for an insect group whose history has been difficult to
              reconstruct on the basis of morphology.  In addition, it will promote
              intellectual exchange and communication between geographically  remote
              scientists with long-standing, complementary interests and skills.
