Title       : Evolution of Enhancer Function in the Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9807531

Award Number: 9807531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Warr warrgw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry E. Ledford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807531  Warr   Transcriptional control is now recognized to be important for
              all aspects of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene expression: that is, enhancer function
              is important not just for driving functional expression of the gene, but it is
              also essential for the processes of V (D) J recombination, heavy chain class
              switching, and somatic hypermutation of the Ig genes to occur.  The channel
              catfish provides a well-developed and unique model to study the function of Ig
              genes at the phylogenetic level of teleost fish: the immunobiology of this
              species has been extensively studied and well documented, and the Ig genes (for
              mu, delta, and L chains) have all been cloned.  The overall objective of the
              project is to understand the function of the IgH enhancer of the channel
              catfish, which has been shown in prior studies to occupy an unusual position in
              the locus, and to possess an unusually diffuse structure.  The following
              questions will be addressed in this project.  1) Which motifs in the catfish
              enhancer are important in driving transcription?  2) What is the role played by
              Oct1 in driving expression from the promoter-associated octamer found in all VH
              genes (including those of the catfish)?  Is a co-activator such as Bob 1
              involved in the function of Oct1 and Oct2 in the catfish?  3) What is the
              nature of the factors (other than octamer transcription factors) that may drive
              transcription from the catfish enhancer?  The approaches to be employed include
              site-directed mutagenesis to delete individual or multiple motifs (such as
              octamer, muE3, muE5) from the enhancer to determine their contribution to
              function, and the cloning of transcription factors (such as Oct1) and the
              co-activator Bob-1 (a co-activator of Oct transcription factors) from the
              catfish, in order to define their roles in driving transcription of the Ig
              genes at this level of evolution.     Antibodies have two polypeptide chains, a
              heavy chain and a light chain. The expression of heavy chain genes occurs
              largely at the level of transcript ion, the process by which information in DNA
              is copied into mRNA. Transcription is regulated by sequences in the DNA, called
              enhancers, which interact with protein transcription factors. This project is
              investigating the enhancers and transcription factors that regulate the
              expression of antibody heavy chains in catfish.
