Title       : Support for the Tissue Collection of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
               University of California, Berkeley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a9807832

Award Number: 9807832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Cicero ccicero@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Wake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        Abstract                                              
                                 The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) will pursue better 
              curation and improvement of its tissue collection.  This  collection, one of
              the largest in the world, houses over  55,000 samples of genetic material from
              terrestrial  vertebrates.  However, a large backlog of  uncatalogued  material
              (over 25,000 samples) has accumulated as a result  of several uncontrollable
              factors.  In addition, recent  changes in curatorial procedures, made in
              conjunction with  the modeling and development of a powerful new database 
              system, call for the integration and recataloguing of large  series of samples
              that are currently maintained in separate  collections.  Changes in MVZ
              staffing and curation of the  tissue collection will ensure that another
              backlog does not  accumulate and that regular operations of the collection are 
              maintained during and beyond the grant period.    This project will support the
              purchase of new equipment and  supplies for storage and organization of the
              collection, and  a full-time assistant for two years to complete the  following
              tasks:  (1) inventory the entire collection; (2)  cross-reference tissues to
              voucher specimens; (3) assign MVZ  catalog numbers to all samples; (4) label
              vials with the MVZ  number; (5) and reorganize and integrate all samples in the
               collection.  The time frame for completion of the project is  based on
              detailed task analyses.    The proposed project is essential if data from the
              tissue  collection are to be integrated with those of the main  specimen
              collection in the museum-wide database system under  development.  Completion
              of the project will greatly improve  the availability of samples and associated
              data to the  national and international research communities.  Primary  and
              long-term benefits of this project include:  (1)  increased accessibility to
              over 25,000 samples that are now  uncatalogued and uncurated; (2) integration
              of all samples  of a give n taxon, thereby increasing retrievability; (3)  more
              accurate information regarding numbers and types of  samples of each taxon, and
              better tracking of use; (4) up-to-  date information on voucher specimens; (5)
              greater  efficiency in the processing of tissue grants and requests  for
              information; and (6) broader dissemination of data on  samples in the
              collection, including WWW access.  Providing  on-line accessibility to all MVZ
              specimen holdings and  associated data is a vital component of the Museum's
              long-  range plans.
