Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Legality in the Bolivan Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9807836

Award Number: 9807836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Salomon fsalomon@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1093,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project advances knowledge of the ways people at the economic, political,
              and social margins use legal processes to create meanings and identities, and
              contest structures of power that are traditionally self-perpetuation.  The
              research, conduced in and near Sacaca, Bolivia, will be the first in the
              Bolivian Andes to elucidate local legality and to relate the workings of local
              legal processes theoretically to the nation legal structure.  The method has
              tow components  First, a three-stage interviewing process is being employed. 
              Initial interviews seek to establish the existence of disputes over land and
              water.  The list of disputes will then be randomly sampled and in-depth
              interviews will be conducted to create `life histories` of disputes that are
              embedded in the histories of the disputants themselves.  Finally, participant
              observation will be conducted to assess current, unfolding land and water
              disputes.  This research will make theoretical advances by analyzing local
              legal processes and contribute to global understanding of legal phenomenal.  It
              will also contribute to understanding of legal pluralism.  %%%  This project
              advances knowledge of the ways people at the economic, political, and social
              margins use legal processes to create meanings and identities, and contest
              structures of power that are traditionally self-perpetuation.  The research,
              conduced in and near Sacaca, Bolivia, will be the first in the Bolivian Andes
              to elucidate local legality and to relate the workings of local legal processes
              theoretically to the nation legal structure.  The method has tow components 
              First, a three-stage interviewing process is being employed.  Initial
              interviews seek to establish the existence of disputes over land and water. 
              The list of disputes will then be randomly sampled and in-depth interviews will
              be conducted to create `life histories` of disputes that are embedded in the
              histories of the disputants themselves.  Finally, participant observation will
              be conducted to assess current, unfolding land and water disputes.  This
              research will make theoretical advances by analyzing local legal processes and
              contribute to global understanding of legal phenomenal.  It will also
              contribute to understanding of legal pluralism.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
