Title       : Manduca Allatotropin: Gene Expression and Peptide Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9807907

Award Number: 9807907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank M. Horodyski horodysk@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9807907  Horodyski  Neuropeptides are important regulatory molecules that
              control numerous physiological and developmental functions in vertebrates and
              in invertebrates.  As more information is gained concerning the function and
              distribution of neuropeptides, it is clear that many of these molecules have
              multiple biological roles.  The subject of this proposal, Manduca sexta
              allatotropin (Mas-AT), is an insect neuropeptide that performs a completely
              different biological function depending on the developmental time.  A crucial
              unanswered question is how Mas-AT acts on its various target tissues. 
              Specifically, the pattern of Mas-AT gene expression will be examined by Dr.
              Horodyski in different tissues throughout development to show how the synthesis
              of Mas-AT and other peptides may be regulated in different tissues as
              development proceeds.  An assay will be developed to quantify Mas-AT levels in
              nervous tissues, gut, and blood during development.  This will allow him to
              predict the means by which Mas-AT act on its target; whether it is released
              into the blood as a hormone or whether its acts locally at its site of release
              from neurosecretory or endocrine cells.  Finally, the synergistic effect of
              Mas-AT and other identified insect neuropeptides on midgut ion transport will
              be examined.
