Title       : Tracheary Element Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9807801

Award Number: 9807801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Jones alan_jones@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on two important developmental processes occurring during
              the normal differentiation of tracheary elements (TE), namely, the coordination
              of secondary cell wall synthesis with the cell's programmed cell death (PCD).
              Tracheary elements are the cellular corpses that form the water conducting
              vessels of plant xylem.  As TEs develop, they lay down a rigid secondary wall. 
              At the conclusion of this process, death of the developing TE is triggered by
              its own extracytoplasmic signal.  Autolysis of the cytoplasm ensues after
              release of nascent hydrolases, stored in the vacuole, but the synthesis of
              these hydrolases begins well before the new wall is completed.  Strict
              coordination of the PCD and autolysis with wall formation is critical because
              inappropriate timing of cell death would have detrimental effects, not only on
              the function of the developing corpse, but on the entire developing cell flank
              (vessel).  Recent data from the PI's lab support the following model:  prior to
              cell wall formation, hydrolases axe synthesized and sequestered in the vacuole.
              During the final stage of secondary wall synthesis, a 40-kD serine protease is
              secreted and induces the influx of calcium that directly or indirectly
              activates rupture of the tonoplast and subsequent release of the hydrolases. 
              The proposed project will utilize the well-characterized zinnia cell culture
              system to address 3 questions about the terminal events of tracheary element
              differentiation:  What is the protease, and how does the signal trigger cell
              death?  The secreted protease will be partially purified in order to obtain
              internal sequence for cloning the corresponding cDNA.  The protease will be
              expressed in E. coli to analyze its proteolytic activity and in both zinnia
              roots and arabidopsis plants to test its function.  The  cleavage specificity
              will be determined using both the partially purified protease and the
              recombinant protease and artificial and natural substrates.  Arabidopsis
              homologs of the protease will be identified and the effect of regulated
              overexpression will be examined.  For the latter, an estrogen-inducible system
              will be used to control expression.  The extracellular matrix is recognized as
              a store of information directing the development of plant and animal cells but
              how it does this is not understood, especially within a single      
              transduction pathway such as PCD.  The proposed model system has several
              advantages over other systems to now determine the mechanism of signal
              transduction involved in cell differentiation.  Furthermore, the mechanism of
              regulation of PCD in any context is not well understood and the significance of
              these results could have impact on many developmental processes from
              coordination of TE development and wood formation to control of neoplasia. 
              Moreover, this work will address how the extracellular matrix provides signals
              for cellular development and more specifically, how a novel secreted protease
              regulates cell death.
