Title       : UJNR Soil-Structure Interaction Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9807562

Award Number: 9807562
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6875               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet Celebi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9807562  CELEBI    During the design/analysis process for engineered structures,
              it  has been  assumed that the foundation of a structure is fixed to a rigid 
              underlying  medium. In the last four decades, however, it has been recognized 
              that  soil-structure interaction alters the response characteristics of  a 
              structural system. In important engineered structures, detailed  numerical  and
              closed-form-solution methods are applied to perform soil-  structure  analyses.
              To date, the earthquake strong-motion data from  instrumented  buildings are
              insufficient to confirm the validity of the soil-  structure  interaction
              analysis methods and procedures as applied to  structures other  than nuclear
              power plants.    During the May 1997 meeting of the Panel on Wind and Seismic 
              Effects of the  United States Japan Natural Resources Development Program
              (UJNR)  held in  Tsukuba, Japan, it was decided to hold a workshop on Soil- 
              Structure  Interaction (SSI). The purpose of this action is to provide  partial
              support  for the organization this UJNR workshop, to be held in Menlo Park, 
              California, September 1998.    The workshop will bring together experts in the
              field from Japan  and the  United States to discuss various topics, including:
              (a) current  methods of  SSI used in design/analyses processes in both Japan
              and the United  States,  (b) recent researches that are being carried out, (c)
              experimental  SSI  research arrays and/or facilities developed and that are in
              the  process of  being developed and (d) searching for ways to cooperate on
              future  SSI  research.    The benefits of the workshop will be to exchange
              detailed  information and  data on SSI and to provide avenues for the
              development of new  cooperative  research between Japanese and US researchers.
