Title       : Protein Stability During Extreme Metabolic Rate Depression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9807762

Award Number: 9807762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244470             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Clegg jsclegg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Clegg
Most animals die within hours if molecular oxygen is removed from their
              environment.  Even well-adapted species, such as sessile intertidal marine
              invertebrates, rarely survive more than a month of continuous anoxia.  This
              research focuses on encysted embryos of the crustacean, Artemia franciscana,
              who bring their metabolism to a reversible standstill during anoxia, some
              surviving that way for over 6 years, a truly remarkable ability.  The central
              question of this research concerns the stability of their proteins:  how do
              these embryos avoid the predictable unfolding and aggregation of proteins
              during years of anoxia?  Since no protein synthesis or breakdown take place
              during anoxia the replacement and/or removal of defective proteins can not
              occur.  This project extends previous study of a small heat
              shock/alpha-crystallin protein called p26.  Several characteristics of this
              protein, including its presence in massive amounts and its extensive
              intracellular translocation during stress, led to the hypothesis that p26
              represents a major component in the adaptive repertoire of these embryos,
              acting as a molecular chaperone to maintain protein integrity.  To further test
              this hypothesis experiments will be performed on the ability of p26 to
              chaperone a model target protein, citrate synthase (CS) in vitro.  The effects
              of trehalose and glycerol (compatible solutes present in large concentration in
              these embryos) on protein stability and on p26 chaperone activity will also be
              examined, as will the effects of pH, known to be a major regulator of
              metabolism during aerobic-anoxic transitions in Artemia embryos.  Physical
              associations between p26 and the model target, CS, will be sought using
              conventional gel filtration and electrophoretic techniques.  Roles of p26 in
              addition to chaperone activity will also be explored, particularly its
              potential function as a regulator of transcription during aerobic-anoxic
              transitions.  To further evaluate the importance of p26 as a stabilizing
              adaptation, a study will be carried out on the resistance to dehydration stress
              and heat shock in the bacterium Escherichia coli transfected with the gene for
              p26 (and expressing this protein).  Since other stress proteins may be involved
              in the ability of these embryos to endure years of anoxia two other well known
              heat shock protein families, Hsp-70 and Hsp-90 will also be examined and their
              behavior compared to that of p26, particularly with regard to stress-induced
              intracellular translocations, to evaluate the possibility that these stress
              proteins may be acting in concert as "chaperone machines".

A significant
              outcome of this research will be a better understanding of the means by which
              cells in well-adapted animals survive conditions that destroy the vast majority
              of non-adapted ones.  Similarly, this knowledge may provide insight into how
              cells, in general, might be protected against severe stress.  It is possible
              that the abundance and uniqueness of p26 may prove to be of value in
              stabilizing proteins of commercial importance such as vaccines and
              biologically-active, but unstable proteins.  Finally, Artemia is a very
              important food source for a wide variety of aquaculture ventures, some of which
              depend heavily on the use of these embryos and the larvae obtained from them. 
              Knowing more about their basic biology  could result in improved aquacultural
              practices involving their use.

