Title       : Parallel Algorithms for Incomplete Factorization Preconditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9807172

Award Number: 9807172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Pothen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9807172  Pothen    Preconditioning is a technique for improving the convergence
              of  iterative methods for solving  large, sparse systems of linear equations.
              The most robust preconditioners available to date are based on computing
              incomplete factors of the coefficient matrix, i.e., factors  that include only
              a small subset of the nonzero elements created during  the factorization. New
              algorithms for computing incomplete factor preconditioners for unsymmetric and
              symmetric matrices on serial and parallel  computers will be designed and
              implemented in this project. These algorithms have two phases: in the first
              symbolic factorization phase,  the positions in which the incomplete factors
              have nonzeros are identified, and data structures for the incomplete factors 
              are set up. In the second numerical factorization phase, these  data structures
              are used to compute the numerical values of the preconditioners in time
              proportional to the number of arithmetic  operations. Without the first
              symbolic factorization phase, the second phase   cannot be implemented 
              efficiently. The new symbolic factorization algorithms rely on a structure
              theory developed for identifying the positions in which the incomplete factors
              have  nonzero elements. The nonzero  elements in the incomplete factors are
              identified from the path structure  of  a graph model of the problem. Two graph
              reduction techniques, transitive reduction and symmetric reduction, are used to
              reduce the data needed to predict the fill, and thereby to  obtain fast
              symbolic factorization algorithms. The new algorithms can be proven to require
              less time  than the currently used algorithm, and preliminary implementations
              show that they  are faster by an order of magnitude or more  in problems with
              high fill.       Methods for solving large, sparse, linear systems of equations
              are workhorses for  solving partial differential equations from scientific and
              engineering models. Hence these fields will benefit from the algorithms and
              software developed in this pro ject. These  preconditioners will be used to
              solve specifically the Helmholtz problem in acoustics and Maxwell's equations
              in computational electromagnetics. The software developed from this project
              will be integrated with the PETSc (Portable, Extensible Toolkit for Scientific
              Computing) package  from Argonne National Laboratories for wide dissemination.
