Title       : Cellular Mechanisms of Activation and Control of Complex Behavior by Peptidergic
               Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9807914

Award Number: 9807914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl Mayeri earl@phy.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9807914  Cellular mechanisms of Activation and Control of
              Complex Behavior by  Peptidergic Neuron    Peptidergic  neuroendocrine neurons
              are activated when an  animal  makes  prolonged  contact  with  a  mass of eggs
               laid  by  other  individuals.  Activation  of  these neurons in the central
              nervous  system,  in  turn,  results in a sequence of behaviors in the same
              individual, including egg  laying, mating as a female during egg laying, and
              mating as a male after  egg  laying. This process in which a sign stimulus
              (possibly a  chemical  stimulus in the egg mass) leads to a sequence of
              behaviors has parallels  to   genetically   determined,  instinctive  behavior 
              associated   with  reproduction  in  other animals. This preparation  is 
              advantageous  for  detailed investigation since activity of the peptidergic
              neurons can  be  monitored in both reduced experimental preparations and intact
               animals,  and  their  effects on neuronal circuits and relationships to
              behavioral  control  can  be  investigated at the cellular and molecular 
              levels  in  considerable   detail.   One  goal  is  to  describe   in   detail 
               how  neurotransmitters released from the peptidergic neurons affect  neuronal 
              circuits controlling locomotion and feeding during the behaviors. As  in  other
               animals,  there appears to be an internal drive for  reproductive  behavior, 
              in  which the threshold for induction of egg  laying  by  the  releasing
              stimulus in the egg mass changes according to the reproductive  cycle.  An 
              idea  we  wish  to test further is  that  the  physiological  properties  of 
              the  peptidergic neurons  and  cells  that  excite  them  constitute  the 
              neural mechanism for the internal drive.  The  research  should  result  in  a 
              clearer understanding  of  the  contributions  of  peptidergic  neural systems
              to neural regulation of complex, genetically  determined behaviors. The
              principles of organization and control by this  neural  system  may  be useful
              for understanding fundamental   mechanisms  that underlie complex behavior in
              higher forms.
