Title       : A Posteriori Error Estimates for Discontinuous Finite Element Methods Applied to
               Problems in Geosciences and Medicine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9807491

Award Number: 9807491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154500             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Bernardo Cockburn cockburn@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1339,9183,9198,9216,9263,BIOT,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Cockburn
      The investigator and his colleague Bernardo Cockburn, in a
              collaborative project, develop adaptive numerical methods for problems with
              moving interfaces and long-time dynamics.  These problems incorporate multiple
              temporal and spatial scales.  Finite element methods have long been used for
              solving partial differential equations.  Recently, methods using discontinuous
              approximating spaces have become popular, especially for nonsteady
              convection-diffusion problems.  Two such methods are the local discontinuous
              Galerkin method (LDG) and the Godunov-mixed method (GMM), developed by the
              investigators and their collaborators.  These methods have the advantage that
              they are based on local conservation and approximate shocks and sharp gradients
              with no spurious oscillations, which is important in many convection-diffusion
              applications.  They also lend themselves to parallel computation.  Both methods
              have been implemented computationally, and a priori error estimates have been
              derived; however, no adaptive strategies based on these methods have been
              developed.  It has long been recognized that adapting the finite element mesh
              and time-step during a simulation is desirable for obtaining an accurate
              solution.  In order to successfully adapt the mesh to guarantee that the actual
              error is below a given tolerance, it is essential to develop a posteriori error
              estimates that measure the actual error as a funtion of the mesh, time step and
              the computed solution.  While a substantial literature exists for such
              estimates for steady problems and conforming finite element spaces, little
              research has been done for nonsteady problems and discontinuous methods. In
              this project, the investigators and their colleagues develop a posteriori
              estimates for the LDG and GMM methods for convection-diffusion equations, with
              emphasis on three important applications: shallow water flow, chemically
              reactive transport in porous media and surface water, and the modeling of brain
              tumor cell growth and treatment.  The basis for these estimates is the
              so-called approximate adjoint equation methodology; however, other ad-hoc
              methods which may potentially be more efficient are also investigated.  These
              estimates are novel for the applications as well as the numerical methods.

 
                  The applications of interest are important to industry, government
              laboratories and departments, and state agencies. Modeling of flow patterns in
              shallow water systems (e.g. bays and estuaries) is important for understanding,
              for instance, the environmental impacts of oil spills and the economic impacts
              of dredging, and can also be useful in tracking storm surges during hurricanes
              and other extreme weather events.  Modeling of transport of chemical species in
              groundwater and surface water is important for understanding waste disposal and
              pollution remediation.  The modeling of brain tumors can be useful in
              predicting tumor growth and examining potential treatments. These applications,
              though varied, share common mathematical characteristics and can utilize
              similar numerical simulation methodologies.  Lacking for these applications and
              methodologies are sound, mathematically based tools for controlling and
              adapting the simulations to meet specific accuracy criteria of interest to the
              user; that is, criteria which can be used to determine whether a numerical
              simulation actually reflects physical reality.  The goals of this project are
              to develop such criteria for making the simulations efficient, accurate and
              physically realistic, and to train future researchers in the underlying
              mathematics, computational science and multidisciplinary aspects of the
              applications.  

