Title       : RUI: Isolation and Characterization of Mating Impaired Mutants in the Fungus
               Ustilago maydis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9807807

Award Number: 9807807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Snetselaar ksnetsel@sju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Snetselaar
9807807
This project focuses on generating and characterizing
              mutants of the plant-pathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis  that are impaired in
              their ability to mate. Mating involves a transition from yeast-like to
              filamentous growth, followed by growth along a pheromone gradient. The mutants
              will provide a tool for understanding the genetic basis of this complex
              developmental phenomenon. Specifically, mutations are being induced in haploid
              cells of U. maydis using either treatment with ultraviolet radiation or the
              chemical mutagen ethylmethanesulfonate. Mutagenized cells will be screened for
              their ability to mate with a compatible cell type, as evidenced by the
              formation of macroscopically visible infection structures. The production of
              these structures, termed the Fuz+ response, demonstrates the ability of the
              cell to mate and form an infection filament that would subsequently invade 
              plant tissue.
Previous attempts to isolate mating mutants in U. maydis have
              focused exclusively on those which are completely sterile (Fuz-) with the
              compatible wild-type cells. These studies will be extended  by also screening
              for mutants that are unable to mate when crossed with a mating impaired mutant,
              mim1. The mim1 mutation reduces the efficiency at which cells fuse with their
              compatible partners. Preliminary results show that there are many mutants that,
              while they are Fuz+ and fully able to mate with wild-type partners, are Fuz-
              and unable to mate with the mim1 mutant. Thus, the mim1 mutant allows the
              isolation of many mating-impaired mutants that otherwise would not be detected.
              
Mating impaired mutants will be characterized in a number of ways. Several
              microscopic techniques, including mating assays employing drops of cells on
              slides covered with water agar, will be employed to determine at what stage of
              mating the mutants are blocked. Mutants blocked at a number of steps including:
              mating filament formation and growth, orientation of the mating filament to the
              compatible partner cell, fusion of the mating filaments, and formation of the
              infection filament should be isolated.  Where possible, mutants will be crossed
              with compatible wild-type cells and used to infect corn plants. Phenotypic
              analysis of the progeny from these crosses will allow the determination of the
              number of loci involved, their linkage to other known genes, and their patterns
              of inheritance.
Mutants with interesting phenotypes will be complemented at
              the molecular level using a plasmid library containing genomic DNA from
              wild-type U. maydis and the complementing DNA sequenced and analyzed. The
              sequences obtained will be compared to those in databases such as Genbank to
              search for homologies to known genes.
This mutant hunt combines elements of
              classical and molecular genetics with a variety of techniques for morphological
              characterization in an extremely interesting developmental system. The research
              will be carried out primarily by undergraduate students jointly supervised by
              the PIs. The project has been designed to provide students with experience
              using techniques that integrate genetic, molecular, and observational
              approaches to studying development. Preliminary results show that the mutant
              screening and characterization strategies are sound, and they indicate that
              this project will provide insight into mechanisms that govern yeast-filament
              dimorphism and chemotaxis. These behaviors occur in a variety of fungi,
              including many important plant pathogens.


