Title       : Improving Research Access to the Comparative Zooarchaeology Collections of the
               Arizona State Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a9807717

Award Number: 9807717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lane A. Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Stiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Arizona State Museum at the University of Arizona holds two important
              comparative faunal collections. One, assembled over many years by Dr. Stanley
              Olsen was obtained through many government and government-regulates sources and
              include, for example, road killed animals and donations by zoos of deceased
              animals. A second collection was assembled from similar sources by the National
              Park Service. Thus species identities are known. Together the materials include
              not only a wide range of mammals but also fish, birds and reptiles. Currently
              the materials are poorly stored and catalogued and therefore it is difficult
              for researchers to use them.  The Arizona State Museum has renovated laboratory
              space for the collections and with National Science Foundation support Drs.
              Beck and Stiner will: purchase new storage cabinets to facilitate access to the
              materials; complete anatomical and taxonomic inventorying and labeling; clean
              the many skeletons which have adhering grease, dust and other organic matter;
              and finally create a user-friendly computerized cataloging system which will
              both help researchers and also ensure that the collections are protected from
              improper handling.  Non-human faunal remains are common in many archaeological
              sites and this is particularly true in the US Southwest where dry conditions
              lead, in many sites, to excellent bone preservation. Such materials are
              extremely important to archaeologists because they serve as indicators which
              allow the reconstruction of past environments. Most bones recovered in
              archaeological contexts are food remains and result from hunting and herding
              activities. Through their analysis it is possible to reconstruct the diets and
              subsistence practices of past groups and, in many instances, gain insight into
              their economic and social systems as well. To conduct such analyses comparative
              skeletal material of known species is essential and the Arizona State Museum
              faunal collections are scientifically important in this context. They contain a
              wide range of species from North and Middle America and, although difficult to
              access at the present time,  they have still seen extensive archaeological use.
              This grant will improve their availability significantly.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
