Title       : The Blue Crab Exoskeleton-A Model System for Studying the Control of
               Biomineralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9807804

Award Number: 9807804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Roer roer@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Shafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Dillaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mineralized structures are found in most groups of animals.  Biominerals are
              associated with bones, teeth, sponge spicules, and shells of molluscs,
              crustaceans and echinoderms to name but a few.  Biomineralization is also
              associated with such pathological conditions as atherosclerosis, kidney stones
              and tumors.  In most groups the minerals are salts of calcium and in all cases
              the minerals are associated with organic molecules.  The organic molecules are
              involved in initiating, guiding and regulating the growth of the mineral
              crystals in all of these systems.  These organic molecules are often proteins. 
              Recently, Dr. Roer and others have found that some of these proteins associated
              with biomineralization have sugars attached to them and are referred to as
              glycoproteins.  It is also becoming apparent that changes in the sugars
              associated with the glycoproteins may play a role in controlling
              biomineralization.

He has chosen the exoskeleton of the blue crab,
              Callinectes sapidus, as a model system for studying the role of glycoproteins
              in controlling biomineralization.  The crab is ideal for such studies, in large
              part, because crabs must molt in order to grow.  In preparation for the molt,
              crabs form the outer layers of their new exoskeleton beneath the old one.  The
              new shell must stay soft until the crab emerges from the old shell and expands.
              Only then does the new shell begin to harden.  He thus has a tissue that is
              incapable of mineralizing at one point in time which then turns on
              mineralization within one to three hours after it molts.  This phenomenon
              allows him to analyze the tissue in both states and understand the changes in
              the glycoproteins that are responsible for turning on mineralization. These
              results will have general application to other mineralizing tissues.

