Title       : Synthesis and Applications of Alpha-Aminophosphonothioic 
Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9807469

Award Number: 9807469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Thompson cmthomp@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Charles M.  
              Thompson, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Montana,  
              studies the synthesis and applications of alpha-aminophosphonothioic   acids
              (APTA's).  APTA's are a new class of molecules in which the   carboxylic acid
              group of an alpha-amino acid has been replaced by a   phosphonothioic acid
              moiety.  The APTA's are chiral at phosphorus and   additionally can display
              tautomerization between the P(O)SH and P(S)OH   forms.  Professor Thompson is
              developing new synthetic routes for the   preparation of  APTA's in both
              racemic and nonracemic form, relying on   the addition of thiophosphites to
              imines, aza-Claisen rearrangement, and   alkylation of 1,3-N,C-dianions derived
              from phosphonates.  In addition,   he exploits the tautomeric equilibrium to
              generate a site for disulfide   bond formation, offering the possibility of
              peptide intra-strand and   inter-chain linkage and the generation of novel
              beta-sheet structures in   synthetic peptides incorporating APTA's.  The
              ability of APTA's to serve   as asymmetric transition state analog inhibitors
              and to serve as central   elements in molecular systems designed to display
              marked conformational   changes upon metal ion complexation are also under
              exploration.    Replacement of the amino acids in biological proteins with
              `unnatural`   amino acids or functionally related derivatives offers the
              possibility of   modifying and controlling the structure and reactivity of
              proteins.  With   the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor
              Charles M.   Thompson, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Montana,   carries out the synthesis and study of unusual amino acid analogs
              known   as alpha-aminophosphonothioic acids (APTA's), in which a P(O)SH group  
              replaces the C(O)OH group found in amino acids.  The incorporation of   APTA's
              in model protein structures allows the use of the pendant sulfur   atoms to
              effect the linking of protein chains, affording access to novel   protein
              architectures.  Professor Thompson also explores the possibility   that
              APTA-containing proteins may function as inhibitors for various   enzymes, and
              additionally uses APTA's as central elements in the design   of molecules
              designed to undergo extreme changes in molecular form upon   interaction with
              metal ions.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
