Title       : Ribosomal Protein L3 and -1 Ribosomal Frameshifting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9807890

Award Number: 9807890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Dinman dinmanjd@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807890
Dinman
The ability to maintain the correct translational reading frame
              is a critical requirement for ribosomes.  However, there are a number of
              examples in which elongating ribosomes are induced to shift into a new
              translational reading frame.  The study of these 'programmed ribosomal
              frameshifts' is important both because of the critical role that they play in
              the morphogenesis of a number of clinically significant viruses, and because of
              how they can be used to illuminate the underlying molecular mechanisms that are
              involved in regulating the fidelity of protein synthesis.  The mechanism of
              programmed ribosomal frameshifting in the -1 (3') direction is well conserved
              between mammalian cells and yeast.  Thus, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
              with its powerful molecular genetics, the ability to perform biochemical
              analysis, and the availability of the sequence of  the whole genome has been
              the organism of choice to characterize the mechanism of programmed -1 ribosomal
              frameshifting.  The investigators have utilized the endogenous yeast L-A and M1
              'killer' virus system as a model system to this end.  Recent studies have led
              them to focus on the peptidyl-transfer step of translational elongation as
              playing a critical role in determining the efficiency of programmed -1
              ribosomal frameshifting.  RPL3 encodes ribosomal protein L3, a protein that
              functions at the ribosome's peptidyl-transferase center, and they have
              characterized two alleles of RPL3 that promote altered frameshifting
              efficiencies and inhibit virus propagation.  Two different classes of rpl3
              mutants are being characterized: an allele first identified more than 20 years
              ago called mak8-2, and a plasmid-borne gene fragment that encodes the
              N-terminal ? of the wild-type L3 protein (100 amino acids) that is called L3D. 
              The investigators have shown that both of these alleles promote increased
              programmed -1 ribosomal frameshift efficiencies and foster rapid loss of the M1
              dsRNA satellite virus.  Thus, the primary objective of this project is to
              investigate the role of ribosomal protein L3 in programmed -1 ribosomal
              frameshifting.  Specifically, the mutant rpl3 alleles will be characterized at
              the genetic and molecular levels, with an eye toward defining the molecular
              mechanism underlying the observed effects of mutant rpl3 alleles on programmed
              -1 ribosomal frameshifting.
Many viruses utilize a molecular mechanism called
              "programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting" for the production of specialized viral
              proteins.  The investigators have previously demonstrated that interfering with
              the host cellular machinery that directs this process interferes with the
              ability of these viruses to replicate and infect new cells.  The investigator's
              research has led them to focus on one specific step in the protein synthetic
              program as playing a critical role in programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting. 
              Specifically, they have found that cells having mutations in a cellular gene
              called RPL3 have altered programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting and cannot
              propagate a virus that depends on this mechanism.  Their current research
              focuses on characterizing a series of RPL3 mutants at the genetic and molecular
              levels.  These mutants will help define the mechanism of -1 ribosomal
              frameshifting and may identify potential new targets for antiviral agents. 

