Title       : Dissertation Research: Understanding Pastoral Land Use in East Africa - An
               Interdisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9807140

Award Number: 9807140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monique Borgerhoff Mulder mborgerhoffmulder@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project by a cultural anthropology student at the
              University of California-Davis studies land use of pastoral households in
              Tanzania.  The student will combine perspectives from studies of individual
              decision making and cultural ecology to quantify the effects of different
              constraints on land use within pastoral households.  An individual-based
              spatial model of grazing intensity will be constructed.  The advantage of an
              individual-based model is that it captures the variability identified at the
              household level and incorporates this information in characterizing landscape
              scale patterns of land use.  Woody and herbaceous vegetation will be sampled
              across a gradient of grazing intensity, and the productivity of herds using
              areas with different grazing intensities will be monitored.  Vegetation data
              will show resource availability and measures of productivity will address
              whether density dependent feedback affect pastoral production.  This research
              will contribute a relatively rare analysis of individual variability in
              pastoral land use practices, and will advance the quantitative study of
              constraints on pastoral land use.  By integrating household decisions,
              aggregated patterns of land use, and ecological outcomes, the proposed research
              will provide a more complete picture of the dynamics pastoral land use systems.
               The research also benefits the training of a young social scientist and
              advances our knowledge of this important region of the world.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
