Title       : Roles of Microtubule-Associated Motor Proteins in Mitosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9807829

Award Number: 9807829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Aist JRA2@CORNELL.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olen C. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Gillian Turgeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807829  Aist    Cell division, with its concomitant uniform distribution of
              genetic material between daughter cells, is absolutely fundamental to all life
              processes.  The part of the cell division process in eukaryotes whereby the
              genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, becomes evenly distributed
              between the two daughter cells is called mitosis.  During the mitotic process,
              the chromosomes become condensed and collect halfway between the poles of the
              spindle, a microtubular array so named because of its shape.  The chromosomes
              become attached to the ends of specialized microtubules within the spindle.  As
              a result of microtubule-based chemomechanical movements mediated by motor
              proteins known as dyneins, the chromosomes separate into two groups and move
              toward the spindle poles, from each of which another set of microtubules,
              termed asters, radiate.  The phase of mitosis during which this migration
              toward the poles occurs is termed anaphase.     The objective of this project
              is to determine how forces that move the mitotic apparatus and its attached
              chromosomes are generated.  The filamentous ascomycete, Nectria haematococca
              (a.k.a. Fusarium solani), has been chosen for study because it is the most
              cytologically tractable fungus which is also amenable to both conventional and
              molecular genetic technologies.  It is the only organism in which both astral
              pulling forces and spindle pushing forces have been demonstrated experimentally
               to occur in vivo; both of these forces contribute to chromosome separation
              during anaphase B.  The time-course and ultrastructural details of mitosis have
              been determined.  Four microtubule-associated motor protein genes have been
              cloned and sequenced, and one role of the cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain gene
              in mitosis has been demonstrated.  The continuing goal is to use the superior
              cytological and optical properties of N. haematococca to further ascertain the
              roles of these motor proteins by direct observation of mitosis in vivo.  The
              strategy is to destroy t he function of each cloned gene by site-specific
              mutation in the genome and then to observe the in vivo mitotic phenotypes
              caused by each mutation.  With each motor protein, the hypothesis that
              elimination or overproduction will alter the rate of mitotic movements will be
              tested.  Laser microbeam experiments will then be used as a confirmation of the
              suspected roles of the motor proteins in mitotic force generation. 
              Additionally, each motor protein will be localized in the mitotic apparatus in
              vivo using green fluorescent protein - motor protein fusions, and the polarity
              of force produced by the kinesin-related proteins will be determined using in
              vitro motility assays.      The project represents a rare opportunity to
              correlate specific motor proteins with in vivo demonstrated mitotic forces of
              known polarity and location.  The strategy of testing functional inferences by
              performing laser microbeam experiments on mutants is unique to this project and
              should lead to unequivocal conclusions as to which motor protein is responsible
              for which mitotic force.  Thus, the project has the potential to be the first
              to fully elucidate the molecular basis of both the astral pulling force and the
              spindle pushing and counter forces.  In doing so, it would contribute
              substantially to our understanding of the mechanisms of mitosis, which is
              fundamental to all growth and development in eukaryotes.
