Title       : Competition & Biodiversity in Heterogeneous Landscapes: Model Simplification
               through Moment Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9807755

Award Number: 9807755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Pacala steve@eno.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon A. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia M. Neuhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pacala
9807755
     The primary goal of this project is to
              interpret
analytically the effects of spatial environmental heterogeneity
on
              the community dynamics and biodiversity of ecological systems.
Simulation
              models and experimental studies have convincingly
demonstrated the importance
              of endogenous and exogenous spatial
heterogeneity, such as variation in
              resource supply rate or
topography, to the coexistence and the maintenance of
              diversity
in ecological communities.  However, both mathematicians
              and
ecologists still lack analytic understanding of the mechanisms
operating,
              particularly in fully spatial, stochastic
environments.  The investigators
              extend existing analyses of the
effects of heterogeneity by using a wide range
              of models (from
metapopulation models to interacting particle systems and
              point
processes); they develop moment approximations, which express
spatial
              population dynamics in terms of mean densities and
covariances, to simplify
              the analysis while preserving both
exogenous and endogenous heterogeneity. 
              The study uses moment
approximations, and more standard techniques, to analyze
              the
effects of environmental heterogeneity, endogenous heterogeneity,
and
              their interaction on population dynamics and competitive
outcomes in
              ecological models of plant and marine intertidal
communities.
     Field
              ecologists have long known that small-scale
variability in environmental
              factors such as soils or temperature
can affect the structure and diversity of
              ecological communities
--- which and how many species can live together in a
              region.
Ecological modellers, however, have often found simple
explanations
              for small-scale spatial patterns of biodiversity,
caused by interactions
              between plants or animals (such as
competition or predation), that ignore
              environmental variability.
Computer simulation models have recently gone a
              long way toward
reconciling these two camps, but (1) simulations show
              that
patterns occur, but do not always explain why; and (2) even
powerful
              computers have limits (it could be foolhardy, for
example, to attempt to
              simulate every tree on a continent in
order to predict the effects of global
              climate change).  This
study develops simple mathematical models that combine
              spatial
variability caused by interactions between organisms with
              spatial
variability caused by the environment to explore how these two
kinds
              of variability affect the structure and diversity of
communities.  The results
              from these simple models will eventually
show how to build more complex and
              realistic models that can
predict patterns of biodiversity and ecosystem
              productivity, and
will provide a much more general understanding of how
              variability
in the environment leads to diversity in ecological
              communities.


