Title       : SGER: Electrophysiological Survey of Avian Hippocampal Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9807476

Award Number: 9807476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Verner P. Bingman vbingma@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9807476  Bingman    A large body of research has established the crucial role
              of  the  hippocampus  in learning and memory.  In  animals,  the  hippocampus 
              is  particularly important for  learning  about  space.  Of special interest
              are electrophysiological studies  in  rats  that  have  demonstrated the
              existence  of  "place  cells", cells that respond when an animal is in a
              particular  location in its environment.  It is generally believed  that  these
               place  cells participate in the neural representation  (map)  of 
              environmental  space  that  enables  animals   to  efficiently  navigate  among
               goal  locations.   Given   the  importance of this research for understanding
              brain/behavior  relations, it is surprising that place cells have only  been 
              intensively  studied in rats.  But to  what  extent  do  the  properties  of 
              place  cells in  rats  generalize  to  other  vertebrate  species and to what
              extent are they a  necessary  design    feature    of   hippocampal    mediated
                 spatial  representations?   The  proposed  research  is  designed  to 
              investigate  the possible existence and eventual  properties  of   cells  in 
              the  bird  hippocampus  that  display  space  specificity  (i.e.  place-like
              cells).  Electrophysiological  recordings of single units in the hippocampus
              will be  taken  from  pigeons  allowed  to freely  move  in  an  open  field 
              environment.   Unit  activity data will then  be  correlated  with  
              simultaneously  recorded  location  information  from  pigeons to determine if
              a unit responds preferentially  when  a pigeon is in a particular location. 
              The data will then be  used  to  determine whether rats and pigeons,  species 
              that  have  a  hippocampus used for spatial learning but otherwise  very 
              different  in terms of lifestyle, behavior  and  brain  organization, represent
              space similarly at the neural level.  The  study  could  fundamentally  change 
              how  we  view  the  hippocampus  and the spatial representations it 
              constructs,  the   environmental/beha vioral  features  that  control  the 
              activity  of  hippocampal cells, and the  evolution  of  the  relationship
              between brain and cognition.
