Title       : The Role of the Zebrafish Diwanka Gene in Motor Axon Guidance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9807933

Award Number: 9807933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Granato granatom@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807933  GRANATO    The enormous amount of information processed in the nervous
              system is dependent on a complex network of trillions of neuronal connections. 
              These neural connections are formed during embryogenesis, when neurons extend
              axonal projections to their targets.  Axonal growth occurs in a highly precise
              and stereotypic fashion.  The objective of this project is to determine the
              cellular and molecular mechanisms by which motor axons extend out from the
              spinal cord to reach their distant muscle targets.  The laboratory of Dr.
              Granato uses the zebrafish (Danio rerio) to investigate molecular and cellular
              aspects of axonal growth and guidance. Dr. Granato has previously isolated
              mutations in over 30 genes with diverse functions in neurons that are part of
              the neuronal circuits mediating locomotion.  This project focuses on one of
              these genes, called diwanka.  In diwanka mutant embryos, the axons from motor
              neurons in the trunk region of the fish fail to extend to their muscle targets,
              whereas other axonal projections are unaffected by mutations in the diwanka
              gene.  This suggests that the diwanka gene plays a crucial and specific role in
              guiding motor axons.  In the current experiments, Dr. Granato will investigate
              where in the long motor axonal pathway from the spinal cord to specific muscles
              targets the diwanka gene is required.  He will also determine if the diwanka
              gene functions as a muscle derived cue to attract motor axons.  Finally, he
              will use molecular methods to uncover the precise chromosomal region of the
              diwanka gene.  Results from the project will enhance our understanding how
              axons migrate towards their distant targets and will also provide the tools to
              uncover the molecular identity of the diwanka gene.  These experiments are
              likely to reveal unknown molecules and mechanisms involved in the precise
              guidance of axons to their targets.
