Title       : POWRE: The Calvin Cycle: Evolution and Catalytic Function of Phosphoribulo
               Kinase in a Marine Chromophyte
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9807675

Award Number: 9807675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose Ann Cattolico racat@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Cattolico
The Calvin cycle, the biological process by which carbon in
              atmospheric CO2  is converted into carbohydrate, has functioned in
              photo-oxygenic cells for over 3.5 billion years. Phosphoribulokinase (PRK) acts
              as a throttle that governs the progression of this biochemical pathway. The
              goal of this project is to probe the evolutionary origin and catalytic function
              of PRK in the chromophytic alga Heterosigma carterae. Chromophytic plants
              contribute extensively to global CO2 cycling, and currently there is no
              biochemical information on PRK in this group of organisms. The formation of
              toxic and noxious algal blooms world-wide  by Heterosigma carterae, a
              golden-brown alga, is another reason that understanding the biology  of this
              organism  is  so important to mankind.

During the term of this award the
              investigator's laboratory will finish sequencing the gene for Heterosigma PRK. 
              Through homology modeling the investigator will identify residues likely to be
              crucial for enzymatic function; in the future these amino acids will be
              mutagenized to determine their effects on function.  In addition, the enzyme
              will be characterized.  The Heterosigma PRK gene will be over-expressed  in
              yeast  to produce large quantities of the enzyme.  An assay for PRK activity
              will be developed and used in measuring the effects of temperature, pH,
              inhibitors, and substrates. These studies, when complete, will form a reference
              database for PRK function in chromophytic plants.

 This is a POWRE project. 
              During the sabbatical supported by this award, the investigator will have the
              opportunity to learn new techniques and to become more familiar with the
              culture and needs of scientific companies.  The new knowledge will enhance  the
              investigator's own research and her value as a mentor and as a contributor to
              the university community.  

