Title       : The Dynamic Regulation in Copper Ion Homeostasis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9807786

Award Number: 9807786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiwu Zhu zhu@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807786
Zhu
Copper ion is essential yet toxic for all living organisms.
              Because of this dual nature, cells must posses a dynamic homeostasis to
              maintain a proper cellular level of copper ion:  not too low to cause
              deficiency and not too high to cause toxicity. What is the molecular mechanism
              of dynamic copper ion homeostasis? This is still a fundamental question to be
              addressed. Therefore, it is absolutely critical to understand copper ion
              homeostatic mechanisms. The goal of this project is, using yeast as a model
              system, to study the dynamic regulation of copper ion homeostasis. Yeast cells
              carry out similar biochemical reactions to those required in humans, and copper
              ion homeostatic mechanisms are largely conserved among yeast, human and other
              divergent species. In yeast, copper ion uptake and transport under
              physiological conditions is regulated by a putative copper ion-sensing protein,
              Mac 1p. Recent studies have shown that Mac lp also responds to toxic levels of
              copper ions through an uncharacterized mechanism of regulated protein
              degradation. Mac lp degradation is a new mechanism in copper ion homeostasis.
              The differential functions of Mac lp under physiological and toxic copper ion
              conditions reflect the dynamic biological nature of copper ions. Therefore,
              understanding Mac lp functions will be instrumental in determining molecular
              mechanism of dynamic copper ion homeostasis. This project, using a combination
              of molecular biological, chemical and biochemical methods, will to determine
              the precise molecular mechanisms of Mac lp functions. These approaches will be
              applied to achieve two specific aims: (1) to further characterize how Mac lp
              responds differentially to physiological and toxic levels of copper ions, (2)
              to elucidate the biochemical mechanisms of Mac 1p sensing and differentiating
              physiological and toxic levels of copper ions. The outcomes of this research
              will make fundamental contributions to understanding of the molecular mechanism
              of dynamic copper ion homeostasis. The results will also provide critical
              insights into the fields of metal ions in biology and regulated protein
              degradation.






