Title       : A Global Regulon in E. Coli Controlled by the Leucine- Responsive Regulatory
               Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9807237

Award Number: 9807237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $657025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rowena G. Matthews matthew@umocj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Blumenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Matthews
9807237
The recent explosion in genomic sequence information has now
              made it possible to know all, or at least a large proportion, of the proteins
              produced by a given organism (i.e., its "proteome"). However, these organisms
              do not live in static environments, and the differential expression of specific
              proteins under different conditions can result in profound physiological
              differences between two genetically-identical cells in distinct environments.
              The next major challenge in meaningfully understanding genomic information is
              to understand not only gene- and operon-specific regulation, but also how
              regulation is integrated so as to give a coordinated response to environmental
              changes. To study global regulation, this project focuses on a model regulatory
              protein in a model organism; it studies global regulation of metabolism in
              Escherichia coli, focusing on regulation involving the leucine-responsive
              regulatory protein (Lrp). E. coil is an ideal model organism, since so much is
              known about it and the sequence of its genome has been determined. Lrp is a
              good model regulator for these studies as it controls so many genes and operons
              and can generate diverse patterns of regulation.

Genes that are regulated by
              Lrp will be identified by genetic methods and by a method that combines
              two-dimensional (2-D) gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Refinement of
              the methodology to identify polypeptides in 2-D gels using mass spectrometry is
              expected to contribute significantly to analysis of proteomes. In another use
              of 2D gel electrophoresis, sequential analyses of protein expression following
              shifts in growth conditions will be used to monitor changes in the patterns of
              protein expression in isogenic strains containing or lacking Lrp. In this way,
              the contribution of Lrp to regulation of protein expression following exposure
              of cells to high osmolarity environments or to entry into stationary phase can
              be assessed, and additional proteins whose expression is regulated by Lrp may
              be identified.

In addition to these studies of the global roles of Lrp,
              studies of its molecular mechanism of transcriptional activation will also be
              continued. These studies have focused on regulation by Lrp of the gltBDF
              operon, which specifies an enzyme central to ammonia assimilation -- glutamate
              synthase. Employing hybrids between the well-characterized lacUV5 promoter
              region from the lac operon and the gltBDF promoter region, the elements
              necessary for Lrp-dependent transcription of a gene will be defined in vivo.
              Once the in vivo studies are complete, the results will be used to develop an
              in vitro transcription system for gltBDF. The nucleoprotein complex formed when
              Lrp binds the gltBDF promoter region has been visualized using scanning force
              microscopy, and these studies will continue. In vitro transcription and 
              scanning force microscopy will synergistically test models for transcriptional
              regulation by Lrp that have been developed during the previous periods of NSF
              support.

These studies should illuminate the means by which a simple dimeric
              helix-turn-helix DNA-binding protein can alter the expression of so many genes
              and operons in such a wide variety of ways. Lrp can either activate or repress
              transcription of target genes, and its co-regulator leucine can alter both its
              affinity for target promoters and its efficacy as an activator or repressor
              once bound. These studies should, at a specific level, assist in understanding
              the role of Lrp and the genes it regulates in coordinating complex
              physiological responses of E. coli cells to changes in their environment. At a
              general level these studies should further understanding of how genomes
              actually function.

