Title       : The Evolutionary Genetics of an Adaptive Maternal Effect: Egg Size Plasticity in
               a Seed Beetle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9807315

Award Number: 9807315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Fox  9807315    In many organisms, a female's environment provides a
              reliable indicator of  the environmental conditions that her progeny will
              encounter.  In such  cases, maternal effects may evolve as mechanisms for
              trans-generational  phenotypic plasticity, whereby, in response to a predictive
              environmental  cue (such high or low host density, short or long photoperiod),
              a mother can change the type of eggs that she makes, or can program a
              developmental  switch in her offspring, producing offspring prepared for the
              environmental  conditions predicted by the cue.  These maternal effects often
              have a  genetic basis, and appear to be adaptive in many organisms.  Yet little
              is  understood about the evolutionary genetics of maternal effects or the
              nature  and consequences of selection on maternal effects, such that the
              potential  for them to respond to natural selection remains largely
              speculative.  This  proposal describes a series of experiments designed to test
              hypotheses that  explain the evolution of egg size, egg number, and egg size
              plasticity (an  apparently adaptive maternal effect) in a seed beetle, Stator
              limbatus.  Specifically, this research will (1) quantify the sources of this
              phenotypic  variation (genetic, maternal, paternal, and environmental) in egg
              size and  egg size plasticity within populations of S. limbatus; (2) test the 
              hypothesis that selection for improved survivorship when larvae develop on 
              seeds of Cercidium floridum (blue paloverde) results in the evolution of 
              larger egg size; (3) test the hypothesis that selection for increased 
              fecundity results in the evolution of smaller egg size; (4) test the 
              hypothesis that the evolution of egg size plasticity is constrained by the 
              genetic correlation between the size of eggs laid in response to Acacia 
              greggii (catclaw acacia) and the size of eggs laid on C. floridum; (5) test 
              the hypothesis that the genetic correlation across hosts evolves in response 
              to selection on egg size and egg size plasticity.    Maternal effe cts are
              ubiquitous in nature; they are important in generating  many of the phenotypic
              patterns and population dynamics that we observe, and  are often important
              components of population responses to natural selection.  In fact, evolutionary
              responses to selection may be manifest through  maternal effects, such that
              maternal effects may provide mechanisms for  adapting to variable environments.
              However, the evolutionary dynamics of  maternal effects, and characters
              influenced by maternal effects, have been  little explored.  In lab and field
              experiments, selection can be  demonstrated to favor or oppose the evolution of
              maternal effects.  However,  demonstrating selection favoring the evolution of
              a maternal effect is not  sufficient evidence to demonstrate that a maternal
              effect has evolved as an  adaptation. The same rigorous techniques applied to
              studies of behavior,  morphology, and life history need now be applied to the
              study of maternal  effects to determine how pervasive adaptive maternal effects
              are in nature  and how often maternal effects evolve simply as consequences of
              the  evolution of parental and offspring characters.  The objectives of these 
              experiments are (a) to study the evolutionary genetics of an adaptive  maternal
              effect (egg size plasticity in the seed beetle, Stator limbatus),  using
              rigorous quantitative genetic experimental designs, and (b) to  simulate
              natural selection on the maternal effect as it is thought to occur  in nature
              to study the evolution of both the maternal effect and correlated  life history
              characters.
