Title       : Millstone Bluff Archaeological Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9807157

Award Number: 9807157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Butler bbutler@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Cobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The great intensification of maize horticulture, the most important prehistoric
              North American crop, in the Southeast and lower Midwest that occurred around
              1000 AD was closely linked to the rise of social hierarchy. This has been
              manifested most overtly in the impressive earthworks associated with
              Mississippian culture mound centers and differential mortuary treatment, often
              involving the internment of elaborate objects or exotic raw materials with
              graves. Such large impressive sites associated with the Mississippian are
              located in river bottom environments with abundant natural resources and rich
              soil. In recent years however archaeologists have discovered smaller - yet
              still substantial sites - in less desirable highland areas. Some appear
              associated with specific functions such as salt mining yet others are difficult
              to explain in that way. Large river bottom sites disappear ca. 1,300 AD and it
              is either slightly before or at just about this time that upland sites become
              prominent. Given the available data it is not possible to determine whether
              these latter regions were inhabited only after the breakup of the bottomland
              occupations or whether they formed part of a larger coincident social and
              political system. It has also been suggested that upland peoples were
              relatively autonomous. The question is of interest to archaeologists who wish
              to understand the Mississippean phenomenon. Perhaps the largest and most
              complex North American prehistoric sites are part of this tradition. Evidence
              indicates that large numbers of people lived were incorporated into stable,
              long-lived hierarchically organized societies and that long distance exchange
              between major centers took place. Researchers wish to understand the mechanisms
              which led to the development and maintenance of such societies and to
              accomplish this it is necessary to set these centers into a broader geographic
              context.  That is the goal of  Drs. Butler and Cobbs research.       With
              National Science Foundation support these two investigators and their
              colleagues will conduct excavation at the Millstone Bluff Site, located on the
              top of an isolated mesa-like hill in the Shawnee Hills about 20 km from the
              Ohio River. Millstone Bluff displays a clear site plan with a central plaza of
              about 1000 sq. m., surrounded by a series of distinct depressions (house
              basins) arranged in multiple tiers. Over the course of two field seasons, the
              team will conduct geophysical survey and excavation of the site, carry out a
              pedestrian survey of the surrounding region and excavate at an adjacent
              Mississppean age locality. One goal of the research is to accurately date the
              span of occupation to determine whether it succeeds or is coincident with river
              bottom occupation. Through analysis of ceramics and other cultural remains it
              will be possible to determine the degree of autonomy exercised by the Millstone
              Bluff inhabitants. Examination of variation in material remains between houses
              will shed light on the social organization and degree of stratification within
              the site itself.       This research is important for several reasons. It will
              take place within the context of a summer archaeological field school and thus
              serve an important training purpose. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and shed new light on one of the most important prehistoric
              Native American cultures.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
