Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Sperm Activating Proteins from Xenopus Laevis
               Egg Jelly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9807862

Award Number: 9807862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Chandler dchandler@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan L. Bieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project, Drs. Chandler and Bieber will focus on the role of the egg
              extracellular matrix (ECM) in controlling sperm and egg interactions during
              vertebrate fertilization. These interactions are essential for successful
              fertilization in animals ranging from invertebrates such as echinoderms to
              vertebrates such as amphibians and mammals. In many phyla animal eggs are
              surrounded by an inner ECM layer, such as the vitelline envelope or zona
              pellucida and outer ECM coats such as the egg jelly layers of amphibian eggs
              and the cumulus mass of mammalian oocytes. The goal of the current project is
              to use an amphibian model system (X. laevis) to evaluate the biological role of
              the three jelly layers sperm must pass through in order to penetrate and
              fertilize the egg. Although the egg jelly layers are poorly studied in
              comparison to any of the inner ECM layers, these outer layers are known to be
              essential for fertilization in many amphibian species. Despite this essential
              role, to date biological activities have not been reported for any egg jelly
              macromolecule in vertebrates.

Appropriate assays have been developed to
              demonstrate that at least two biological activities can be attributed to egg
              jelly macromolecules - a factor that acts as a sperm chemotactic agent and a
              factor that acts to promote fertilization at the moment of sperm-egg binding.
              First, using these bioassays, Drs. Chandler and Bieber intend to isolate the
              biologically active proteins by a combination of molecular sieve
              chromatography, ion-exchange chromatography and HPLC. Second, these proteins
              will be characterized by mass spectroscopy, capillary electrophoresis and amino
              acid sequencing. Third, the physiological actions of the fertilization
              promoting factor on sperm will be studied in detail. A working hypothesis is
              that this factor has a direct effect on one of four steps in the fertilization
              process: 1) enhancement of sperm motility, 2) initiation of an acrosome
              reaction or surface remodeling of the sperm, 3) enhancement of sperm-vitelline
              envelope binding, or 4) enhancement of sperm-egg plasma membrane fusion and
              sperm penetration. Protocols for evaluating each of these physiological steps
              in the fertilization process have been developed. Fourth, sperm-egg jelly
              interactions in situ will be characterized by a combination of confocal
              microscopic, video microscopic and quick-freeze, deep-etch electron microscopic
              technologies in order to correlate the distribution of these biologically
              active factors with the physiological status of the sperm as it traverses the
              jelly layers.

The longer term goals of this research are a) to use PCR
              amplification techniques to amplify and sequence the genes coding for these
              proteins and b) to construct primers and use PCR technology to identify
              homologous genes from mammals that may code for similar proteins essential to
              fertilization.

