Title       : Bootstrapping in Autoregressions: Threshold Estimation and Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9807111

Award Number: 9807111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Hansen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9807111  Hansen    This project develops new tools for econometric estimation
              and inference in two distinct areas of interest.    (1) New bootstrap
              confidence intervals for cases where t-statistics are not approximately free of
              nuisance parameters.  As a leading example of interest, the distribution of the
              t-statistic in the AR(1) model with a local-to-unity autoregressive root is not
              asymptotically pivotal.  Similar difficulties arise in many dynamic and
              nonlinear models.  Standard bootstrap methods do not work properly in such
              contexts.  The project calculates bootstrap distributions on a grid of the
              parameter of interest, holding all nuisance parameters fixed at the sample
              estimates.  Accurate bootstrap confidence intervals are easy to construct from
              such bootstrap distributions and Monte Carlo simulations show important gains
              in confidence interval coverage.   These techniques are extended to handle
              confidence region construction for vector-valued parameters.  Extensions to
              non-linear econometric models will also be considered.  (2) Threshold models. 
              A threshold arises when a sample is split into groups based on a
              continuously-distributed covariate.  The difficulty in inference concerns
              estimation of the unknown threshold.  It is known that the least-squares
              estimate is super-consistent and has a non-standard asymptotic distribution.  A
              new asymptotic approximation to the least squares criterion function is
              developed and used to construct asymptotically valid confidence intervals.  The
              methods are extended to non-dynamic panels, and will be extended to 2SLS
              estimation.  Threshold autoregressive models are especially popular in the time
              series literature.         ??
