Title       : Development of Photofragmentation Laser Induced Fluorescence Sensor for
               Measurements of CH31 in the Marine Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9807653

Award Number: 9807653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Sandholm sts@minitower.gtri.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1584,4444,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program   is
              jointly supported by the Divisions of Atmospheric Science and   Chemistry and
              by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.  Dr.   Scott T. Sandholm of
              the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences,   Georgia Institute of
              Technology, will develop a photofragmentation laser   induced fluorescence
              sensor (PF-LIF) to measure volatile methyl iodide in   situ in the marine
              boundary layer.  Current detection methods for organic   iodides rely heavily
              on analysis of stored `grab` samples and can be   quite sensitive to
              preparation and handling of samples and to thermal   degradation.  The LIF
              sensor will permit in situ measurements as well as   temporal emission profiles
              of methyl iodide and other simple organic   iodides to the atmosphere from
              oceanic and coastal regions.  The method   is expected to have the sensitivity
              and selectivity needed to be   effective.  The similarities in
              photofragmentation dynamics of organic   iodides enables total iodine emission
              to be measured by following the   cumulative photofragmented production of
              atomic iodine as I* for all   organic iodides known to be emitted from oceanic
              sources.      The role of iodine in tropospheric and stratospheric ozone cycles
              is not   well understood due to lack of quantitative measurements of the source
                compounds. Organic iodide compounds are thought to evaporate from the   ocean
              and serve as a source.  In this research, a new method for direct   measurement
              of iodine will be developed and tested in field deployment   off the coast of
              Georgia.
