Title       : Dissertation Research: Cultural Ecology of Customary Marine Tenure in Fiji
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9807206

Award Number: 9807206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Terrence McCabe mccabe@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project by a cultural anthropology student at the
              University of Colorado will study how local systems of traditional ecological
              knowledge in Fiji are affected by external factors, and how this process
              impacts fragile marine ecosystems. Exogenous economic and political forces from
              national and international sources often influence local systems of resource
              management. These forces will be examined within the context of the variability
              in the management of marine resources by chiefly elites or traditional fishing
              rights owners within a community based marine reserve now being established in
              Fiji. The student will compare variability of resource management activities
              and of traditional ecological knowledge between three inshore fishing villages,
              each with a different set of development constraints.  Hypotheses to be tested
              will deal with conflict between land developers, dive tourists, and local and
              non-local small-scale commercial fishing enterprises, all competing over
              traditional fishing right zones.  As external pressure increases the student
              hypothesizes increased conflict over local chiefs over access to the economic
              benefits from leasing the traditional zones. The student hypothesizes that
              traditional knowledge systems will erode as the influence of external
              commercial fishing, tourism and development increases (the alternative
              hypothesis is that the knowledge will develop through being defended and
              explained to outsiders). The project will also assess the potential for
              ecological damage from the diverse uses of the underwater resources.  The
              research is important because it will advance our understanding of how
              traditional societies can conserve natural resources which are valued by a wide
              range of interests.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
