Title       : GOALI: A Fundamental Study of Hydrocarbon Cracking on Acidic Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9807333

Award Number: 9807333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold H. Kung hkung@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Q. Snurr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Title:    GOALI: A Fundamental Study of Hydrocarbon     
              Cracking on Acidic Zeolites  Proposal Number:   CTS-9807333  Principal
              Investigators: Harold H. Kung, Jeffrey Miller and Randall Q.       Snurr 
              Institution:    Northwestern University    This GOALI proposal is a
              collaboration between Northwestern University (H. H. Kung and R. Q. Snurr) and
              Amoco Chemicals R&D (Jeffrey Miller). Its objective is the determination of the
              mechanisms responsible for the enhancement of catalytic cracking activity
              produced by the steam dealumination of HY zeolite. In the proposed model of
              catalytic cracking of alkanes, three reaction mechanisms are operative:
              monomolecular cracking involving a non-classical carbocation, bimolecular
              cracking involving hydride transfer and beta-scission, and oligomeric cracking
              involving alkylation, oligomerization, hydride transfer and beta-scission.
              While both the bimolecular and oligomeric cracking are strongly dependent on
              alkane partial pressure, the monomolecular cracking is strongly dependent on
              acidic strength, and the oligomeric cracking is diffusion limited.
              Experimentally, the dominant mechanism would be manifested in the product
              distribution, and could be controlled by the operating condition. Therefore,
              various possible causes of enhanced activity in dealuminated HY will be studied
              under conditions that correspond to a predetermined mechanism. The formation of
              new acid sites will be tested by means of the monomolecular cracking rate. The
              role of extra-framework Al will be determined by contrasting the rates of
              monomolecular and bimolecular-oligomeric cracking. The role of internal
              diffusion in mesopores and defects will be elucidated by contrasting
              monomolecular, bimolecular, and oligomeric rates. Also to be studied are the
              effects of selective poisoning of acid sites, e.g., Na; of zeolite type (Y,
              ZSM-5, ferrierite, mordenite); of adsorption heat contribution to apparent
              activation energy; of adsorption of reactant alkanes on the selectivity of c
              ompeting cracking reactions. The experimental adsorption study will be
              supported by theoretical calculations and simulations of binary adsorption
              isotherms.
