Title       : (EGB) Evaluating the Processes Governing Particle-Reactive Element Transport in
               an Arctic River System: Coupling Hydrology, Geochemical Tracers, and Hydrologic
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9807590

Award Number: 9807590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick L. Sayles fsayles@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,5939,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807590
Sayles

We propose an interdisciplinary approach for the evaluation
              of the riverine transport of sediments and particle-associated contaminants
              that is applicable to many sparsely measured river-dominated coastal systems. 
              To overcome data restrictions and cover large spatial scales, we propose the
              joint use of geochemical, hydrodynamic, and hydrological data sets together
              with high-resolution models of transport and geochemical processes.  Our
              objective is to provide basic information on the pathways, dynamics, and
              controls on transport and depositional environments, and to explore the
              sensitivity of the system to contaminant- loading and accumulation.  A very
              important aspect of the study is the deliberate design of the approach to use
              the often-minimal monitoring network on river systems together with limited
              field observations. 
We propose to focus our study on the Ob River, one of the
              four largest rivers flowing into the Arctic Ocean.  It is representative of
              large Arctic rivers in many respects, but is unique in a way that adds greatly
              to its utility for the present study.  The Ob basin has been the site of the
              bulk of the nuclear weapons production and development program of the former
              Soviet Union.  As a result of releases from thee facilities, a variety of
              tracers has been introduced, over the past 50 years, into the river system at
              known point-sources providing unique opportunities for studying pollutant
              transfer rates and mechanism, as well as basic sediment transport and
              deposition within this large arctic river system.  We will use a
              two-dimensional hydrodynamic model with sediment-transport and geochemical
              interaction submodels to interpolate between river data sets.  In a statistical
              sense, we will evaluate how the fate of the particles and associated tracers is
              governed by the geochemistry, the hydrology, the geometry of the river
              configuration, and the physical processes that must be responsive to the river
              geometry, flow, and the physics of sediment transport.  The links between the
              geochemical data derived from the sediment cores, the historical hydrologic
              data, and the models will be established through developing detailed
              chronologies for the cores.  This chronology then would be used to relate
              changes in accumulation rates and sediment characteristics in space and in time
              to multiyear changes in hydrologic conditions and model predictions.
Recently
              obtained data from Ob above its confluence with the Irtysh provide strong
              confirmation of the utility of studies in this river basin.  The sediments from
              this river contain uniques isotopic signatures that effectively "tag" its
              sediments.  One isotopic ratio, 240Pu/239Pu, is ~constant over the past 50
              years providing a label to identify these sediments in mixtures down stream.  A
              second tracer, 237Np, varies strongly over times, by up to an order of
              magnitude, providing a time varying signal for use in estimating transport and
              deposition rates.  Such unique signatures are ideal for meeting the goals
              proposed here. 


This proposal was submitted to the EGB Program and is
              being jointly funded by:
1. Division of CTS (Arndt) and (Roco)
2. Division of
               INT - (Dudka)
3. Division of OPP - (Ledbetter)
4. Division of OCE -
              (Buesseler)
