Title       : ESH: Response of Extreme Hydrologic Events to Climate Change: Upper Mississippi
               River
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9807715

Award Number: 9807715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232087             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Knox knox@geography.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807715
Knox

The general objective of this research involves the systematic
              compilation and analysis of high quality alluvial stratigraphic data to
              determine the terrestrial hydrologic responses to Holocene (post-glacial)
              climatic changes in the mainstem upper Mississippi River valley.  Specific
              objectives include:
1.  to quantitatively document recurrence frequencies of
              large and extreme floods recorded in upper Mississippi River island levee and
              backswamp environments in association with regional Holocene climatic
              episodes;
2.  to quantitatively document recurrence frequencies of large and
              extreme floods recorded in upper Mississippi River tributary mouth slackwater
              environments in association with regional Holocene climatic episodes; and,
3. 
              to quantitatively document recurrence frequencies of large and extreme floods
              recorded in modern (historical) alluvial sediments for island levees and
              backswamps and for tributary mouth slackwater environments of the upper
              Mississippi River.

The unique stratigraphic archive is available because the
              upper Mississippi River has experienced ongoing gradual aggradation throughout
              the Holocene following an episode when drainage of glacial lakes at and soon
              after the last glacial advance in the region caused deep entrenchment of late
              Pleistocene (late glacial age) alluvium.  Since then, remobilization of
              sediment from tributaries has been gradually refilling the main valley of the
              upper Mississippi River.  The research proposed here is a key component of a
              long-term research program by the principal investigator to investigate
              hydrogeomorphic responses to climatic change in the upper Mississippi River
              valley.  My previous research, however, has focused on small tributary systems
              of the upper Mississippi River.  The earlier research showed that flood
              hydrology and sediment mobility and storage in small tributaries of 5-200 km2
              drainage area were strongly responsive to even small climate changes.  Those
              changes typically involved air mass and storm track boundary adjustments that
              were associated with changes of mean annual temperature of < 1-2 C and changes
              of mean annual precipitation of not greater than 10-20%.  Because the physical
              processes responsible for floods on small watersheds (5-200 km2) are not
              necessarily the same as for the very large upper Mississippi River watershed
              (100,000 - 300,000 km2), the present research will also examine how watershed
              scale transfer affects the sensitivity of rain, snowmelt, and combined rain and
              snowmelt floods to climate change.

The methodology for the research involves
              field, laboratory, and quantitative analyses phases.  The major component of
              fieldwork involves the extraction of continuous cores from floodplain alluvial
              sites and from slackwater sedimentary sites in tributary mouths.  Detailed
              sedimentological and geochemical analyses will be applied to sediment cores at
              sampling intervals of 1 cm or less in most situations.  Statistical analyses
              will be undertaken to study relationships between historically recorded flood
              and climatic data for comparison with the geologic record of climate/flood
              relationships on the UMR.

The proposed research contributes directly to
              improved understanding of terrestrial Earth system science emphasizing the
              hydrologic system and how it has been influenced by paleoclimate variability. 
              The research will provide a systematic compilation of a high quality physical
              paleorecord that focuses on the linkage between climate and extreme hydrologic
              events, especially involving large floods on a large river system.  Results
              from the proposed research are expected to provide a systematic evaluation of
              how magnitudes and recurrence frequencies of extreme floods on the upper
              Mississippi River behaved within past Holocene paleoclimates and during what
              appear to be abrupt transitions between paleoclimate episodes.  This
              information should prove quite useful in contemplating the consequences of
              "abrupt flips" in circulation systems of the ocean and atmosphere.

