Title       : Turtle Biodiversity: Global Data For the Global Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9807898

Award Number: 9807898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399546             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Jon Kimerling kimeralia@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DBI 9807898; Kimerling, John; Oregon State University

A prototype
              database and web access system of turtle biodiversity data will be built and
              
made available worldwide to a variety of users in the systematic, museum,
              conservation, 
and land management communities. This prototype will be used to
              characterize users and 
their needs and should lead to a second generation
              system that could be permanently 
institutionalized. The prototype will be
              immediately useful to international groups dealing 
with the declining turtles
              crisis. The data will consist of every known locality of all 263 
freshwater
              turtle and tortoise species with appropriate documentation. In addition to
              
supporting the usual text queries, the database will have associated tools
              for visualization 
of models of species ranges against environmental data and
              for analytical queries using a 
global grid system. We will develop a system
              that can be tailored for use by anyone from 
the most sophisticated user to
              the least. The system must be usable by both a well-
endowed museum in a
              developed country and the least well-equipped park ranger in a 
developing
              country. In contrast to most web development, the system will rely on multiple
              
data distribution methods to support heterogeneous users, postal services,
              more 
established web protocols, and the newest technologies may all be
              employed to achieve an 
acceptable level of service to users. Data access and
              visualization tools will be usable on 
the most common computer hardware and
              operating systems.

The three-year design will initially focus on building
              the prototype up to implementing the 
visualization components. This initial
              phase includes database design, data migration, 
establishing the development
              environment, and building the site for user interaction. 
Subsequent work will
              add visualization tools and further refine the overall system design 
based on
              feedback from users, to include documentation and distribution methods. These
              
design and implementation methods will be valuable to similar conservation
              efforts across 
a global user community.


