Title       : Development of Novel Properties in Block Copolymer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9807591

Award Number: 9807591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin L. Thomas elt@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9807591  Thomas    This proposal describes a research program aimed at
              developing  novel macromolecular materials for technological applications.  The
              first area is traditional:  morphology and mechanical  properties; and the
              second is completely new:  block copolymer  photonic band gap (PBG) materials. 
              Both areas depend critically  on the ability to organize block copolymers into
              well ordered  microdomain morphologies using composition, molecular 
              architecture, and careful processing.  Tailored self assembly  into new
              microdomain structures such as the double gyroid  tricontinuous structure in
              ABA triblocks is exemplary for  understanding how the microdomain structure of
              a glassy  continuous (polystyrene end blocks) and a rubber continuous 
              (polyisoprene mid block) system evolves with increasing  deformation and
              substantially recovers upon release of the  applied load.  The continued
              exploration of ABC terpolymers, both  linear and miktoarm stars, will
              undoubtedly reveal additional new  microdomain structures.  The object is to
              gain an overall  understanding of how composition, number of components and
              chain  architecture govern the resultant structure of the intermaterial 
              dividing surface of the periodic microdomains.  In the second  area, a new
              field will be explored, of potentially huge  significance for block copolymer
              materials and their interesting  topologically connected microdomains by using
              them in combination  with high dielectric contrast nanoparticles to create
              novel  photonic band gap materials.  PBG materials are a new class of 
              materials with enormous potential to revolutionize electroptical  and all
              optical applications.  Up to the present, this new field  has been pioneered
              using microlithography to pattern periodic  dielectric structures.  By
              sequestering nanoparticles into one of  the components of an appropriately high
              Mw block copolymer,  structures with excellent dielectric contrast and
              appropriate  length scale can b produced to control the flow of U.V. and 
              visible li ght.  %%%  These two projects are in the areas of polymer-based
              structures  for technological applications.  In addition to the basic science 
              and new technology, both graduate students and undergraduate  students will be
              exposed to multidisciplinary training in these  exciting project thrust areas. 
              ***
