Title       : Secondary State Formation in the Danish Iron Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9807729

Award Number: 9807729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina L. Thurston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millsaps College
	      1701 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392021144    601/354-5201

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Tina Thurston will conduct one
              season of fieldwork in the Thy region of Denmark. She will focus on the Iron
              Age period when a state level society first emerged in this area and attempt,
              through archaeological survey, to gain insight into its organization.
              `Pristine` states which developed independently have long been a focus of
              archaeological attention because it is believed that through comparison of such
              individual cases it is possible to gain insight into the social processes which
              underlie the emergence of social and political complexity. However most
              prehistoric states do not develop in this way but result, in fact from contact
              with and response to other such pre-existing entities. Much less is known about
              this `secondary` state process and Dr. Thurston's research focuses on this
              issue. Early Danish states are also unusual because of their `corporate` nature
              where labor, food production, social groups and even rulership may be
              controlled through broad integrative ritual and ideological means and extreme
              differentiation between leaders and followers is suppressed. Centralized or
              network style government differs dramatically, stressing personal prestige,
              wealth, power accumulation and highly individualized leadership.       
              Palaces, cities, royal storehouses, temples are absent in Denmark and Dr.
              Thurston has developed a methodology to reconstruct state organization. This
              depends on reconstructing the distribution and size of individual settlements
              and determining the organizational principles which link them. To accomplish
              this goal Dr. Thurston will rely heavily on surface survey and soil chemical
              (phosphate) analysis. Prior research in Denmark, as well as other parts of the
              world indicate a close and direct tie between phosphate level in the soil and
              human occupation. In this first season of a projected long term project, Dr.
              Thurston will conduct a stratified sample survey and collect phosphate data,
              analyze diagnostic materials exposed on the surface and carry out limited text
              excavations. If the methodology is successful, this will set the stage for
              complete geographical coverage with will allow reconstruction of patterns of
              social organization and how they change over time.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
