Title       : Mammalian Extinction Dynamics in the Late Quaternary of Siberia and the
               Hyperdisease Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9807670

Award Number: 9807670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. E. MacPhee macphee@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This study involves an innovative approach to understanding the dynamics
              of Quaternary extinctions of polar mammals.  The causes of most extinctions in
              earth history are obscure, but several events responsible for extraordinary
              losses during the last 40,000 years have proven especially resistant to
              testable explanation.  A new hypothesis_the "hyperdisease hypothesis"_ proposed
              by the investigators may explain the known facts of certain late Quaternary
              extinctions better than competing hypotheses do.  The essence of the argument
              is that, under certain circumstancces, highly infectious, highly lethal
              diseases can be a cause of species extinctions.  The argument has testable
              implications, but it will first be necessary to create a database that does not
              now exist and to conduct laboratory investigations that could not have been
              undertaken even a decade ago.  The investigators intend to participate in an
              expedition organized by Russian colleagues from the Institute of Zoology, St.
              Petersburg, Russia, during summer 1998 to recover late Pleistocene mammal
              specimens, especially woolly mammoths Mammuthus primigenius, preserved in
              permafrost conditions in eastern Siberia, and to undertake a battery of
              molecular analyses designed to detect, amplify, and sequence the host and viral
              genetic material in existing museum samples as well as material collected
              during the course of the present investigation.  The Small Grants for
              Exploratory Research (SGER) program will allow the investigators to take
              advantage of a unique opportunity to collect mammoth carcasses frozen in the
              permafrost tundra.
