Title       : The Impact of Fundamentalism on Women's Socioeconomic Attainment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9807611

Award Number: 9807611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Glass jennifer-Glass@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of the influence of religious affiliation on the socioeconomic
              attainment of women.  Women's ideological beliefs about appropriate family
              roles for mothers and fathers and the effects of nonmaternal child care are
              crucial determinants of their labor market behavior. However, little research
              has attended to the institutional sources of those beliefs. Conservative
              religious institutions, in particular, promote belief systems that proscribe
              mothers' market behavior and support a traditional family structure in which
              mothers concentrate on childrearing to the exclusion of other pursuits. These
              fundamentalist religious institutions have been gaining rather than losing
              strength during the period in which mothers' labor force participation has
              risen dramatically in the United States overall. This research project focuses
              on the direct and indirect impacts of fundamentalist religious ideologies and
              institutional participation on mothers' labor force participation and wage
              attainment.    This project seeks to answer several crucial questions in three
              general areas: (1) Does fundamentalist religiosity matter for women's labor
              force participation and wage attainment? Does gender ideology mediate the
              impact of religious participation on market outcomes, or does religious
              participation (and the social networks it spawns) affect behavior irrespective
              of individuals' gender ideology? (2) How does the life-cycle timing of
              fundamentalist activity affect adult behavior? Do family-of-origin religious
              beliefs and practices have lingering effects (perhaps through the failure to
              acquire marketable skills via higher education) or are current beliefs and
              practices most compelling? (3) How precisely does fundamentalism affect women's
              wages - indirectly through its effects on fertility, early family formation,
              and the acquisition of education or directly through its effects on the amount,
              gender type, and intensity of employment following motherhood?    These
              questions will be investigated with a national  longitudinal sample (The
              National Survey of Families and Households) to determine the strength and
              direction of effects of both childhood and adult fundamentalist activity on the
              acquisition and use of marketable skills among American women. Structural
              equation modeling using multiple group comparisons will be used to test the
              influence of fundamentalist denominational affiliation, religious beliefs, and
              religious activities on the likelihood of labor force participation, and the
              wages obtained from participation, for married and unmarried women.     Because
              the gender wage gap has been stubbornly persistent, while the obligations of
              mothers to financially support their children have been increasing over time,
              debates about the social rather than economic causes of mothers' lower wages
              continue to be important. In particular, this research can shed light on the
              extent to which mothers' failure to achieve wages on par with fathers can be
              attributed to the influence of religious institutions on women's decisions to
              prioritize mothering over preparation for and engagement in market work. This
              research also addresses fundamental theoretical questions in sociology about
              the autonomous power of cultural ideology to mold behavior in the face of
              structural economic pressures to behave otherwise.
