Title       : Purchase of a Quadrupole Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9807748

Award Number: 9807748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Hopkins chair@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities   (CRIF)
              Program will assist the Department of Chemistry at the University   of
              Washington to acquire a quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer equipped   with
              electrospray ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical   ionization
              (APCI) interfaces, which will be interfaced to a liquid   chromatograph.  This
              equipment will enhance research in a number of   projects involving highly
              sensitive ionization of involatile polar   compounds, peptides, proteins, DNA
              conjugates, organometallic complexes,   negative ion detection, and multi-stage
              tandem mass spectrometry   capabilities at unit mass resolution for
              singly-charged ions and sub-unit   mass resolution for multiply-charged
              species.    Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate
              structural   details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a vast array
              of   organic, bioorganic, and organometallic molecules. The addition of the  
              technique of electrospray extends the range of MS to proteins and nucleic  
              acid molecular weights far beyond any other technique. The use of  
              electrospray ionization in combination with high resolution provides the  
              latest techniques available in mass spectrometry. It affords the chemist   one
              of the most powerful tools available for the characterization of   compounds.
              The acquisition of this capability in mass spectrometry is   essential for the
              prosecution of frontier research in many fields of   chemistry.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
