Title       : Intrinsic Mode Decomposition Method for Damage and System Identification of
               In-Situ Civil Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9807855

Award Number: 9807855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jann N. Yang jnyang@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9807855
Yang
Tradtional data Analysis techniques have been dominaed by the
              Fourier transform.  The main restrictions are that the data should be
              stationary and long enought, and that the system generating the data must be
              linear.  Unfortunately, when the structure is damaged, such as cracking or
              yielding, the response process in nonlinear, and consequently, Fourier or
              Fourier-based transform methods such as wavelet analysis approach, is not
              capable of capturing the intrinsic nonlinear and nonstationary characteristics
              of the physical process involved in the vibration data.  A new technique, the
              Empirical Mode decompositon (EMD) method and Hlbert spectral analysis, recently
              developed at NASA Goodard space Flight Center, has been demonstrated to offer a
              great potential for nonstationary and nonlinear data analyses for wide
              engineering applications.  

This project is a collaborative research between
              the University of California, Irvine, and NASA Goddard space Flight Center.  It
              is aimed at further development of the recently proposed EMD method and hilbert
              spectral analysis for applications to damage detection and system
              identification of civil infrastructures.  In addition, efforts will be made to
              separate the polluted noises from measured vibration data and to capture the
              intrinsic linear or nonlinear characteristics of the structural response. 
              Signatures resulting from the energy release due to structural damage will also
              be identified and used to characterize the extent of structural damage. 
              

The unique approach proposed is based on the innovative and powerful data
              analysis technique to capture the intrinsic nonlinear and nonstatinary
              characteristics of the measured vibratin data from which system identification
              and damagedetection can be made.  Teh results of this research project are
              expected to make a significant advancement of the state-of-the technology in
              system identification and damage detection of civil infrastructures.
