Title       : ESH: Macroecology of Quaternary Mammal Faunas: Distributions, Heterogeneity, and
               Extinctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a9807499

Award Number: 9807499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Graham   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest L. Lundelius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807499
Graham

To confirm or refute this hypothesis, a relational database
              on fossil mammal sites for three Land Mammal Ages (Blancan, Irvingtonian, and
              Rancholabrean) from Alaska, Canada, and the U.S. will be constructed.  FAUNMAP,
              an existing relational database for fossil mammal sites for the last 40,000
              years from the contiguous 48 states of the U.S., will be updated and expanded
              to construct a new database.  FAUNMAP II will be updated and expanded to
              construct a new database.  FAUNMAP II will be interfaced with a Geographic
              Information System (GIS) with ARC/INFO to map changes in individual species
              distributions through time and to conduct spatial analyses.  Two graduate
              students supervised by Principal Investigator, Dr. Graham, will review
              scientific literature.  Graham who will travel to high-density data centers
              will acquire some Alaskan and Canadian data.  Site visits are efficient because
              they provide access to local literature, and they permit consultation with
              primary investigators to determine the limitations and quality of data.  Dr.
              Lundelius, Principal Investigator will travel to Denver for coordination and
              analysis.

In the first year, new sites will be added to the existing FAUNMAP
              database and corrections will be made to errors previously identified.  Data
              derived from Alaskan literature and visits will also be acquired.  Second year
              activities will focus on data acquisition for Canada.  Data will be reviewed
              for errors after input.  Bathymetric maps and sea level curves, obtained from
              the NOAA Paleoclimate Database in Boulder, Colorado will facilitate
              construction of maps with adjusted sea levels for different periods of time. 
              The Denver Museum of Natural History's (DMNH) GIS lab will permit mapping and
              quantitative measurements of distribution areas for individual species.  Time
              intervals will be defined by three Land Mammal Ages and by ten microtine rodent
              biochrons.  Areas of distribution will be compared by body size categories to
              statistically and graphically determine if large mammal species ranges were
              reduced through time and if there is a critical size limit at the end of the
              Pleistocene.  These data will also be compared with surviving species as the
              control sample.

Publications will be prepared at the conclusion of the
              project.  FAUNMAP II will be placed on the World Wide Web.  Its general
              structure will make it useful to biogeographers, paleontologists, mammalogists,
              wildlife biologists and other scientists for a wide variety of research
              projects.  Educational programs can be developed for pre-college and college
              students.  The database will also be useful for on-line and interactive
              exhibits.

