Title       : Structural Studies on Fe-only Hydrogenase (CpI) from Clostridium Pasteurianum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9807821

Award Number: 9807821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Peters petersj@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807821  Peters  The ability to oxidize or evolve hydrogen is a feature of a
              diverse group of microorganisms containing hydrogenases of a variety of
              molecular and catalytic properties.  To date, there is no available structural
              information for any of the Fe-only hydrogenases.  Mechanistic issues concerning
              the function of the Fe-only hydrogenase (CpI) from Clostridium pasteurianum
              will be addressed using a multidisciplinary structure/function based approach. 
              This will combine structure determination by x-ray diffraction methods with
              complimentary biochemical and biophysical studies.  The specific objectives of
              this research concerning the Fe-only hydrogenase (CpI) from Clostridium
              pasteurianum include: 1) determination of the native three-dimensional
              structure by x-ray diffraction methods, 2) development of an expression system
              that will allow introduction of site-specific amino acid substitutions and
              simplify the method for purification, 3) investigation of oxidation state
              dependent structural changes, inhibitor binding, and site-specific amino acid
              substituted proteins combined with complimentary biochemical and biophysical
              studies.  It is anticipated that these studies will reveal the structural
              architecture of the, as of yet, uncharacterized active site cluster of the
              Fe-only hydrogenases.  Additional experiments will give insight into the
              mechanism of activity reversible hydrogen oxidation at this site which will
              lead to a model for catalysis.  In addition, the structure of the Fe-only
              hydrogenase may be quite informative in developing models for the mechanism of
              Ni independent reversible hydrogen oxidation.  Additionally, comparison of the
              structure of an Fe-only hydrogenase with the structure of the NiFe-hydrogenase
              from D. gigas as well as the structure of the active site of nitrogenase (which
              catalyzes proton reduction as part of the mechanism of nitrogen reduction) may
              bring to light commonalties suggestive of their individual mechanisms.
