Title       : The Role of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling Pathway in Drosophila
               Retinal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9807892

Award Number: 9807892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Moses   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN #9807892; Moses;   Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) was first discovered in
              vertebrates.  It is a small protein that regulates the growth of many cells and
              their ability to stop dividing and form specialized cell types.  EGF is
              secreted from cells that are sending an instructive signal and is received by
              other cells that then act on that signal.  The target cells receive the EGF
              signal using a protein that penetrates thorough their surface called the
              EGF-receptor (EGFR) which can bind EGF.  When EGFR has bound EGF on the outside
              of the target cell it becomes activated and begins to chemically modify other
              proteins on the inside of the cell (by adding phosphate to them).  A chain
              reaction then follows with the sequential activation of a series of proteins on
              the inside of the cell, usually named for one of its links as the "ras signal
              transduction cascade".  At the other end of this pathway are proteins that when
              activated can bind to DNA at specific sites and change the set of genes that
              the cell is using to make new proteins.  Thus a signal from EGF acts through
              EGFR and the ras cascade in the target cell to alter its behavior.

	This
              process is of great general significance in developmental biology.  Many
              developmental processes are regulated by it.  Over activation of the pathway
              can cause run-away cell division and is the most common cause of cancer in
              humans.  However the normal functioning of the EGFR pathway is essential for
              the normal development of all animals, and their nervous systems in particular.
               Thus, the present proposal will study the role of EGFR signaling in the
              developing compound eye of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.  This model
              organism has been chosen because decades of genetic research using this animal
              have made it possible to conduct more sophisticated genetic experiments than
              are possible in vertebrates.  The insect compound eye contains many similar
              facets, but each has only eight photoreceptor cells.  It is thus possible to
              approach a real understanding of the development of this relatively simple
              model nervous system.  Temperature-sensitive mutation of the EGFR gene in flies
              were produced that permit Dr. Moses to grow live flies with functional EGFR,
              and to kill the activity of the receptor simply by raising the temperature at
              any time.  In the proposed experiments the P.I. will undertake more detailed
              studies with the temperature sensitive mutations in order to understand how the
              EGF signal is controlled in flies.  In addition, of two new genes recently
              discovered in the EGFR pathway will be cloned.

