Title       : Electrical Structure of Storm Systems that Produce Positive Cloud-to-Ground
               Lightning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9807179

Award Number: 9807179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407812             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Beasley wbeasley@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. David Rust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. MacGorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9807179
Beasley
Cloud-to-ground lightning flashes that lower positive (CG+),
              rather than negative, charge to ground have been the object of intense study
              because they are anomalous, particularly energetic, and have unusual current
              characteristics.  Past research has shown that CG+ tend to occur in specific
              convective storm situations and also are connected in some way with the
              recently discovered "sprites", which are discharges from thunderstorm tops to
              the upper atmosphere.  The Principal Investigators will participate in a large
              cooperative project to study the electrical, dynamical and microphysical
              characteristics of storms that produce CG+.  This project, knows as the
              Mesoscale Convective System Electrification and Polarimetric Radar Study
              (MEaPRS),  will bring to bear a variety of instruments to observe cloud
              microphysics, x-rays, electric field and field changes, lightning strike
              locations, radar reflectivity, winds, and polarimetric radar variables.
This
              research will employ balloon-borne measurements and numerical cloud modeling to
              study the distribution of the electric field and charge in mesoscale convective
              systems (MCSs) and in isolated severe storms that produce positive
              cloud-to-ground lightning.  The occurrence of positive ground flashes in these
              types of storms has been documented, but the electrical structures of the
              storms are not yet well understood.
Vertical profiles of electric field and
              charge density have been acquired in a few MCSs, which typically produce
              scattered positive ground flashes in the stratiform region. There have been
              enough profiles to develop a conceptual model of the storm∆s electrical
              structure that has been composited from several cases.   Never have the
              electrical characteristics of all the major regions of a single MCS been
              sampled.  
A goal of the proposed research is to obtain observations of
              electric field and particle charge to evaluate the relative contribution of
              each of these charging processes to observed charge distributions. Soundings
              will be made in all of the major regions of individual MCSs to determine the
              distribution and temporal development of charge, especially in the stratiform
              region. 
***

