Title       : Chaotic Load Models for Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9807529

Award Number: 9807529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Kostelich kostelich@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Heydt  (Co-Administrator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9807529  Kostelich    This project is an application of chaos theory from
              mathematics to electric power engineering.  The project focuses on the research
              on the design, formulation, and performance of electrical load models that
              employ chaos.  The objective is to design a load model for certain highly
              varying loads such as AC electric arc furnaces, steel rolling mills, plasma
              torches and certain other mining loads, and electric arc welders.  These loads
              have been shown to have load currents that are time series that exhibit chaos:
              that is, tests for chaos have been applied to field measurements and it appears
              that the load current data are consistent with a chaotic system as the
              generating source.  The principal investigators span two universities (Arizona
              State University and Iowa State University) and two departments (Electrical
              Engineering and Mathematics) with the plan to combine facilities, talents, and
              capabilities to study chaotic models for the cited application.  The research
              plan is to test chaotic models for applicability and accuracy with respect to
              field data and other models (namely, the stochastic model).  The method of
              comparison and evaluation is through the use of advanced power quality indices,
              measures from the mathematics of chaos, and time and frequency domain
              evaluations.  Actual AC arc furnace data shall be used in the evaluation and
              accuracy assessment.    This project builds on the work of the co-principals. 
              Some application oriented work was completed for the Electric Power Research
              Institute; however, that sponsor was primarily interested in applications and
              software development.  Virtually no theoretical work nor fundamental research
              was done. This project proposes the fundamental research on the use of chaos
              models for highly varying electrical loads.    The practical impacts of this
              work are: the utilization of chaos for a load model which may represent certain
              load types more accurately and more like the actual physical process; the
              development of accurate lo ad models for certain types of highly varying loads;
              and a new application of chaos theory for the measurement of the impact of
              highly varying electrical loads.  Also, there is an educational component to
              the project and there is expected to be an impact on the students, both
              graduate and undergraduate, who are involved in the project.  This will be in
              the understanding and utilization of chaos theory.  Part of the implementation
              of the educational component of the project is the development of a classroom
              study module on chaos.
