Title       : SGER: Investigating the Spread and Causes of Amphibian Declines in Tropical
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9807583

Award Number: 9807583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen R. Lips   (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Val R. Beasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent D. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Lawrence University
	      
	      Canton, NY  13617    315/379-5011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Lips  9807583    Between 1990-97 the PI has observed the sudden and
              unexplained  decline of the riparian anurans at two remote, protected sites in 
              montane Central America. Causes of these declines are unknown, but  based on
              over five years of personal observations, demographic  data, and results of
              autopsies on dead frogs (by D. E. Green), the  PI hypothesizes that these two
              declines may be attributed to two  microbial pathogens: a fungus, and a virus.
              The PI suggests that  these two sites were affected by the same agent as that
              which  decimated the amphibians of Monteverde, Costa Rica, and that the 
              sequential disappearance of amphibians at these three sites over  the past 10
              years is evidence of a highly contagious pathogen  moving through the Central
              American isthmus.    The PI will propose to organize a multidisciplinary Rapid
              Response  and Assessment Team that would attempt to jump ahead of this 
              apparent "front" of amphibian mortality. The team would survey the  health of
              both the amphibian fauna and the environment to document  the changes in each
              during a decline. Likely members would include  herpetologists, pathologists,
              toxicologists, and endocrinologists,  parasitologists, and epidemiologists. 
              The team would survey these sites in a systematic way to determine  the
              mechanisms of amphibian  declines by surveying all life stages, measuring
              environmental  factors thought to cause or contribute to declines, and
              collecting  individuals for full medical diagnostic evaluations.  The team
              would determine the geographic extent of this decline in  Central and South
              America by surveying select upland areas where  declines have occurred, and
              where declines are expected to occur.
