Title       : Studies of the Control of Quantum Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9807127

Award Number: 9807127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rice s-rice@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stuart Rice is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his work on the theory of control of the
              evolution of quantum many body systems with applications to the selective
              enhancement of products of a chemical reaction.  Four areas of study will be
              pursued: 1) refinements and extensions of the Kobrak-Rice photoselective
              adiabatic passage scheme; 2) the accuracy of reduced dynamical descriptions of
              an excited molecule; 3) the control of the evolution of a molecule embedded in
              a solvent; and 4) the possible existence of a fundamental limit to the extent
              of control of quantum dynamics that is attainable.  Much of the theoretical
              approach to coherent control will be developed as an extension to the
              generalized Stimulated Raman Adiabatic Passage (StiRAP) process for control of
              product selectivity in a reaction.

The achievement of selective control of
              product formation in a reaction has been sought persistently throughout the
              evolution of chemistry. To date, such control has only been accomplished at the
              macroscopic level, by the manipulation of external factors such as temperature,
              pressure, solvent character, etc. With the advent of the tunable laser, it was
              hoped that product selectivity could be controlled at the microscopic level,
              and that individual bonds within a molecule could be selectively broken. It was
              very quickly found that energy absorbed by a molecule was not easily localized
              in individual bonds, but preferred to redistribute throughout the molecule.
              More recently, however, the concept of laser selective chemistry has had a
              rebirth, and theories developed by Rice and others have shown that energy could
              be localized by carefully choosing a complex sequence of laser pulses of
              prescribed shapes. If this theory can be put to practice experimentally, it may
              still be possible to realize the goal of microscopic selective control of
              chemical reactions. 

