Title       : Neuroanatomical Basis of Endocrine-Mediated Behavioral Development in the Honey
               Bee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9807560

Award Number: 9807560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fahrbach susanfah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Honey bee society is organized by worker age.  The youngest bees work inside the
              hive; older bees become foragers.  Foraging for food and water requires
              learning the location of the hive, navigating far from the hive using celestial
              cues, and learning the location of scattered resources.  Past research in the
              laboratories of Dr. Fahrbach and Robinson have revealed that foragers have high
              levels of juvenile hormone and show selective growth of a brain region (the
              mushroom bodies) that is a learning center.  They have also demonstrated that
              those bees that returned to their colony after removal of the gland that
              produces juvenile hormone,  are delayed in becoming foragers.  These bees have
              another striking behavioral deficit - many fail to return to the hive after
              leaving for short flights,  at a rate double that of controls.   Because these
              losses occur before the start of foraging, when the bees are taking orientation
              flights to learn the hive location, these investigators hypothesize that the
              absence of hormones affects visual learning.  This project will explore why the
              lost bees fail to return to their hive by examining their performance on
              several visual learning tasks.  They will also track flights of bees learning
              the location of their hive,  using the technique of harmonic radar.  These
              studies are the first to use a social insect model to study the effects of a
              hormone on learning.   
