Title       : Language and Memory in the Processing of Reference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9807028

Award Number: 9807028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Gordon pcg@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Hendrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project will examine the cognitive processes that are engaged by the
              probe-word  tasks that have commonly been used to study language comprehension,
              focusing on the processes involved in the comprehension of referring
              expressions during the reading of narrative texts. It will do so in order to
              determine the extent to which the memory processes measured by probe tasks are
              those that are usually involved in language comprehension and the extent to
              which they arise from strategic task adaptations. The project seeks to gain an
              understanding of the mechanisms by which referential expressions are
              interpreted and by which patterns of coreferential expressions contribute to
              the meaning and coherence of sentences within a discourse  Empirical work will
              use probe word recognition tasks. These tasks involve presenting subjects with
              a probe word and asking them to make a speeded response indicating whether or
              not that word has occurred in the passage that they are reading (or hearing).
              Use of the task is based on the assumption that response times to the probe
              word reflect the accessibility of discourse referents in the memory
              representations that are being constructed as part of language comprehension.
              The research using the task aims to test the validity of that assumption in
              specific types of studies on coreference. The probe word recognition tasks will
              use rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) with the sentence or passage being
              presented at the center of a computer screen                The exploration of
              the probe word task will focus on two major issues:  How do the mechanisms for
              coreferential interpretation of reduced expressions (specifically pronouns) and
              complete referring expressions (specifically proper names) differ and what is
              the relative ease of interpreting these two forms of expressions in a
              coreferential manner? Probe word recognition experiments will examine the
              extent to which results showing that repeated name coreference increases memory
              accessibility more than pronominal coreference may be due to strategic
              adaptations to the probe word recognition task.  How do the sequential and
              syntactic structure of language influence mental representation in a model of
              discourse and how does this mental representation influence the interpretation
              of referring expressions in linguistic input?  Probe-word  recognition
              experiments will examine the extent to which evidence on the importance of
              sequential organization (particularly first mention) on memory accessibility
              are due to strategic task adaptations.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
