Title       : Structure and Function of a Viral RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9807800

Award Number: 9807800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Cheng Kao ckao@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kao 

Viral RNA replication is a fundamental process in viral pathogenesis.
              This laboratory studies brome mosaic virus (BMV), a model (+)-strand RNA virus,
              in order to characterize the interactions between RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
              (RdRp) subunits and the mechanism of RNA synthesis. Three projects will be
              carried out simultaneously in this research. The first is designed to dissect
              the requirements for the interaction of the proteins found in the BMV replicase
              through chemical mutagenesis, selection for stable mutants that have lost
              protein-protein interaction in the two-hybrid assay, and sequencing the 
              mutations. The second project is designed to elucidate the sequences that
              contribute to the initiation of (-)-strand viral RNA synthesis and to examine
              how these sequences affect steps in (-)-strand RNA synthesis. The third project
              examines genomic (+)-strand RNA synthesis by identifying the minimal functional
              promoter and constructing promoters with nucleotide substitutions, to identify
              RNA sequences that affect the various steps in viral RNA
              synthesis.

Knowledge gained from the execution of this project will
              contribute to the basic understanding of how viruses replicate. The use of a
              plant virus, brome mosaic virus, as an experimental model, will directly
              increase the understanding of less well-studied viruses, some of which cause
              disease. The detailed understanding of the different steps in viral RNA
              replication could ultimately uncover targets for the design of highly specific
              antiviral compounds.

