Title       : Microbially-mediated Sulfide Mineral Dissolution: Biogeochemical Controls on
               Reactions at Pyrite Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a9807598

Award Number: 9807598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hamers rjhamers@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jillian F. Banfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program   is
              jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Chemistry.    Drs.
              Jillian F. Banfield, Geology Department, and Robert J. Hamers,   Chemistry
              Department, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison will   investigate effects
              of microbes on pyrite surfaces.  Abundant organisms   (bacteria and archaea)
              have been shown to attach to pyrite and to occur   in the low pH solutions
              produced by pyrite dissolution.  The mechanism of   `direct` biological
              catalysis of pyrite dissolution involving attached   organisms is poorly
              understood, however, as are the geochemical controls   on the distribution of
              attached and non-attached Fe and S oxidizing   organisms.  In this research,
              the abundance and distribution of   chemolithotrophs will be studied as a
              function of pH, ionic strength and   geochemical conditions.  Attachment sites
              for organisms will be   correlated with surface morphology using
              precharacterized surfaces and   cultured microbes as well as microbes in the
              natural environment.  The   polymeric binding layer whereby microbes attach to
              pyrite will be studied   at low pH and the relationship to pyrite dissolution
              determined.  The   results will be compared to kinetic data from field studies
              of acid mine   drainage generation.   Experiments will be constrained by both
              molecular   biological information about the relevant species at the site and  
              physical and chemical details of the solid-liquid-organic interfaces.  The role
              of bacteria in acid mine drainage is not well understood.  Until   recently,
              only chemical and geological factors were considered in models   for
              dissolution of iron sulfides (pyrite) at locations such as Iron   Mountain
              (Redding, California).  The identify of some bacteria associated   with iron
              pyrite dissolution was determined in previous work.  Here the   role of
              bacteria in dissolution of the metal sulfides will be determined.    Factors
              such as how bacteria attach to mineral surfaces and how   transport of metals
              is affected by that attachment will be explored                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
