Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Information Technology and New Organization
               Forms: A Study of IT Adoption and Use among Mass Merchandisers, 1982-1986
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9807072

Award Number: 9807072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie Y. Lewin ay13@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT  Information Technology and New Organization Forms: A Longitudinal
              Study of US Mass Merchandisers: 1980-1996  This dissertation research examines
              three aspects of the relationship between information technology (IT) and
              organizations: the adoption and spread of IT-intensive organization forms
              throughout an industry group,  the strategic use of IT, and the impact of IT on
              and management practices and organization structures.  The specific research
              questions are:  Whether the adoption of IT by mass merchandisers is driven
              primarily by the firms' strategic intentions, by competitive pressures,  or by
              industry associations and standard-setting bodies.  How  mass merchandiser's
              use IT to achieve sustained competitive advantage.   When and how IT has been
              responsible for  radically-new  or incrementally-improved  organization forms,
              i.e. job design, task-flow processes, managerial practices, decision-making,
              etc.   The empirical work on this dissertation is based on a new, unique
              dataset consisting of full-text articles and annual reports describing
              organizational restructurings and strategic reorientations that were
              facilitated by  the implementation of IT (e.g. network and telecommunications
              systems, e-mail, the internet and world-wide web, database and software
              applications, and hardware). Findings are validated against `hard` measures of
              firms' operating efficiencies.   This dissertation is embedded in the Research
              Project on New Organizational Forms for the Information Age (NOFIA), a
              collaborative endeavor of leading organizational scholars in Europe, Asia, and
              North America. The NOFIA project is led by Professor Arie Y. Lewin, Director of
              the Center for Research on New Organization Forms, Fuqua School of Business,
              Duke University. The project's overall goals are to chronicle the evolution of
              the new dominant organizational forms and anticipate their dimensions.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
