Title       : Transmission Conflict in X - Y Chromosomes and Consequences to Heritable
               Variation in Fitness in Diopsid Dipterans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9807937

Award Number: 9807937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald S. Wilkinson gw10@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807937  Wilkinson    The evolutionary significance of sexual selection has
              received considerable study in the past twenty years, but controversy remains
              over the form and magnitude of benefits inherited by offspring as a consequence
              of mate choice.  The work proposed in this study is designed to determine if
              transmission conflict between the sex chromosomes, i.e. sex-linked meiotic
              drive, can provide heritable variation in fitness that could be exploited by
              female choice.      The motivation for this novel hypothesis is threefold. 
              First, sex-linked meiotic drive influences fitness because it distorts the sex
              ratio.  If females choose males possessing modifying genes that suppress
              sex-linked drive, then they will produce more offspring of the limiting sex.
              Sex-linked drive should be more common than autosomal drive because genetic
              exchange between the sex chromosomes is reduced or absent. The second
              motivation comes from theoretical work on the maintenance of genetic variation
              among Y chromosomes in general and X-linked meiotic drive in particular. This
              work indicates that heritable variation can be maintained either by recurrent
              sequential evolution of driving and suppressing alleles, a balanced
              polymorphism, or cyclical changes in allele frequencies.  Recent work on
              several fly species indicates that drive-modifying genes are common and evolve
              rapidly.  Third, theory and experimental work indicate that traits which
              benefit males but cost females should accumulate on the sex chromosomes. 
              Direct evidence for an association between meiotic drive suppression and a
              sexually selected ornament was recently obtained in the lab.  In two
              dramatically sexually dimorphic southeast Asian species of stalk-eyed flies
              (Diopsidae) long eye span was both preferred by females and indicated the
              presence of a Y-linked factor that suppresses X-linked meiotic drive.    The
              work proposed here will determine how sex chromosome drive is maintained in
              stalk-eyed flies and, therefore, how this drive could influence the  evolution
              of a male ornament.  The extent to which X-linked drive and Y-linked
              suppression influence male and female fitness will be quantified in two ways. 
              Replicate captive populations will be used to follow experimental evolution of
              driver and suppressor chromosome frequencies, sex ratio, and eye stalk length
              caused by selection.  The life history components responsible for evolutionary
              change will be identified in a series of experiments that will involve testing
              each male and female genotype to determine if they differ in mating success,
              longevity, fertility, sperm competitive ability, or fecundity. Results from
              this work have the potential to influence current thinking on sexual selection.
               If the evidence is consistent with sex chromosome conflict influencing male
              eye span evolution, then the possibility that meiotic drive has influenced
              sexual selection in other species must be considered.  This includes species
              known to exhibit meiotic drive, such as guppies, as well as species currently
              not known to exhibit meiotic drive, since one outcome of drive-suppressor
              coevolution is a temporary absence of detectable chromosome drive within a
              population.
