Title       : Kinetic Measurements and Modeling of Hydrothermal Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9807370

Award Number: 9807370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Brill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program   is
              jointly supported by the Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, and   Chemical
              and Transport Systems Engineering, and by the MPS Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities.  Drs. Thomas B. Brill, Chemistry   Department, and Michael T.
              Klein, Chemical Engineering Department, of the   University of Delaware will
              investigate the kinetics of synthesis of   small organic molecules in
              hydrothermal environments.  Conditions of high   pressure and temperature occur
              widely throughout the Earth's crust,   creating conditions for synthesis and
              alteration of organic feedstocks.    In this research, the kinetics of simple
              reaction pathways will be   determined at high water density in the presence of
              salts and particles,   modelling conditions at a hydrothermal vent.  The
              results are expected to   complement the thermodynamics parameters that have
              been determined   previously.  A high performance flow reactor, monitored by
              FTIR and   dispersive Raman spectroscopy, will be used to carry out the
              experiments   under controlled conditions of temperature and pressure.  
              Emphasis will   be placed on reactions of simple molecules such as urea,
              ammonia, carbon   dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, and carboxylic acids.  The effects
              of various   soluble and insoluble salts as well as changes in acidity and
              ionic   strength will be determined.  Automated kinetic modeling (AKM) will be 
               used to formulate and reduce complex reaction schemes of compound   families
              by drawing upon a matrix of qualitative and quantitative   correlations in
              addition to detailed kinetics.  In the vicinity of hydrothermal vents, unusual
              thermodynamic conditions   lead to production of complex organic molecules by
              mechanisms that are   not understood.  The objective of this investigation is
              to determine the   kinetics of some chemical reactions under hydrothermal
              conditions.    Synthesis, degradation, and alteration of organic and inorganic
              compounds   will be modeled with newly developed computational software.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
