Title       : Biogeography of Malagasy Carnivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9807045

Award Number: 9807045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne D. Yoder ayoder@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Nedbal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807045  YODER    The carnivorous mammals of Madagascar have not been studied as
              extensively as other mammals on this island, yet are an important component of
              this unique fauna.  How many times have carnivores invaded the island?  How did
              they get there?  From where did they come?  Have any Madagascar carnivores ever
              migrated back to mainland areas?  An understanding of the history (phylogeny)
              of Madagascar carnivores should help answer these and other questions about the
              biology and distribution of these animals.    In this research, Anne Yoder and
              her colleagues John Flynn and Michael Nedbal will acquire and analyze DNA
              sequence data, from two mitochondrial genes and portions of two nuclear genes,
              collected from the species of Madagascar carnivores.  From these data, the
              historical (phylogenetic) relationships of these carnivores will be
              reconstructed; the analysis will include carnivore species inhabiting other
              places that are presumed to be the closest relatives of the Madagascar
              carnivores, and thus may belong to lineages from which Madagascar carnivores
              appeared.  In some cases, DNA sequence data can be used as a "molecular clock"
              to estimate dates for major events.  The carnivore data will be evaluated to
              see if such estimations are appropriate, and if so, then geologic dates for
              carnivore colonization(s) of Madagascar will be proposed.    The results of
              these investigations will become  increasingly important as more is learned
              about other lineages of Madagascar's terrestrial vertebrates.  If, for example,
              it is found likely that different groups appeared at widely spaced intervals
              and without obvious patterning to the intervals, then the best explanation for
              how Madagascar became populated with animals would be that it was haphazard;
              founders arrived on fallen logs or other "rafts" washed up at irregular
              intervals on the island's shore.  If, on the other hand, all groups are
              estimated to have appeared within a relatively short time period, then a less
              random mechanism for populating Ma dagascar, likely tied to geological events,
              would be favored.  For example, a discrete interval for animal arrival on
              Madagascar coupled with geological evidence for a chain of islands between
              Madagascar and another land mass would suggest that the animals "hopped" among
              these islands to colonize Madagascar.
