Title       : FASEB Summer Conference: Lipid Modification of Proteins to be held August 8-13,
               1998 Snownmass Village, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9807792

Award Number: 9807792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria L. Stevens   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Buss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807792
Stevens
This award provides support for a conference on "Lipid
              Modification of Proteins" to be held August 8 to 13, 1998, at Snowmass Village,
              Colorado, under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies of
              Experimental Biology (FASEB).  Proteins which have the unusual property of
              containing an attached lipid are important in an exceptionally broad group of
              disciplines.  For example, GPI-anchored proteins are found in the coat proteins
              of trypanosomes; acyl proteins form parts of the virion or perform essential
              roles in infectivity and replication of certain viruses; and isoprenoid
              addition is an essential modification for signaling proteins which regulate
              hormonal responses, vision, and calcium signaling.  The enzymes which attach or
              remove these lipids are being studied with increasing scrutiny because they
              present novel biophysical challenges for understanding the interface of
              membranes, lipids, and proteins.  Because lipid-modified proteins participate
              in a variety of cellular processes, scientists from  diverse disciplines have
              found in them, sometimes unexpectedly, a common interest. Two examples that
              have generated considerable attention are the involvement of myristoylated ARF
              proteins and prenylated Rab proteins in vesicular trafficking and the
              attachment of lipids to Ras proteins.  A pivotal question is the importance of
              interactions of lipid-modified proteins of all these varieties within specific
              subregions of membranes that are enriched in glycolipids or associated with
              physical structures known as caveolae.

Because scientists interested in
              lipid modification of proteins often attend only meetings in their own
              specialties,  they frequently do not learn of advances by others who work on
              these interesting proteins in different fields.  The key objective of this
              conference is to provide a venue for communication among  these investigators
              and to highlight the emerging possibilities for cross-disciplinary synergy. 
              This FASEB conference is particularly important since no other conference on
              the subject is being held in 1998.

