Title       : A Systematic Procedure for Synthesizing Multiphase Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9807101

Award Number: 9807101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ka M. Ng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ng - 9807101  A research program is planned to develop a procedure to identify a
              multiphase reactor for carrying out a given reaction at the early stage of
              process development.  Such gas-liquid, gas-solid, liquid-liquid and
              gas-liquid-solid reactions, with the solid being a catalyst or a reactant,
              provide the basis for a large number of chemical, petrochemical and biochemical
              operations.  There are three elements to this screening approach --- a generic
              reactor model, an accompanying sensitivity model, and a knowledge base
              consisting of heuristics, and correlations on hydrodynamics, heat and mass
              transport.  In synthesizing a generic reactor model, the conventional
              multiphase reactors are decomposed into common attributes and constituent
              parts, and reaggregated for the reaction under consideration.  Thus, in
              addition to choosing between conventional reactor types, the procedure also
              provides insights for the creation of novel reactors.  The sensitivity model
              quantifies the relative impact of the model parameters on the reactor
              performance.  The knowledge base provides heuristics, estimates and reality
              checks in the decision making process.    The PI has initiated work on
              isothermal, single reaction systems.  Heat effects, multiple reactions and
              safety will be emphasized in this work.  For a given reaction, the alternative
              reactors identified in the screening approach can be represented in a
              superstructure, which will then be examined rigorously using optimization
              techniques to produce an optimal design.  Case studies will be used to help
              identify heuristics and to provide users with concrete examples.  A computer
              code is planned to demonstrate the procedure, and to facilitate the use of this
              procedure by chemists, engineers and students.  The physics and chemistry of
              reactions will be emphasized in all aspects of the program.  The results could
              contribute to reactor design in industry, both in conceptualization and process
              development, and provide a coherent body of knowledge and concrete exampl es
              for teaching design of reaction system synthesis.
