Title       : Molecular Biology of Chemosensing in Bacterial Chemotaxis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9807789

Award Number: 9807789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius Adler adler@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Some simple single-celled organisms provide models for  understanding complex
              biological problems.  In sensory  neuroscience, one of the areas important to
              understand is the  process of transduction, in which capture of some form of
              stimulus  is transformed into a cellular signal of some kind.  In  chemosensory
              transduction, for example smell, an odor molecule  binds with a particular
              receptor protein on the membrane of the  olfactory sensory cell, and internal
              biochemical reactions lead to  the sending of a nerve impulse to the brain. 
              This project  continues work on the common bacterium E. coli, as a model system
               for chemoreception.  This unicellular organism lives in liquid  medium, and
              propels itself toward attractant chemicals like  nutrients, and away from
              others.  It has been found that the  mechanism for this chemically-cued
              movement, called chemotaxis,  depends in part on the role of calcium ions in
              solution.  Calcium  ions are known to be extremely important in other cellular 
              signaling systems, including between nerve cells.  This project  combines
              biochemical work with genetic mutant strains of bacteria  to test steps in the
              chemotactic response for calcium sensitivity,  to find out how changes in local
              calcium concentration affect the  chemotaxis, and to see whether
              pharmacological agents that block  calcium responses in other systems work the
              same way in bacteria.     Results are important beyond simply bacterial
              chemotaxis  because they are highly relevant to understanding sensory 
              transduction in general, and to understanding how calcium can  exert important
              and widespread effects in more complex systems.
