Title       : Function of the Axial Musculoskeletal System in Locomotion and Ventilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9807534

Award Number: 9807534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Carrier carrier@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9807534  Carrier  Vigorous activity requires elevated rates of metabolism. 
              Thus, for an animal to sustain rapid locomotion, it must breathe as it runs. 
              Although humans take breathing during locomotion for granted, there is
              increasing evidence that the ability to run and breathe at the same time is a
              derived condition among terrestrial vertebrates.  analysis of fishes and
              amphibians clearly shows that the original function of the muscles of the
              abdomen and thorax was locomotion rather than lung ventilation.  The
              significance of this is apparent in lizards in which the muscles that produce
              ventilation also have a role in locomotion.  In these lizards, the locomotor
              function of the axial muscles predominates over their ventilatory function. 
              Consequently, in some species, the locomotor actions of the trunk muscles
              interfere with breathing to such an extent that and both lung ventilation and
              oxygen consumption decline as speed increases.  Similarly, in dogs, the
              locomotor function of the axial muscles appears to be dominate over the
              ventilatory function of these muscles.  When trotting dogs uncouple their
              breathing from the locomotor cycle, activity of all but one or two of the trunk
              muscles stays locked to the stride cycle.  This suggests that tetrapods will
              either be unable to run and breathe at the same time, or their ventilation must
              in some way be integrated with their locomotion.  The research described in
              this proposal is intended to increase our understanding of the mechanical
              linkage between the locomotor and ventilatory systems by investigating the role
              the axial muscle-skeletal system plays in running and breathing.  It has two
              goals.  First Dr. Carrier will use electromyography and manipulation of
              locomotor forces to test specific hypotheses of locomotor function for the
              axial muscles in both lizards and mammals.  Second, by comparing the intensity
              of muscle activity when ventilation is coupled versus not coupled to the
              locomotor cycle, the PI will determine whether locomotor-venti latory coupling
              decreases the conflict between running and breathing in mammals.  This study
              will contribute to our understanding of the ways in which the oxygen cascade is
              maintained in the face of conflicting demands resulting from locomotion; and it
              will help clarify differences between lizards and mammals which may help
              explain the reliance of running lizards on anaerobic metabolism and the ability
              of mammals to sustain vigorous locomotion aerobically.
