Title       : Ultrafast Electron and Lattice Dynamics Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9807144

Award Number: 9807144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Mazur mazur@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Mazur
9807144
This condensed matter physics project will employ optical
              techniques to study the electron and lattice dynamics in solids after
              excitation with intense femtosecond laser pulses. These pulses induce phase
              that will be investigated in semiconductors, wide-bandgap semiconductors,
              metals, and insulators in both crystalline and amorphous forms in order to
              study the carrier relaxation processes. The nature of the phase changes is
              determined by measuring the response of the dielectric function to femtosecond
              laser excitation. Additional experiments are planned to study carrier
              relaxation processes in semiconductors and wide-bandgap semiconductors at high
              injected carrier densities. The results of this research project will further
              advance understanding of ultrafast electron and lattice dynamics in
              laser-excited materials. The research will train graduate students in the
              latest techniques in laser spectroscopy, an area of both fundamental and
              technological importance.
%%%
This condensed matter physics project employs
              optical techniques to study the processes that occur during an ultra-small time
              interval after the solid has been illuminated by an intense femtosecond laser
              pulses. The intense laser pulse causes rearrangements of atoms in the solids,
              sometimes to new phases in the materials. These phase changes will be
              investigated in semiconductors, wide-bandgap semiconductors, metals, and
              insulators in both crystalline and amorphous forms. Of interest is the time
              required for the lattice and electrons to reach equilibrium after the laser
              pulse.  in order to study the carrier relaxation processes. The nature of the
              phase changes is determined by measuring the response of the optical response
              to the femtosecond laser excitation. Additional experiments are planned to
              study carrier relaxation processes in semiconductors and wide-bandgap
              semiconductors at high levels of dopant atoms. The results of this research
              project will further advance understanding of ultrafast electron and lattice
              dynamics in laser-excited materials. Beyond its immediate scientific goals, the
              proposed research will have additional impact on application areas and
              education.  The materials and processes studied have important applications in
              semiconductor technology, data storage, and laser materials processing. Through
              quality research-based education of undergraduate students, this research also
              contributes to science and engineering education and the training of future
              scientists and engineers.


