Title       : The Moon Pyramid and the Teotihuacan State Polity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a9807105

Award Number: 9807105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saburo Sugiyama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The archaeological site of Teotihuacan which is located in the Valley of Mexico
              a short distance from Mexico City was, at its apogee, one of the largest and
              most populous prehistoric metropolises in the New World. Construction at its
              sacred center was initiated during the first two centuries B.C. During the
              following stage of monumental construction a series of large imposing stone
              pyramids were erected; the urban area around them covered approximately 20
              square km, with about 60,000 to 80,000 inhabitants by A.D. 150. The Teotihuacan
              state extended its influences throughout many parts of Mesoamerica and its
              power continued for centuries until its apparently sudden collapse in the
              seventh century. Although archaeologists most often focus their attention on
              large impressive structures associated with high ranking elites ,at Teotihuacan
              just the opposite is the case. Extensive survey and excavation over decades has
              resulted in the exposure of many typical house compounds and a great deal is
              known about `ordinary` life at the site. In a prior NSF supported project Dr.
              Sugiyama and his collaborators undertook important excavation at the Feathered
              Serpent Pyramid. Working both around and underneath this structure they
              recovered large numbers of sacrificial burials (apparently of prisoners) as
              well as graves of royal members of society. This has shed a preliminary light
              on one significant social stratum. With NSF support, this approach will be
              continued at the massive Moon Pyramid. Through excavation in the immediate
              vicinity as well as tunneling under the structure itself, the investigators
              will attempt to answer a number of questions. They wish to date the structure
              and determine the construction stages. They hope to recover, royal burials,
              sacrificial remains as well as other cultural materials. The Pyramids were
              designed to reflect the society's basic ideology and both the layout of burials
              and the materials they contain shed light on systems of belief, social
              organization and political control.  Archaeologists wish to understand how
              complex societies arise and how, with simple technological systems, large
              numbers of people are organized into state systems. Mechanisms that establish
              and maintain hierarchies and which facilitate social control play a vital part
              in this process. This research will elucidate them at one of the most important
              sites in the New World.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
