Title       : Transport of Biomolecules in Electric Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9807541

Award Number: 9807541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Allison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Allison
9807541

1. Technical Abstract

Perhaps no other techniques are
              used more extensively in
biochemistry and molecular biology than the various
              electrophoretic
methods.  It is easy to understand why this is so.  Since
              most
biomolecules in aqueous solution are charged to varying degrees, it
              is
possible to separate them (roughly on the basis of their charge) by simply
              applying a constant external field.  Although electrophoresis is easy to
              understand at a qualitative level, it is an extremely difficult problem to
              understand at a quantitative level due to the complex interplay of biomolecule,
              ion atmosphere, solvent, and external field.  In order to accurately predict
              the electrophoretic mobility of a particular protein, for example, it is
              necessary to correctly account for these interactions. P.I. has developed
              numerical boundary element methods and applied them to several model and actual
              systems. The   objective of this study is to extend past work on free solution
              electrophoresis to a variety of systems including proteins, nucleic acids, and
              synthetic polyelectrolytes.  This is done in collaboration   with Professor Tom
              Laue and coworkers (University of New Hampshire) who carry out the experimental
              work on the systems. These include: (1) oligonucleotides as a function of
              length (20-200bp), salt concentration (.05 to 1.0 M), and salt type/valence
              (KCl, NaCl, Tris acetate, MgCl2); (2) DNA fragments of reduced charge and
              charge density; (3) bent DNA fragments; (4) Bovine ribonuclease as a function
              of pH and salt concentration; (5) an RNA fragment of well-defined structure and
              with putative cation binding sites.  These studies will enable charge and
              structural information from mobility studies to be inferred to a degree that
              was not possible before.   Additional objectives include accounting for a gel
              support medium, supplementing the boundary element calculations with Brownian
              dynamics simulation, and applying the modeling protocols to related
              polyelectrolyte
              problems.
















Allison
9807541

2. Non-technical
              Abstract

Electrophoresis is undoubtedly the most extensively used
              technique
in a number of scientific and technical fields.  This is due to a
              
combination of the method's simplicity (basically applying a voltage drop
              across a solution) coupled with its effectiveness in separating different
              biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.  DNA fingerprinting in
              Forensic Science is just one of a vast array of applications of
              electrophoresis. Since different biomolecules invariably possess different
              charges, an applied voltage produces a force on the biomolecules which vary
              from type to type depending on charge.  This variable force, in turn, leads to
              a separation of the different types of biomolecule present in solution.  Even
              though electrophoresis is easy to understand at a qualitative level,  it turns
              out to be extremely difficult to understand at a quantitative level due to the
              complex interplay of biomolecule, its ion atmosphere, the solvent, and the
              external force field.  For example, it is easy to predict that a DNA molecule
              will move in a particular direction when a particular voltage gradient across a
              solution is applied.  What has been unable to predict, at least until very
              recently, is precisely how fast the DNA moves, which is the challenge for this
              study.  Computer methods developed in previous studies will be extended to more
              accurately predict electrophoretic mobilities of biomolecules on the basis of
              detailed molecular models.  Working closely with experimentalists (Tom Laue and
              coworkers at the University of New Hampshire) these modeling protocols to a
              number of nucleic acid and protein systems will be subject to tests.  From
              these studies, it is anticipated that important charge and structural
              information such as the nature of the binding of small molecules/ions to
              proteins and nucleic acids and molten globule transitions in proteins can be
              inferred.



