Title       : Diffusion of a Social Innovation: Covenant Marriage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9807379

Award Number: 9807379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64397              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine B. Rosier krosier@lsuvm.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott L. Feld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9178,9237,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is an exploratory study of the diffusion of a social innovation, the new
              "covenant marriage" law recently enacted in the state of Louisiana.  A covenant
              marriage requires a greater degree of commitment to the union as manifest in
              accepting greater obstacles to marriage and especially greater obstacles to
              divorce. The sponsors of the legislation hope that providing the option of
              covenant marriage will create stronger marriages that are less likely to end in
              divorce. While many observers are skeptical about the ability of such a law to
              dramatically affect divorce rates, others across the United States and beyond
              are looking at this law as a possible model for an important first step towards
              increasing stability in American families. This research project will provide
              understandings of the actual impact of the covenant marriage law in the first
              six months that covenant marriages are available. The project will investigate
              the political process that produced the law, and the responses to the law of
              the religious communities and the marrying couples of Louisiana.    The
              researchers will investigate the choice of a covenant marriage as a process of
              adoption of an innovation, where the adoption diffuses through a population by
              a process of social contagion. As with many other types of innovations, all
              individuals are not equally susceptible to influence toward the innovation and
              all actors are not equally influential. Individuals who are more religiously
              traditional are likely to be more susceptible to adopting the innovation of a
              covenant marriage, and clergy are likely to be especially important opinion
              leaders. Because of the potentially great impact of the clergy, this study
              focuses upon diffusion of support among the clergy as well as among the general
              public    Rather than relying upon retrospective reports, this research is
              being carried out as the process unfolds.  The researchers will monitor public
              pronouncements and interview key opinion leaders as they emerge, to describe
              and understan d any escalation in the choice of covenant marriage particularly
              by certain groups of people. Interviews will be conducted with political
              figures, with clergy, and with marrying couples, with the primary purpose of
              understanding why covenant marriages come to be chosen by some couples and not
              by others.
