Title       : The Encounter Complex in Antibody-Antigen Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9807950

Award Number: 9807950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferson Foote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  981091024    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807950
Foote
Molecular recognition between biological macromolecules is
              thought often to occur through a transient intermediate known as an "encounter
              complex".  In this complex, two reactants come into proximity and collide
              repeatedly. They do not necessarily form bonds with each other, but cannot
              easily escape because they are packed against each other by solvent. The
              investigator's long term goal is to develop experimental approaches to study
              encounter complexes. The investigator proposes a method for resolving encounter
              complex formation into component steps, and will apply this method to antibody
              recognition of antigens.  The method is to construct monovalent and divalent
              versions of the same antibody and measure the kinetics of antigen binding by
              each. Loss of one binding site creates a deficit in reaction rate that affects
              the specific interaction with antigen, but not the general processes of
              diffusion and non-specific collisions. This theory will be tested with mutant
              antibodies and antigens, using primarily stopped-flow fluorescence to measure
              kinetics. The model system employed will be the antigen lysozyme and a
              humanized version of an anti-lysozyme antibody.  These studies will elucidate
              new principles of ligand-receptor interaction that underlie the reactivity of
              antibodies and other molecules of the immune system.  

The investigator
              proposes a new way of analyzing chemical reactions between complex biological
              molecules such as proteins. Macromolecules in water move about uneventfully for
              a long time, then undergo a rapid series of collisions when they meet each
              other. Two molecules engaged in this collision process are called an "encounter
              complex". Computer calculations indicate that the encounter complex is an
              important intermediate in crucial life processes, such as the recognition of
              foreign materials by antibodies. The investigator plans to test this theory
              experimentally, and to develop a general method of looking at the biological
              role of the encounter complex.
