Title       : Chronology, Technology and Culture Change in Late Prehistoric Southwest Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9807031

Award Number: 9807031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria A. Masucci mmasucci@drew.drew.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drew University
	      36 Madison Avenue
	      Madison, NJ  079401434    201/377-3000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Masucci will conduct two
              seasons or archaeological fieldwork in the Chanduy, El Azucar and Rio Grande
              valleys of Ecuador. These extend inland from the Pacific coast towards the
              Andes and thus cover a range of environmental zones. While the prehistory of
              this region of Ecuador is poorly known, prior work indicates that the final
              periods of prehispanic occupation may be divided into two periods: a Guangala
              Phase from ca. 200 BC to 800 AD and a following Integration phase which extends
              from ca. 800 to 1530. One model for the organization of the latter period has
              proposed a centralized state level of organization with a complex system of
              agricultural production through water management and storage facilities.
              Evidence for the earlier Phase suggests a more independent production system
              with resources shared across environmental zones within a developing
              hierarchical system or chiefdom. Dr. Masucci wishes to determine whether these
              models are correct and if so discover the factors which are responsible for the
              shift from one to the other. Relatively little excavation has been conducted in
              this region and in this first phase of a longer term project Dr. Masucci will
              establish a basic chronological and ceramic sequence. She will map and conduct
              small scale excavation at a number of sites to collect in situ material.
              Ceramics serve as time sensitive indicators since styles change over time and
              ceramic characterization and seriation will provide an important dating tool.
              Radiocarbon dates will anchor the sequence in absolute time. Collection and
              analysis of fauna as well as macrobotanical and pollen will permit 
              environmental reconstruction and the eventual interpretation of change in this
              larger context.  Archaeologists have worked in the Peruvian coastal zone for
              many years and within this highly arid environment reconstructed a trajectory
              of cultural change. In many ways this is similar to the preliminary sequence
              from Ecuador. While the Peruvian sequence is well established, debate rages
              about what underlying factors are responsible for the observed changes. Some
              archaeologists rely heavily on climatic factors and believe that El Nino events
              precipitated major social re-organizations while others argue that social
              rather than natural factors played a more important role. Ecuador can provide
              information potentially relevant to this issue. Dr. Masucci wishes to compare
              the Ecuadorian sequence to its Peruvian counterpart; she will compare the
              degree of similarity and the times a which change occurred. Since the two are
              relatively independent, if cultural changes occurred at essentially the same
              time that would provide strong evidence for a climatic cause.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will increase knowledge of an important and
              understudied archaeological region. The data will be of interest to many
              researchers. It will also shed new light on the effect of events such as El
              Nino on hierarchical societies which existed at a simple level of technology.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
