Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Transition Metal Hydrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a9807358

Award Number: 9807358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Michael Heinekey heinekey@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Michael Heinekey, Chemistry Department, University of Washington, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              for studies of the synthesis and reactivity of transition metal hydrides.
              Synthetic methods will be developed for cationic dihydrogen complexes of iron
              and ruthenium. These complexes will be studied as models for the active site of
              hydrogenase. Tris-pyrazolyl and related ligands will be used to stabilize a
              series of cationic Ir and Rh hydrides that will be used to activate
              hydrocarbons. Structural and charge dependence of the quantum mechanical proton
              tunneling that occurs in polyhydride metal complexes will be investigated to
              increase the mechanistic understanding of the process. A significant portion of
              the study will involve the study of hydrides into which deuterium or tritium
              has been incorporated. Tritium nmr will be used to characterize the behavior of
              some of these systems. Exchange coupling will be developed as a probe of the
              solvation and ion-pairing that occurs in these systems. The occurrence of
              partial orientation of dihydrogen complexes in very high magnetic fields will
              investigated at 17.6 Tesla and these data will be used to determine the H-H
              distance in the complexes. 

Hydrogen molecules may be activated when they
              interact with metal atoms. This behavior has tremendous utility in laboratory
              and industrial chemistry to increase the ability of hydrogen to undergo many
              reactions, including virtually all "hydrogenation" reactions.  In another
              respect, the interactions between hydrogen and metals has become an important
              topic with the increased interest in hydrogen as a clean fuel. In this project
              the fundamental ways that hydrogen becomes attached to a metal will be
              investigated and the details of how hydrogen atoms interchange with each other
              and interact with the surrounding environment will be determined.

