Title       : Computational Approaches to Phasing for Macromolecular Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9807896

Award Number: 9807896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd O. Yeates yeates@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Crystallography is one of most powerful tools for determining the
              three-dimensional structures of proteins and other macromolecules at atomic
              resolution. But despite the method's long history, determining the crystal
              structures of proteins is still a laborious and uncertain task. Aside from the
              problem of crystallizing the molecule of interest, the main obstacle is in
              recovering the phases of the scattered X-ray waves, information that is lost in
              the diffraction experiment. While this problem was largely overcome about 40
              years ago for the case of small organic molecules, the problem has not been
              solved for large molecules like proteins. As new and important proteins are
              being discovered at an increasing rate, due to genome sequencing efforts for
              example,  more  powerful  approaches  to  the  phasing  problem  for
              macromolecules are essential.

This proposal attacks two particular aspects
              of the macromolecular phasing problem from a computational perspective. The
              first study aims to improve on the method of molecular replacement, a protocol
              that requires knowledge of a structure similar to the one that is not yet
              known.  The method is largely limited by the similarity between the known and
              unknown macromolecules.  The general problem of adjusting the 'search model'
              during the calculations to more closely resemble the unknown is cast as a
              tree-search problem and algorithms are presented for finding the optimal
              solution.

The second study addresses a more general aspect of macromolecular
              phasing.  Empirical and computational methods are used to characterize complex
              properties that should be obeyed by the protein electron density images or
              'maps' that result, through Fourier synthesis, from the diffraction data and
              the phase information. Applying these derived properties as constraints should
              lead to better phase information and better protein maps.

