Title       : Interactions of Mercury With Organic Matter in Water and Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9807735

Award Number: 9807735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph N. Ryan joe.ryan@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn L. Nagy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9807735
Ryan

The interactions of mercury with organic matter play an
              important role in determining the environmental risk and toxicity of mercury in
              water and sediments.  Most of our understanding of mercury speciation in water
              and sediments comes from studies of mercury at high concentrations.  These
              studies may be relevant for sites of substantial mercury contamination, but
              mercury toxicity is a problem even in areas where mercury concentrations are
              barely above detection limits.  The toxic forms of mercury, methylmercury,is
              formed by the methylation of Hg(II) species and accumulated in higher
              organisms.  
The methylation of Hg(II) may be prevented by complexation of
              Hg(II) by strong ligands.  Increasing evidence suggests that organic matter
              effectively binds Hg(II), prevents methylation of Hg(II), and controls the
              transport of Hg(II) in water and sediments.  However, our understanding of the
              interactions of organic matter with mercury is lacking in several crucial
              areas:

1. Why does organic matter bind mercury so strongly?
2. What is the
              form of mercury in relatively pristine sediments?
3. How rapidly and by what
              mechanism is mercury released from mercury solids?      

It is the goal of
              this study to provide answers to these questions by pursuing three major
              tasks:
(1) isolation and characterization of organic matter fractions
              responsible for Hg(II) binding, 
(2) development of sequential extractions for
              determination of mercury speciation in relatively pristine sediments, and 
(3)
              examination of the role of organic matter in the release of Hg(II) from mercury
              solids.  

These tasks will accomplished by a research team of Joe Ryan
              (University of Colorado), an environmental engineer with experience in surface
              chemistry and sequential extractions, George Aiken (U.S. Geological Survey), an
              organic geochemist with experience in the isolation and characterization of
              organic matter, and Kathy Nagy (University of Colorado), an aqueous geochemist
              with experience in mineral-water interactions.
	The first task is the
              identification of key components of natural organic matter responsible for
              mercury binding through affinity chromatography.  This task, combined with a
              full arsenal of organic matter characterization methods, will help us test the
              hypothesis that reduced sulfur functional groups are the key factor in strength
              of mercury binding by organic matter.  George Aiken will lead this effort with
              the assistance of analytical techniques provided by Murthy Vairavamuthy of
              Brookhaven National Laboratory.
	The second task is the characterization of
              the speciation of mercury in sediments using refined sequential extraction
              procedures.  This task will examine new possibilities for the sequestration of
              mercury in sediments and test the hypothesis that organic matter dominates the
              speciation of mercury in sediments.  Joe Ryan of the Department of Civil,
              Environmental, and Architectural Engineering, University of Colorado, will lead
              this effort, assisted by a graduate research assistant.
	The fourth task is an
              examination of the rate and mechanism of mercury released by natural organic
              matter during cinnabar dissolution to assess the mobilization of mercury from
              sediments.  This task will provide basic data on the release of mercury from
              mercuric sulfide solids and test a novel hypothesis that organic matter is
              acting both as a strong ligand and an electron acceptor in enhancing the
              dissolution of mercuric sulfide solids.  Kathy Nagy, assisted by a graduate
              research associate, will direct this effort.

This proposal was submitted to
              the EGB Program and is being jointly funded by:
Division of CTS (Roger
              Arndt)





 
