Title       : Entropic and Disorder Effects in Soft Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9807156

Award Number: 9807156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Nelson Nelson@physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807156  Nelson    This is a theoretical grant funded jointly by the Divisions 
              of Materials Research, Physics and Molecular and Cellular  Biology.  The focus
              is on the physics of soft biomaterials.  The systems studied will include lipid
              bilayer membranes,  DNA, and complexes of DNA with other materials.  The work
              is  basic research aimed at characterizing these key  achitectural and
              functional elements of living cells and  understanding the mechanisms governing
              their behavior.  The  interest of the work is not only to understand their 
              operation in vivo, but also to illuminate principles which  could help in the
              design of simple artifiical analogs,  ultimately for medical and even
              industrial applications.    This project will use the methods of theoretical
              physics to  study the interplay between membrane conformation, entropic 
              effects, adhesion of particles to membranes, and structures  of cytosol; the
              dynamics of stiff biopolymers such as DNA  and actin, the role of torsional
              stiffness in their  dynamics, and in particular the transport of torsional 
              stress down DNA in response to transcription; the  interactions of
              highly-charged polymers (polyelectrolytes),  such as DNA; and, the sharp
              switching between positionally  ordered and disordered tracts of chromatin
              fiber, and its  hypothesized role in gene regulation.    Particular emphasis
              will be placed on distinguishing the  effects of thermal fluctuations (entropy)
              from those of  frozen disorder (e.g. sequence information) in soft 
              biomaterials.  Sometimes these effects are similar, for  example in equilibrium
              DNA stretching, while in other cases  they can be wildly different.    Much of
              this research will continue ongoing direct  collaborations with
              experimentalists.  Many different  techniques will be needed, from standard
              continuum mechanics  methods (elasticity theory, fluid mechanics) to modern 
              statistical physics.  Numerical modeling will be called upon  as needed, with
              primary emphsis given to simple analytical  results.  %%%  This i s a
              theoretical grant funded jointly by the Divisions  of Materials Research,
              Physics and Molecular and Cellular  Biology.  The focus is on the physics of
              soft biomaterials.  The systems studied will include lipid bilayer membranes, 
              DNA, and complexes of DNA with other materials.  The work is  basic research
              aimed at characterizing these key  achitectural and functional elements of
              living cells and  understanding the mechanisms governing their behavior.  The 
              interest of the work is not only to understand their  operation in vivo, but
              also to illuminate principles which  could help in the design of simple
              artifiical analogs,  ultimately for medical and even industrial applications. 
              ***
