Title       : Segmental Dynamics of Surface Bound Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9807696

Award Number: 9807696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank D. Blum fblum@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9807696  Blum    This award will enable study ofthe segmental motion of polymers
               at interfaces, particularly those attached to solid surfaces.  The interfaces
              in multiphase materials, such as those in  composites, coatings, nano- and
              electronic materials play an  important role in determining the physical
              properties of those  systems.  Since the interfaces themselves are quite thin,
              and as  the size of structures is reduced, the effects of the interfaces 
              become even more difficult to properly characterize with  macroscopic physical
              testing.  Spectroscopic techniques,  especially deuterium nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR), will be  used to study the microscopic properties of the
              polymers at  interfaces with solid substrates.  The use of deuterium labelling 
              is important because specific deuteration is not a significant  perturbation of
              the segmental motion of the polymer-the deuterons  act as reporter groups based
              on their position which is  synthetically controlled.  The focus will be on the
              dynamics  (i.e. molecular motion) of polymer segments.  Segmental motion  has
              not been studied as much as the structures of the interfacial  species;
              however, both determine the ultimate properties of the  systems used.    This
              work builds on work previously funded by NSF where deuterium  NMR has been
              shown to be a powerful tool for probing the motions  of adsorbed polymers.  For
              homopolymers adsorbed on solid  surfaces, a motional gradient in a
              single-molecule thick film has  been identified.  However, the characterization
              of this  gradient/layer was incomplete.  It is proposed that experiments  on
              composite materials, where the labelled polymer is adsorbed on  the solid
              substrate and an unlabelled polymer is absorbed over  it, be performed.  These
              will identify how the presence of an  overlayer affects the interfacial layer. 
              With the sensitivity of  the NMR instrumentation available, it is also proposed
              that two-  dimensional exchange NMR experiments be performed in order to 
              quantitatively estimate the  rates and amounts of different  motional species
              present in the interfacial polymers.  %%%  The result of the successful
              completion of this work will be that  knowledge of the structure and dynamics
              of interfacial materials  will help researchers to design interfacial systems
              with enhanced  properties for advanced applications such as advanced composite 
              structures, electronic devices, particle stabilization, and  adhesive
              properties.  ***
