Title       : Special Project: Regional Shaping the Future Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1998   
File        : a9807341

Award Number: 9807341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pui-Kei Wong pkwong@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Gallagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Special Project: North Central Regional Shaping the Future Workshop  Project
              Summary    The colleges of Education and Natural Science at Michigan State
              University, with cooperation from the Michigan Department of Education will
              host a workshop for mathematics, science, and science education faculty and
              administrators from campuses in the North central region on June 24, 1998 at
              the Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center of Michigan State University.    This
              workshop is a follow-up to the highly successful national conference held last
              year at Michigan State University during May 8-10: Revitalizing Undergraduate
              Science and Mathematics Education: A National Dialog. This event was attended
              by 400 faculty and administrators from around the nation.    The June workshop
              will address specific issues raised by the conferees, namely, how the various
              recommendations of Shaping the Future: New Expectations for Undergraduate
              Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineerin& and Technology (NSF96-139) that
              are particularly important to institutions of higher education in the North
              central region of the U.S. can be implemented. Referencing this report, the
              principal foci of the workshop will be:      V. Role of college ~ university
              administrators in shaping the future      VI. Role of SMELT departments in
              promoting faculty development      VII. Role of SME&T faculty in facilitating
              and employing curricular improvements and pedagogical enhancements to SME&T
              courses.    Teams of 3 to 5 faculty and administrators from each participating
              institution will attend this workshop. The plan is to invite teams from a mix
              of 60 two- and four-year institutions. Particular attention will be given to
              the issues of reaching all students found in three major groups (majors,
              students planning teaching careers, and non majors). One ofthe themes of the
              workshop will be developing partnerships between two- and four-yea institutions
              and ensuring the foundation courses taken in two-year colleges will properly
              prepare students for furthe r work in four-year institutions. This work will be
              guided by an external advisory committee of experts.
