Title       : Function of a Chloroplast Signal Recognition Particle in Protein Targeting and
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9807826

Award Number: 9807826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Henry rahenry@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Henry  9807826    Eukaryotic cells are compartmentalized; that is, their
              cytoplasm is divided into certain functionally and spatially discrete (albeit
              dynamically interactive) regions, the boundaries of which are most often
              delineated by membranes.   The chloroplast is such a compartment in green
              plants.  Chloroplasts contain within them the biochemical and biophysical
              machinery for photosynthesis, the process whereby light energy is converted
              into chemical energy.  Photosynthesis in green plants is critical to life on
              earth as we know it, since it is the source of chemical energy (in the form of
              sugars and related molecules) not only for the plants themselves but also for
              essentially all animals and fungi.        In general, protein synthesis in
              eukaryotic cells takes place in the cytosol, outside any specific intracellular
              membrane-bound compartment.  Thus, the specific proteins that are found in and
              function in a particular compartment must be targeted and transported to that
              location.  The structure of chloroplasts is complex:  there is a double
              membrane surrounding the so-called stromal, or internal space, and within the
              stromal space are smaller membrane-bound subcompartments called thylakoids.  In
              the case of proteins manufactured in the cytosol whose function and ultimate
              location is in the thylakoids, the proteins must first be imported into the
              chloroplast and then transported into or across the thylakoid membrane.  This
              process has been shown to be quite complex, and at least three different
              sorting pathways have been found that localize imported proteins to the
              thylakoid.  This project focuses on one of these pathways, which is responsible
              for localizing Light Harvesting Chlorophyll Protein (LHCP) and certain other
              integral membrane proteins to the thylakoid membrane.       Of considerable
              interest is the homology between LHCP localization and protein targeting to the
              endoplasmic reticulum (ER).  Both protein-sorting mechanisms require GTP
              hydrolysis and a ribonucleoprotein complex, termed the signal recognition
              particle (SRP), that binds to the part of the imported protein that serves as
              the specific sorting signal. One major difference between the two SRP systems
              is that the chloroplast SRP operates post-translationally and forms a soluble
              LHCP/SRP transit complex in the stroma.  The hypothesis of this project is that
              LHCP in transit complex is targeted to thylakoids by a mechanism that requires
              an SRP receptor on the thylakoid.  This hypothesis will be explored through
              experiments designed to identify proteins on the thylakoid that interact with
              the complex or with SRP.  One approach will be to isolate proteins associated
              with a thylakoid-bound SRP.  Such binding occurs when assays for LHCP
              integration are conducted in the presence of a non-hydrolyzable GTP analogue,
              GMP-PNP.  Proteins associated with membrane-bound SRP will be identified by
              immunoprecipitation with antibody to chloroplast SRP following fractionation of
              thylakoids solubilized with non-denaturing detergents.  Proteins
              co-precipitating with the SRP will be isolated from polyacrylamide gels and
              used to obtain protein sequence information.  A second approach will rely on
              antibody to E. coli FtsY, a bacterial homologue of the SRP receptor
              alpha-subunit.  Anti-FtsY, which specifically interacts with a chloroplast
              protein on immunoblots, will be tested for its ability to inhibit LHCP
              integration and used to identify a cDNA coding for a chloroplast FtsY.   
              Successful completion of this project will identify a component(s) of the
              thylakoid membrane that functions as part of the targeting/integration
              machinery.  It should then be possible to asses whether other localization
              pathways in the chloroplast share any of these components.  The results will
              likely also have impact on investigations of protein localization in bacteria,
              since virtually nothing is known about the events that take place at the
              bacterial cytoplasmic membrane when proteins are directed for transport or
              integration by an SRP homologous mechanism.   Finally, the identification and
              purification of components that comprise part of the LHCP localization
              machinery will provide important tools for future studies to more completely
              understand protein targeting in chloroplasts.
