Title       : Symbiotic Association of Aphids: Synthesis of Essential Amino Acids by the
               Nonculturable Prokaryotic Endosymbiont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9807145

Award Number: 9807145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Baumann pabaumann@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807145
Baumann, Paul
Aphids are major pests of agriculturally important
              plants. Essentially all aphids harbor intracellular prokaryotic symbionts
              (assigned to the genus Buchnera) within specialized cells. The endosymbionts
              cannot be grown outside the aphid. Aphids are dependent on Buchnera;
              elimination of the endosymbionts results in death of the aphid. Plant-sap, the
              diet of aphids, is rich in carbohydrates but deficient in amino acids. Insects
              require ten preformed amino acids and it is thought that one of the functions
              of the endosymbiont is the synthesis of these amino acids for the aphid. The
              investigator's past studies, as well as those of other investigators, have
              provided evidence that the endosymbionts make the essential amino acid
              tryptophan for the host. From previous studies there is nutritional evidence
              that the endosymbiont also synthesizes the essential branched chain amino acids
              (isoleucine, valine, leucine). The pathway of branched chain amino acid
              biosynthesis involves several enzymes common to both isoleucine and valine
              biosynthesis. The leucine pathway originates from intermediates of the valine
              pathway. Other investigators have found that in the Buchnera of some aphids,
              the genes for leucine biosynthesis are located on a plasmid. The goal of this
              research is to provide evidence on whether Buchnera is involved in the
              biosynthesis of branched chain amino acids. In this project the investigator
              will use the aphids Schizaphis graminurn and Diuraphis noxia, both of which are
              pests of cereals. The comparisons of Buchnera from these two aphids is of
              interest since previous studies suggested that there is less demand for the
              biosynthetic activities of Buchnera in the aphid Diuraphis noxia. Since
              Buchnera cannot be cultivated outside the aphid, the investigator will use
              several approaches to examine whether Buchnera synthesizes branched-chain amino
              acids for the aphid host. Initially the laboratory will establish if the genes
              encoding enzymes of the branched chain amino acid biosynthetic pathway are
              present in Buchnera from the aphids S. graminum and D. noxia. This will involve
              cloning and sequencing endosymbiont DNA fragments which hybridize with probes
              for these genes. Subsequently,  the endosymbionts will be purified and assayed
              for the presence of activities of selected enzymes of the branched chain
              biosynthetic pathway. Using the quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase
              chain reaction, the investigator's laboratory will also determine the levels of
              messenger RNA (mRNA) encoding these selected enzymes.  Increases in the
              activity and mRNA levels of key regulated enzymes are expected.  In addition,
              the specific activities and  the levels of mRNA for the enzymes from Buchnera
              from S. graminurn may be higher than those for the enzymes from Buchnera from
              D. noxia. One possible adaptation to an endosymbiotic association and
              overproduction of amino acids is desensitization of key regulated enzymes to
              end-product feedback inhibition.  The genes for such key Buchnera enzymes will
              be overexpressed in Escherichia coli  and  enzymes purified; their kinetic
              properties, with respect to substrates and end-product inhibitors, will be
              determined.
Since Buchnera is essential for the survival of aphids,
              information on the endosymbiont's function,  genetics, and physiology may
              provide a means of controlling aphid populations. Research on the biosynthesis
              of branched chain amino acids by aphid endosymbionts may reveal ways in which
              it will be possible to interfere with the biosynthesis of these essential amino
              acids, thereby reducing aphid populations on agriculturally important plants.
              This could have a major economic impact since the debilitation of plants by
              aphids and by the plant viruses the aphids transmit significantly reduces
              agricultural productivity.
 
  

