Title       : Investigations of Coronafacic Acid Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9807774

Award Number: 9807774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Parry parry@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Parry 
Coronatine is a novel phytotoxin produced by the phytopathogenic
              bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. Previous investigations of the biosynthesis of
              coronatine have revealed that the hydrindanone portion of the toxin,
              coronafacic acid, is a novel polyketide derived from two acetate units, one
              butyrate unit, and a four or five-carbon starter unit derived from
              (-ketoglutaric acid. The cyclopropyl amino acid moiety of the toxin, coronamic
              acid, has been shown to be biosynthesized from L-alloisoleucine by an unusual
              oxidative cyclization reaction. Genetic investigations of coronaline
              biosynthesis have identified a DNA region of ca. 6.9 kb that appears to be
              associated with coronamic acid formation and a region spanning ca. 21 kb that
              is associated with coronafacic acid biosynthesis. Sequencing of the coronafacic
              acid region has disclosed the presence of ten open reading frames which are
              part of a single transcript. The transcript begins with cfl and the remaining
              genes are designated as cfal-cfa9, numbering from the 5' end of the transcript.
              The cfl and cfa5 open reading frames encode proteins that are similar to
              enzymes that activate carboxylic acids as acyl adenylates. Two of the open
              reading frames, cfa6 and cfa7, are unusually large and appear to encode
              proteins that bear a close resemblance to known Type I polyketide synthases
              (PKSs). The remaining open reading frames encode proteins that are similar to
              components of Type II PKSs or fatty acid synthases. The organization of the
              coronafacic acid PKS is unlike that of any other PKS that has been reported.
              The research project has two major, long-term objectives. The first objective
              is to understand the nature of the steps involved in coronafacic acid
              biosynthesis at the biochemical level. Because of the complexity of coronafacic
              acid biosynthesis, the project will focus upon an analysis of the function of
              the first six genes in the pathway. The second objective is to utilize parts of
              the coronafacic acid PKS genes to engineer other PKSs in order to produce novel
              polyketide products. The experiments will focus upon the engineering of
              portions of the PKS that codes for the production of 6-deoxyerythronolide B
              (DEB), which is the polyketide portion of the antibiotic erythromycin. The PKS
              engineering experiments will be carried out in collaboration with Professor
              Chaitan Khosla of Stanford University.
The investigation of polyketide
              synthases is currently an extremely active field of research. The reasons for
              this are a), that there is presently little understanding of the structural and
              mechanistic principles by which these enzymes are able to assemble highly
              reactive intermediates and catalyze the formation of specific products, and b),
              that the engineering of polyketide synthases has been remarkably successful in
              the creation of new polyketides. Because of the novel features of the
              coronafacic acid polyketide synthase, this project should lead to important new
              insights into polyketide biosynthesis and also provide new tools with which to
              engineer polyketide synthases. Since many biologically active compounds are
              polyketides, the engineering of polyketide synthases has great potential for
              the production of new substances with useful biological activity.


