Title       : SGER: Early Detection of Human Bacterial Pathogens Using Electronic Nose
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9807617

Award Number: 9807617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Troy Nagle t.nagle@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9807617  Nagle  The  investigation  will methodically explore the  potential 
              for  applying  emerging "electronic nose" technologies  to  the  rapid 
              detection  and analysis of a wide variety of bacterial pathogens.  Rapid
              identification of disease-causing bacterial pathogens would  significantly 
              reduce the time required for the diagnostician  to  prescribe  a specific
              antibiotic. The researchers seek to  answer  three  questions during the twelve
              months term of their work:  1)  Can  existing gas sensors detect a wide range
              of human  bacterial  pathogens?  2)  Can  existing  gas  sensors  be  used  for
               early  identification of one or more human pathogens in culture? 3)  Can  the 
              sensitivity  of conducting polymer sensors be  improved  for  this  application
              by precisely controlling the  geometry  of  the  active sensing material?   
              Gas  sensor  arrays  of  metal oxide,  conducting  polymers,  and 
              piezoelectric  elements  are to be assembled  in  the  Biomedical 
              Instrumentation  and Biomedical Microsensors Laboratories  at  NC  State
              University.  These sensor arrays will be incorporated  into  an  electronic 
              nose instrument that has been  fabricated  at  NC  State.   The  NC  State
              device and a commercial  electronic  nose  instrument (the AromaScan A32S from
              the Duke University Taste and  Smell  Lab)  will  be used to sample the
              headspace  of  bacterial  cultures  in  the  Clinical Research Unit #2 at  Duke
               University  Medical  Center.   The sensor data will then  be  analyzed  using 
              normalization,  feature  extraction, and  pattern  classification  algorithms
              at NC State University.  The performance of the sensor  arrays and data
              processing algorithms in differentiating cultured  bacteria  strains will be
              evaluated. Sensors will  be  tested  to  determine  their  abilities  to 
              detect  at  least  four  of  ten  important   drug-resistant  microbes.  The  
              results   of   these  preliminary  laboratory  studies are  expected  to  guide
               future  efforts  to  fabricate and test a hand-held  prototype  instrument 
              designed for rapid diagnosis of bacterial cultures.    This  exploratory 
              investigation is  believed  to  be  the  first  research   project  to  make  a
               comprehensive   and   methodical  investigation of the value of the underlying
              sensor technologies.  Success   from   the  investigation  could  lead  to  
              physicians  prescribing  a disease-specific antibiotic rather  than  using  a 
              broad-spectrum  antibiotic  until  the  offending   pathogen   is  identified.
              Consequently, it is believed the risk will be lowered  of the bacteria
              developing drug resistance.  ***
