Title       : Collaborative Research: Macroeconomics and Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9807971

Award Number: 9807971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony A. Smith Jr. smithaa@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For a long time, modern theoretical macroeconomics-dynamic general equilibrium
              theory-has built on the representative agent assumption: there is one consumer
              in the economy, and one firm. Although this theorizing has been very useful in
              many ways, it is by definition silent on some of the issues that are central to
              almost all policy debate: what is the differential impact of a given change in
              policy on different consumers, for example the rich and the poor, or the
              `lucky` and `unlucky` workers? The unemployment variable in traditional,
              reduced form macroeconomic models captured some of this concern. Clearly,
              though, it is important to have a broader view of inequality.  Recently,
              economic theory and computational methods have undergone substantial progress
              in the ability to analyze dynamic general equilibrium models with agent
              heterogeneity. This progress has opened the possibility of specifying quite
              realistic models in terms of income and wealth heterogeneity and studying the
              effects of economic policy explicitly. In particular, it is possible to study
              quantitatively how policy affects the welfare of different groups, besides the
              standard efficiency concerns.  The investigators' previous work focused on
              solving and analyzing a macroeconomic model where consumers differ in various
              respects: in income, wealth, employment status, and preferences. The purpose of
              this research project is to continue this work and extend it in a number of
              directions. The overall purpose of the extensions is to obtain a better
              understanding of the determinants of inequality and, in particular, a richer
              picture of the effects of a number of often discussed macroeconomic policies.
              The issues of most interested are:  the costs of business cycles and the
              effects of stabilization policy;  the effects of `welfare policy`, including
              specific or general subsidies and progressive tax schedules; and  the
              interactions between productivity (technological) change and inequality through
              the labor market.  In order to capture the main quantitative determinants of
              inequality, the investigators develop and refine their baseline model. An
              important goal is to further the analytical tools available for analyzing these
              complex macroeconomic models. Special emphasis is devoted to the continued
              development of  computational techniques                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
