Title       : Implicit vs. Explicit Barriers to Atypical Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9807970

Award Number: 9807970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie A. Rudman rudman@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Women who move into traditionally male-dominated jobs must often work to
              counteract gender stereotypes regarding their qualifications (e.g., their
              competence, ambition, and leadership ability). One strategy for doing so is
              self-promotion. Previous research has shown that female self-promotion does
              lead to higher ratings of competence. However, such self-promotion also elicits
              a backlash effect in the form of lower ratings of likability and hireability.
              As a result, highly qualified women are rejected because of social factors. For
              men, self-promotion carries no such risks. This double standard for
              self-promotion represents a dilemma in which women may be discriminated against
              for normative behavior (i.e., for acting `as a woman`) and discriminated
              against for counternormative behavior (i.e., for not acting `as a woman
              should`). If the workplace values masculine behaviors but suppresses them in
              women, this constitutes a distinct form of sex discrimination, with
              implications for women's economic and psychological well-being. The current
              research will use both self-report and response time measures to investigate
              potential mediators of the backlash effect, including traditional gender
              beliefs. The research will also examine moderators of the effect (conditions
              designed to exacerbate and relieve it). By examining these variables, the
              research will provide insight into a social psychological barrier that prevents
              women from fully realizing equal opportunities in performance settings. Thus,
              the research is designed to contribute to the goals of NSF's Human Capital
              Initiative.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
