Title       : The Role of Vacuolization in Rapid Fluid Secretion by InsectMalpighian Tubules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9807948

Award Number: 9807948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Spring jhs0431@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Felgenhauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9807948  Spring  Vacuolization refers to the formation of membrane-bound
              "sacs" or vacuoles within cells.  Over the past thirty years, the presence of
              vacuoles in a variety of animal tissues involved in cellular transport,
              including the mammalian kidney nephron, liver, mammary glands and epididymis of
              vertebrates as well as the excretory organs of invertebrates (antennal glands
              and Malpighian tubules), has been documented throughout scientific literature. 
              Although their presence is no longer argued, vacuole function and overall
              contribution to fluid transport remains speculative.  Drs. Spring and
              Felgenhauer hypothesize that these vacuoles are participating in transcytosis
              (movement of fluid and solutes across cells) and contribute significantly to
              rapid fluid transport.  By employing both physiological methods and microscopy
              (light, confocal scanning and transmission electron microscopy), the PIs
              objective is to characterize the vacuoles in terms of direction of movement,
              source, content, volume, and destination.  The PIs will also investigate the
              contribution of the structural elements of the cell (cytoskeleton) to vacuolar
              movement and assuming that these vacuoles fuse with membrane surrounding the
              lumen (apical), what contribution, if any, do vacuoles make to fluid secretion
              either directly, or as a mechanism to alter the apical membrane, or as a source
              of osmolytes.  The Malpighian tubules of the house cricket provide an excellent
              model system to investigate cellular transport due to their availability,
              relative ease of experimental manipulation and striking cellular similarities
              to other transport tissues including kidney tubules.  In addition, rapid fluid
              secretion in cricket Malpighian tubules is always associated with extensive
              vacuolization.  The results of this investigation will serve to further our
              knowledge of basic mechanisms of secretory processes in general with
              applications ranging from insect control to vertebrate renal physiology.
