Title       : Precursors and Processes for Tantalum Nitride and Related Thin Film Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a9807269

Award Number: 9807269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Winter chw@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Prof. Charles Winter at Wayne State University is supported   by
              the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry   Division. The
              research will focus on new precursors and processes for   tantalum nitride and
              related thin film materials. New low temperature   routes to binary and ternary
              transition metal nitrides of tantalum,   niobium, zirconium and hafnium will be
              developed with particular emphasis   on tantalum nitride thin films.  Specific
              objectives are: (1) synthesis   and characterization of tantalum complexes with
              a range of   nitrogen-containing ligands such as alkyl hydrazines,  
              1,3-diaryltriazines, pyrazoles, 1,2,4-triazoles and tetrazoles as single  
              source precursors for nitrides; (2)examination of chemical vapor   deposition
              reactions of the nitrogen ligands and tantalum (V) source   compounds as low
              temperature routes to nitride films; (3) development of   ternary
              tantalum-silicon nitrides by addition of volatile silicon   sources; and, (4)
              extension of the tantalum technology to other early   transition metal
              nitrides.  Nitride films will be characterized by x-ray   diffraction, x-ray
              photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning electron   microscopy and Rutherford
              back-scattering.  Nitride thin films are recognized for a wide range of
              important   properties including hardness, chemical resistance, electrical  
              conductivity and desirable optical properties. Currently, nitride films   are
              made by high temperature sputtering. The early transition metal   nitrides
              studied in this research  will be prepared by low temperature   chemical vapor
              deposition and will impact the development of barrier   materials for
              microelectronic  applications, particularly between silicon   and copper
              substrates in integrated circuits. The synthetic chemistry of   single source
              precursors will also lead to new early transition metal   complexes of
              fundamental interest to structural inorganic chemistry.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
