Title       : Establishment of the Growth Axis and Alignment of the Division Plane in Pelvetia
               Zygotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a9807811

Award Number: 9807811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl L. Kropf kropf@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Establishment of embryonic axes is fundamental to the development of eukaryotic
              organisms, yet very little is known about this process in plants because the
              embryo is retained inside maternal tissues and is difficult to isolate. In
              contrast, zygotes of the brown algae, Fucus sp. and Pelvetia sp., are easily
              harvested from seawater and have long served as model organisms for
              investigation of polarity establishment. For the past nine years the Kropf lab
              has been studying the cell biology and physiology of polarization in P.
              compressa zygotes focusing primarily on the roles of cytosolic ions and the
              cytoskeleton. Based upon this research, and that from other laboratories, the
              Kropf lab has formulated a working model to account for establishment of the
              growth axis and the precise orientation of the division plane. Briefly, this
              model postulates that the rhizoid pole of the growth (rhizoid-thallus) axis is
              marked by a patch of cortical F-actin and that the division plane is determined
              by the orientation of centrosomes on the nuclear envelope. Sperm entry is
              postulated to induce both axes by causing assembly of an F-actin patch at the
              sperm entry site and by introducing centrioles into the egg cytoplasm. Over the
              first few hours of development, the F-actin patch, and hence the growth axis,
              can be repositioned in response to environmental cues. The centrosomal axis
              does not respond to environmental cues and therefore the two axes develop
              independently of one another. The PI speculates that the F-actin patch at the
              rhizoid pole defines a target site for secretion, and that polar secretion of
              molecules locally into the rhizoid plasma membrane and cell wall amplifies the
              nascent growth axis. After growth begins at the rhizoid pole, and just prior to
              first mitosis, the centrosomal axis rotates into parallel alignment with the
              growth axis. The spindle poles form from the aligned centrosomes and
              cytokinesis bisects the spindle, ensuring that the division plane is transverse
              to the growth axis.

The proposed research will test the salient aspects of
              this working model. The primary objectives are to:
1) determine whether sperm
              entry induces an initial polarity
2) demonstrate that a patch of F-actin marks
              the rhizoid pole of the axis
3) investigate the mechanism of polar
              secretion
4) analyze the role of microtubules (MTs) in rotational alignment of
              the centrosomes
5) clarify the role of plasma membrane-cell wall adhesions in
              rotational alignment
6) investigate regulation of the cytoskeletal arrays by
              cytosolic H+ activity

Confirmation of our working model will provide the
              first comprehensive picture of the role of the cytoskeleton in polarity
              establishment and expression in fucoid zygotes, and will initiate important
              studies on polar secretion and cytoskeletal regulation by H+. This study will
              also provide a paradigm for future investigations of polarity establishment in
              higher plant embryos.

