Title       : Chiral Nucleophiles and Electrophiles in Relay Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9807442

Award Number: 9807442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark E. Welker                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin Vedejs edved@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Edwin Vedejs, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Michigan, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
              his studies of chiral nucleophiles and electrophiles in relay catalysis. 
              Through the investigation of new methods for the synthesis of chiral phosphine
              and pyridine derivatives, Professor Vedejs is developing new catalysts designed
              to serve as chiral relays in a multi-phase transfer technique.  Following
              attachment of potentially incompatible stoichiometric reagents to solid-phase
              supports, the soluble chiral relay agent is activated by one supported reagent,
              then diffuses to the other supported reagent, delivering the activating
              subunit.  Variations of this technique are used to effect catalytic parallel
              kinetic resolution, wherein each enantiomer of a racemic mixture is derivatized
              by two simultaneous catalytic processes.  Phase isolation and relay catalysis
              are essential to the success of this technique, which offers promise for
              dynamic kinetic resolution of sulfinyl and phosphinyl chlorides, hindered
              tertiary alcohols, amines, and N-acyl amines.

Many molecules displaying
              biological activity can exist in either of two forms, related to each other as
              mirror images, and frequently only one member of a pair of mirror image isomers
              displays desirable activity.  With the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Edwin Vedejs, of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Michigan, is investigating novel methods for the
              preparation of single isomers of such "chiral" compounds.  By attaching two
              potentially reactive reagents to solid supports, Professor Vedejs is able to
              harness their reactivity, with small molecule "shuttles" required to effect
              their reaction with one another.  By using chiral shuttle molecules, selective
              syntheses of chiral products are achieved, offering access to a variety of
              chiral compounds of utility as intermediates in the synthesis of more complex
              molecules.

