Title       : Probing Metalloenzymes with Sensitizer-Tethered Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9807150

Award Number: 9807150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry B. Gray hbgray@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports metalloenzyme research by Drs. Harry B. Gray and John H.  
              Richards of the Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology.    The
              goal of the work is to develop a new method for probing the   properties and
              reactivities of redox metalloenzymes.  The prototypical   heme oxygenase,
              cytochrome P450, will be the main system studied.  This   enzyme
              stereospecifically hydroxlates hydrocarbons using dioxygen as the   oxidant. 
              In many metalloenzymes, rate-limiting electron transfer (ET)   steps preclude
              observation of other critical activation steps.  To attack   this problem,
              natural redox partners will be replaced with new reagents   that are able to
              exchange electrons at much faster rates.    Laser-initiated electron transfer
              reactions will be used to drive   enzymatic reactions.  In order to deliver the
              laser-generated redox   equivalents, a direct covalent or hydrogen-bonded
              pathway has been shown   to be essential.  Here a direct link between a redox
              sensitizer and the   enzyme active site will be formed by taking advantage of
              the affinity of   the enzyme for its active site.  Ruthenium-diimine
              sensitizers will be   covalently tethered to cytochrome P450 substrates to
              provide a conduit   for delivering oxiding and reducing equivalents to the heme
              cofactor.    The initial goal is to prepare and characterize the oxo-iron
              (ferryl)   intermediates that have been suggested as the active hydroxylating  
              agents.  Enzyme for this work will be expressed in E. coli, and   site-directed
              mutagenesis will be employed to study the importance of   specific residues in
              ferryl-formation reactions.  The reactive   intermediates will be studied using
              a variety of photochemical methods.   Metalloenzymes catalyze many reactions
              involving small-molecule   activation.  For example, enzymes promote reduction
              of oxygen gas to   water, reduction of nitrogen gas to ammonia, and use oxygen
              gas to add   oxygen atoms to carbon chains.  These reactions are important not
              only   biologically but also commercially.  This research aims at understanding
                the enzyme that promotes addition of oxygen to hydrocarbons by oxygen   gas. 
              The reactive enzyme intermediate has never been observed, so a   stategy for
              replacing the reagents from the natural system with ones that   can react more
              readily will be used to enable photochemical observation   of reactions at the
              active site.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
