Title       : Determination of Charge-Structure Relationships for DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9807550

Award Number: 9807550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Laue Tom.Laue@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Laue
9807550
Electrophoresis is one of the most widely-used techniques in
              molecular biology, however a thorough and correct theoretical treatment of
              electrophoresis has proven elusive. This study, in collaboration with Dr.
              Stuart Allison at Georgia State University, combines experimental measurements
              with recently developed boundary-element modeling methods aiming at the
              development of a theory applicable to small polyions in aqueous solvents. DNA
              oligonucleotides of defined size, charge and charge density will be examined in
              a range of solvents. Electrophoretic mobility and effective charge will be
              determined by membrane-confined analytical electrophoresis. Analytical
              ultracentrifugation will be used to determine solution mass, as well as
              sedimentation, frictional and viral coefficients. The effective charge will be
              measured over a wide range of DNA lengths in solvents with varying  ionic
              strengths, salt types and salt valences. Structure-charge relationships also
              will be explored using oligonucleotides that have formal charge densities that
              are selectively altered by methylphosphonate substitutions. This allows the
              examination of the effective charge and hydrodynamics of DNA having the same
              formal charge but different distributions of charge density. Finally, a
              ribosomal RNA fragment of defined structure will be examined in order to
              characterize putative divalent metal ion binding sites. To complement the
              nucleic acid work, the mobility and effective charge of bovine ribonuclease
              will be determined over a range of pH and salt concentrations. Structural data
              indicate that ribonuclease may have a histidine-dependent anion binding site.
              The modeling of P.I.'s preliminary mobility data indicate that the anion is
              loosely bound. Experiments will determine the dissociation constant for the
              ion, define the role of the histidine in anion binding and determine the
              effects of reversible ion binding on electrophoretic mobility. Taken together,
              the combination of experimental data and theoretical analysis will allow the
              development of a broadly applicable theory for electrophoresis. Furthermore,
              data from this study will define the experimental relationship between the
              effective charge measured by steady state electrophoresis and other measures of
              molecular charge. Overall, this work will lay the foundation for the routine
              determination and manipulation of the effective charge in
              biochemistry.

Electrophoresis is amongst the most widely used methods in
              biochemistry, molecular biology and molecular genetics. For example, the
              technique is at the foundation of the methods used in sequencing DNA for the
              human genome project. Despite its wide-spread use and fundamental importance, a
              comprehensive theory for electrophoresis has eluded scientists for the last
              century. This study is to experimentally analyze models developed in a
              collaborating laboratory in order to refine the understanding of
              electrophoresis. It will lay the foundation for the rational manipulation of
              charge on biomolecules so that better pharmaceutical, agricultural and polymer
              agents can be developed.

