Title       : Analytical and Experimental Investigation of the Effects of Member Deterioration
               on Seismic Response of Steel Frame Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9807069

Award Number: 9807069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Mahin mahin@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Until recently, steel frame buildings have been considered to be among the very
              best structural systems for use in regions subjected to earthquakes.  However,
              the brittle fracture of many welding steel frame buildings as a result of the
              Northridge, Loma Prieta and other earthquakes in California, the serious
              damage, including collapse, of similar buildings during the Kobe Japan
              earthquake, and recent research have led many to question this assertion. 
              Research has been initiated on the basic properties of steel weldments and
              connections.  However, the impact of local fracture and strength deterioration
              on the overall performance of a system is still not understood.

An
              integrative experimental and analytical assessment will be conducted in this
              project of the effects on overall system behavior of various forms of member
              strength deterioration.  Models of two-dimensional frame systems representative
              of welded steel frame buildings are investigated to  understand the relative
              contribution of various types of strength deterioration and ground motions on
              overall performance and to assess the effect of the dynamic redistribution of
              force caused by strength deterioration, and assess the role of system
              redundancy on global performance. 

Particular attention is directed at the
              consequences of (a) sudden loss of strength associated with brittle connection
              failures and (b) gradual deterioration of post-yield strength that may be
              associated with ductile response due to local buckling or lateral torsional
              buckling.  Analytical studies will be conducted on a variety of framed systems.
               Shaking table tests with planer frame specimens made of replaceable plastic
              hinge regions which exhibit various forms of deterioration, including brittle
              fracture will be carried out and the test results will be integrated with
              analytical results to formulate designs recommendations.


