Title       : Relations Between Sounds and Spellings in English: Nature, Use, and Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9807736

Award Number: 9807736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Treiman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The goal of the research is learn more about how the sounds of English words
              are related to their spellings, and to use this information as a basis for
              studying the processes involved in spelling and reading.  The results will shed
              light on the cognitive and linguistic foundations of reading and writing
              ability, as well as on the nature of the English spelling system itself.   In
              the first part of the project modern computer methods will be used to study the
              links from sounds to spellings in several thousand words of English.  It is
              hypothesized that, even when it is not possible to predict exactly how a given
              sound will be spelled, there are certain factors that can help narrow the range
              of alternatives.  For example, the spellings of vowels may be influenced by the
              following consonants in such a way that spelling becomes more predictable when
              vowel + final consonant units are taken into account.  For example, the short
              `e` sound has a higher chance of being spelled as `ea` when it comes before `d`
              (as in `head`) than when it comes before `m` (as in `hem`).  Such results would
              suggest that the English writing system is not as chaotic and illogical as
              commonly believed.    It is further hypothesized that users of English develop
              a sensitivity to the patterns in the writing system.  As a result, words with
              more predictable relationships between sounds and spellings should be spelled
              and read more easily than words with less predictable relationships.  The
              development of this sensitivity will be mapped out in a series of studies with
              adults and children of various ages.  These studies will include not only
              traditional small-scale experiments but also large-scale studies in which each
              participant pronounces or spells thousands of words over the course of several
              sessions.  The findings will have implications not only for basic understanding
              of reading and spelling, but also for the teaching of reading and spelling
              skills to normal children and to children with learning difficulties.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
