Title       : Analytic Rheology of Polydisperse and Long-chain-branched Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9807262

Award Number: 9807262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Larson rlarson@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Mead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9807262  Larson    This is a GOALI award between the University of Michigan and 
              Rheometric Scientific Co.,supported jointly by the Division of  Materials
              Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities  of the Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences.  Recent commercial development of
              metallocene-catalyzed polymers  greatly increases the prospects for molecular
              tailoring of  molecular weight distribution (MWD) and long-chain branching 
              (LCB) distributions for optimal polymer processing  characteristics.  However,
              progress requires a much more detailed  understanding of the impact of MWD and
              LCB on the polymer  rheological properties.  It has already been shown that
              linear  rheological data can be used to infer the MWD of unbranched  polymers. 
              Inferring LCB characteristics, however, is much more  difficult, and cannot be
              done using linear viscoelastic data  alone, since without additional
              information, there is no unique  linear viscoelastic signature of LCB which
              could not also be  interpreted as a peculiar molecular weight distribution. 
              Fortunately, recent theoretical advances open up the possibility  of using
              nonlinear rheological data to quantify both the MWD and  LCB characteristics of
              entangled melts and concentrated solutions  of flexible polymers.  To exploit
              and enhance these new  capabilities, an experimental program that combines
              recent  advances in rheological instrumentation with the availability of 
              polymer synthetic methods will be carried out.  The group will  use a new
              commercial extensional rheometer and compliance-free  and compliance-corrected
              shear rheometers to study the time  dependent nonlinear rheological properties
              of well characterized  blends of linear polymers, and ideal, monodisperse, star
              and "pom-  pom" branched polymers.  The nonlinear data will be compared in 
              detail with newly developed theories.  Efforts to develop robust  methods for
              distinguishing mixtures of linear polymers from  branched polymers, using
              rheological methods alone will be   targeted.  %%%  Such research has powerful
              potential applications, since it could  turn rheometers into analytic
              instruments for determining polymer  MWD and LCB.  In addition, this GOALI
              research program is an  important educational tool, since it will bring
              graduate students  into close contact with a major commercial instrument
              developer,  and will require of them a thorough knowledge both of the most 
              powerful experimental tools and the most recent theoreticai ideas  in the field
              of polymer rheology.  ***
