Title       : Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9807559

Award Number: 9807559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Boxer sboxer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9807559
Boxer
The goal of this project is to study the mechanism of the charge
              separation and recombination steps in reaction centers (RCs) from
              photosynthetic bacteria.  Specific approaches to these problems include: (i)
              quantitative analysis of the absorption and Stark spectra of mutants that
              affect the special pair (P) using an analytical treatment of the coupling
              between locally-excited and charge transfer states to obtain information on the
              electronic properties of 1P; (ii) application of the higher-order Stark method
              developed in this laboratory to study the mechanism of electron transfer and
              the origins of unidirectional electron transfer, (iii) creation of an RC that
              does not bind carotenoid and measurements in these carotenoid-free RCs of
              phosphorescence spectra of the special pair and the activation energy of 3P
              decay to determine the energetics of the primary charge separation in RC
              mutants; (iv) estimation of differences in electronic coupling on the L-vs
              M-side using ultrafast singlet energy transfer in RC mutants; and (v) use of
              RCs in supported lipid bilayers as a nucleation site for assembling and imaging
              the organization of photosynthetic membrane components using lateral electric
              field-induced concentration profiles and atomic force
              microscopy.

Photosynthesis is the process by which solar energy is converted
              into useful fuel.  As such, the processes involved are among the most important
              in nature.  Furthermore, the elementary steps involved, energy transfer,
              electron transfer and proton transfer, are among the most universal processes
              in chemistry and biology.  The photosynthetic reaction center is beautifully
              crafted to optimize each of these processes and this research aims to
              understand how this works.  By working with a system whose function is
              initiated by light, it is possible to study the mechanism under very well
              defined conditions, something that is rarely possible with complex biological
              systems. The answers to the particular technical questions posed by this
              research also impact wider issues of long distance electron transfer and
              electrostatics in proteins, with further implications and applications in
              materials science and the analysis of self-assembly in complex systems.

