Title       : SGER: Feasibility of Vibrational Traveling Waves for Industrial Material
               Handling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9807383

Award Number: 9807383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64003              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul I. Ro paul_ro@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9807383  Ro   In this SGER project, a feasibility of the use of traveling waves
              as a mechanism for industrial material handling is to be examined.  To realize
              an industrial quality material handler using traveling waves, two major issues
              need to be addressed.  First, the ratio of the mechanical work to power input
              needs to be significantly improved from those reported of the currently
              existing ultrasonic motors, which range from 2 to 20 percent.  The low ratio is
              attributed to large power consumption associated with absorbing reflective
              waves to minimize standing waves and the lack of advanced triggering mechanisms
              to generating traveling waves with minimal power.  Secondly, because of the
              design modularity necessary to arbitrarily adjust the length of the transfer
              line in a typical factory setting, a consistent carry-over of traveling waves
              from one module to the next is an essential requirement.  The objective of the
              project is to design a prototype miniature material handler that consists of
              two identical modules equipped with wave carry-over capability with a
              significant improvement in power efficiency.  To achieve this, the following
              tasks are planned: 1) The combination of active absorption of reflecting waves
              in one module with generation of traveling waves in the next module will be
              examined using Piezoelectric actuators; 2) An increase in friction, thus
              mechanical work done, through active and passive means will be explored; 3)
              Non-sinusoidal triggering mechanisms for generating traveling waves with
              minimal power will be investigated.   If successful, the proposed new material
              transfer mechanism can eliminate rollers and conveyors that generate
              unnecessary noise and dust and provide improvement in modularity and
              flexibility.  The impact can be immediate in cleanroom and
              medical/pharmaceutical industries.
