Title       : The Role of Bacterial Chemotaxis in the Biodegradation of Naphthalene in Porous
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9807666

Award Number: 9807666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Aitken maitken@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cass T. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9198,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Aitken  9807666       There is considerable interest in methods of remediating 
              contaminated soil and ground water by in situ processes,  particularly if
              remediation can be accomplished through natural  processes such as
              biodegradation by indigenous microorganisms.  To properly evaluate and develop
              in situ bioremediation methods,  it is important to understand the dominant
              physical, chemical and  biological processes.  Biological processes are perhaps
              the least  understood of these.  The investigator and his colleagues focus  on
              the potential role of bacterial chemotaxis in the  biodegradation of common
              soil pollutants in porous media.  They  study the biodegradation of
              naphthalene, a common soil pollutant,  by Pseudomonas putida G7 in a model
              porous medium consisting of  uniform glass beads.  The effect of chemotaxis is
              evaluated by  comparing the rates of mineralization of naphthalene by the 
              chemotactic wild-type strain and by an immotile or  non-chemotactic mutant
              strain with the same inherent kinetics of  naphthalene degradation as the
              wild-type.  A mathematical model  is constructed that incorporates the most
              significant chemical  and biological phenomena in the experimental system.  The
              model  is used to quantify the chemotactic and random motility  coefficients of
              the organism as a function of the size of the  glass beads, and to evaluate the
              relative influences of random  motility and chemotactic motility in naphthalene
              biodegradation.       Chemical contamination of soil and ground water is an 
              enormous problem in the U.S.  The cost of cleaning up  contaminated sites can
              be reduced dramatically if the  contaminated materials do not have to be
              excavated or pumped to  the surface for treatment or disposal; consequently
              there is  great interest in taking advantage of processes referred to as 
              "natural attenuation."  Many bacteria found in the subsurface are  known to be
              able to degrade a variety of chemicals, but the  behavior of bacteria in soil
              is relatively poorly understood.  A  commo n property of many bacteria is
              chemotaxis, an ability to  move in response to the presence of a chemical. 
              However, the  potential role of chemotaxis in the biodegradation of pollutants 
              in soil has not been explored before.  It is likely, for example,  that
              bacteria able to swim towards the sources of chemical  contamination are able
              to degrade the contaminants faster than  those bacteria unable to do so.  The
              investigators in this project  conduct experiments with a simulated soil
              environment and  mathematical modeling techniques to evaluate the potential
              role  of chemotaxis in the biodegradation of a pollutant found at many 
              contaminated sites.  An improved understanding of the role of  chemotaxis will
              permit better characterization of the feasibility  of natural attenuation
              processes, and may permit the development  of strategies to accelerate the in
              situ treatment of contaminated  sites that take advantage of bacterial
              chemotaxis.
