Title       : Does Development Bias the Evolution of Beetle Horns?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9807932

Award Number: 9807932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Emlen demlen@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Emlen  9807932    Many beetle species have "horns" which are only produced by
              males. These  horns can be extreme (as dramatic as the antlers of elk), and
              investment by  males into the production of horns is presumed to be
              substantial. In many  beetle species only some of the males produce horns.
              other males being  completely homless. In most species of the genus Onthophagus
              (Coleoptera:  Scarabaeidae), male horn expression is facultative, and depends
              on whether  or not a male grows larger than a threshold body size: males
              growing larger  than this size produce horns, whereas males not attaining this
              size do not.  Facultative expression of male horns provides an unusual
              opportunity to  study how horns develop, and whether horns are "costly" to
              males to  produce. Prior research revealed that males allocating developmental 
              resources to horn production were forced to compensate by reducing  allocation
              to other traits, including eyes. This suggests that there may be  allocation
              tradeoffs operating during beetle development which restrict the  range of
              beetle shapes that can be produced, and these may also restrict  the directions
              of evolution within the genus. Here the PI extends his prior  work by (1) using
              manipulative experiments on developing larvae to confirm  the existence and
              nature of resource allocation tradeoffs, and (2) testing  whether the biases
              predicted to arise from such a mechanism are manifest in  the shape variation
              among taxa. This study will enhance our understanding  of the relationship
              between developmental mechanisms and evolutionary  change, as well as improve
              our understanding of the "costs" associated with  the production of exaggerated
              secondary sexual characters like beetle  horns.
