Title       : Signaling Mechanisms and Mobility of the EGF Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9304393

Award Number: 9304393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Gross dgross@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda L. Slakey  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304393  Gross    This project focuses on the regulation of binding of epidermal
               growth factor (EGF) by its receptor (EGF-R).  The time course of  binding of a
              fluorescent derivative of EGF (f-EGF) to the EGF-R  will be studied at the
              level of single cells by the use of  quantitative optical microscopy. 
              Preliminary data indicates that  the binding of f-EGF to cultured A431 cells
              proceeds over a  biphasic time course that is not consistent with the commonly 
              accepted model of EGF/EGF-R in which two EGF-R affinity classes are  postulated
              to exist at fixed densities on the cell surface.  A  ternary complex model has
              been developed that is consistent with  the individual cell binding data.  It
              is proposed that actin/EGF-R  interaction through specific binding domains
              modulates the affinity  state of the receptor.  Recent studies have shown that
              the EGF-R is  an actin-binding protein.  Microinjection of HL-33, a peptide
              that  competes for the actin binding site with the EGF-R, will be used as  a
              probe of this interaction.  Preliminary f-EGF binding data to  individual A431
              cells also indicates that the kinetics of binding  are variable between cells. 
              The consequences of this variable  timing and degree of primary signal input on
              subsequent individual  cell responses will also be examined by quantitative,
              single-cell  fluorescence imaging.  A consequence of the predicted interaction 
              of the EGF-R with actin is that some individual EGF-Rs will be  immobilized in
              the plasma membrane, and that the immobile receptors  will be preferentially of
              the high-affinity class.  Measurement of  the mobilities of individual EGF
              receptors on stimulated and  unstimulated cells forms an important test of the
              actin-regulation  model.  Single receptors will be labeled by biotinylated
              anti-  receptor Fab' fragments and fluorescent streptavidin-latex 
              nanoparticles or streptavidin-colloidal gold particles as  visualization
              probes.  The lateral mobility of individual EGF-Rs  will be followed before and
              during EGF challen ge, and will be  examined in individual cells microinjected
              with the HL-33 competing  peptide.  Correlations between individual EGF
              receptor movements  and the affinity state of the receptor will be examined. 
              The  lateral mobilities of individual EGF-Rs will be compared to those  for
              individual LDL receptors.  (The LDL receptor system is thus far  the only one
              in which individual receptor movements have been  described; in this system
              three classes of lateral movement were  characterized including random,
              directed, and no mobility.)  %%%  The goal of this research is to better
              understand the molecular  interactions between a cell surface protein that is
              known to  regulate cell growth, the epidermal growth factor receptor, and the 
              signal molecule that activates it, epidermal growth factor (EGF).   The
              interaction of these two molecules on individual cultured cells  will be
              studies using fluorescently labeled EGF and quantitative  optical microscopy. 
              The results of this study of the EGF receptor  system will add much to
              knowledge about molecular details of the  mechanism by which growth factors
              signal cells to divide.  ***
