Title       : Superoxide Response Regulon of E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9304092

Award Number: 9304092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304092  Weiss  The soxRS (superoxide response) regulon of Escherichia coli an 
              adaptation to oxidative stress.  It includes the genes for a  superoxide
              dismutase, endonuclease IV (a DNA repair enzyme), and  glucose 6-phosphate
              dehydrogenase.  Induction occurs in two stages.   SoxR is first altered by an
              oxidative signal to become a  transcriptional activator of SoxS.  The
              overexpressed SoxS then  activates the target genes of the regulon.  The first
              question to  be answered is whether or not the two-stage mechanism provides a 
              temporally programmed response; i.e., are there genes other than  soxS that are
              turned on directly by the activated SoxR and that are  therefore expressed
              before those genes targeted by SoxS? To answer  this question, 2-D gel protein
              patterns are being examined in  regulon-constitutive (soxR) mutants that have a
              soxS deletion.  The  major part of this research deals with purification of
              SoxS and  SoxR proteins from overproducing strains and a study of their 
              interactions with their DNA binding sites and with RNA polymerase.   Because
              the Sox S protein is a member of the large AraC family, so  many analogs of
              which are being separately studied, investigations  is limited to examining
              only its unique properties; thus, its  specific recognition sequence will be
              delineated via DNA  footprinting and mutational analysis of the for promoter
              region.  SoxR, which is activated directly and/or indirectly by superoxide, 
              will be studied more extensively.  An attempt will be made to  reconstruct
              SoxR-mediated soxS induction in vitro an to use it to  identify the possible
              effector (s).  The physical traits of the  native SoxR protein will be compared
              with both mutationally  activated and chemically activated forms to provide an
              insight into  the mechanism of induction.  The physical traits to be examined 
              will include evidence of phosphorylation or proteolysis and changes  in metal
              content, DNA footprint, titratable thiols, absorption  spectrum, fluorescence,
              and multimer formation.    %%%  Because bacterial regulons are controlled in
              diverse ways, they  provide many useful models for the coordinate regulation of
               dispersed genes in all organisms.  Ultimate goals of the studies on  the soxRS
              regulon are (a) the understanding of an additional system  of multigene
              regulation and (b) the elaboration of the mechanism  whereby organisms that
              grow in the presence of oxygen can deal with  toxic by products of oxidative
              growth.  ***
