Title       : Novel Oxide Materials, Indo-U.S. Collaborative Research, Award in Indian
               Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9304570

Award Number: 9304570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37544              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. N. R. Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Science
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:                                                                   
              This proposal requests renewal of a previously approved                        
              and active research project "INDO-US Collaborative                             
              Research on Novel Oxide Materials."  The collaborators                         
              are C.N.R. Rao, Professor, Solid State and Structural                          
              Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,                        
              and J.M. Honig, Materials Research Center, Purdue                              
              University.  The research will continue development of                         
              novel oxide materials with special attention to high                           
              temperature superconductors.  The research includes                            
              synthesis of interesting oxide systems and examination                         
              of structure-property relations. Included are selected                         
              studies of high Tc 214-oxide superconductors with the                          
              K2NiF4 structure and related normal properties of this                         
              class of materials.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Scope:                                                                         
              The collaboration of Professor Rao's team at Bangalore                         
              and Professor Honig's team at Purdue has been                                  
              successful and resulted in a number of significant                             
              publications.  Rao is one of India's most distinguished                        
              scientists.  He has done pioneering research                                   
              in numerous areas of materials and structural chemistry.                       
              It is likely that this project will result in significant                      
              advances in the field of new materials and better                              
              material characterization. Dr. Honig is a participant in a                     
              newly established Indiana Center for Innovative                                
              Superconductivity Technology, which was provided                               
              $500,000 for the first year of operation by the State of                       
              Indiana.  His work with Dr. Rao would fit well with the                        
              objectives of that center, and with enhancing materials                        
              science research in the U.S.
