Title       : Ovule Development in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9304998

Award Number: 9304998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Fischer rfischer@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                  9304998  Fischer    A unique aspect of the plant life cycle is the
              alternation of  generations between diploid sporophytes and haploid
              gametophytes.  In higher plants, the sporophyte is the dominant generation, and
               the male and female gametophytes, greatly reduced in size and  complexity, are
              dependent upon the sporophyte. The female  gametophyte is formed in the ovule
              that is composed of specialized  tissues, integuments and nucellus. The
              nucellus gives rise to a  megasporocyte that undergoes meiosis to form four
              haploid  megaspores. Three megaspores degenerate, whereas the megaspore 
              adjacent to the nucellus grows and becomes the female gametophyte,  the embryo
              sac. Within the embryo sac, haploid nuclei generated by  mitotic divisions
              migrate to different cytoplasmic positions and  form structurally and
              functionally distinct cells, including the  egg cell. Ovule integuments
              surround the nucellus and embryo sac,  providing nutrients and form the opening
              for the pollen tube during  fertilization. Although a wealth of information
              about ovule and  female gametophyte morphology is available, the molecular 
              mechanisms that control their development are not known. The extent  to which
              their development is coordinated, how the striking  polarity of the ovule and
              gametophyte is generated, and the effect  of their cellular organization on
              subsequent development of the  embryo, is not understood. The strategy Dr.
              Fischer will use to  address these questions involves studying mutations in
              Arabidopsis  thaliana that reduce female fertility. He has isolated ovule 
              mutants among lines mutagenized by insertion of the T-DNA from  Agrobacterium
              tumefaciens. Mutant phenotypes include failure to  initiate integuments,
              abnormal integument development, aberrant  cell proliferation within the
              nucellus, degeneration of all spores,  repression of embryo sac formation, and
              embryo abortion. Molecular  genetic analysis of these mutants will provide
              information about  early events involving integument initiation and 
              megasporogenesis,  the role of integuments on embryo sac development,
              competition  between the nucellus and embryo sac for growth within the ovule, 
              and maternal effects on embryogenesis.  %%%  The significance of these
              experiments is that they will identify  genes and processes that regulate ovule
              and gametophyte development  and will provide insight into interactions between
              the haploid and  diploid generations. Moreover, they will advance our
              understanding  about how cells and tissues differentiate and communicate, and
              may  result in new conceptual information about processes leading to the 
              inception of the embryo in higher plants.  ***
