Title       : Protein Surface Mutations: Denatured State Stability Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9304751

Award Number: 9304751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Bowler bbowler@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9163,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304751  Bowler  The research to be undertaken focuses on the role of the 
              denatured state of a protein in modulating the thermodynamics  equilibrium
              between the native and denatured state.  Mutation at  highly solvent-exposed
              amino acids on the surface of iso-1-  cytochrome c is proposed as a means of
              probing the energetics of  the denatured state with reduced interference from
              native state  energetic relative to mutation at buried amino acids.  
              Hydrophilic to hydrophobic mutations at such sites will be used  to test the
              prediction of heteropolymer theory that such  mutations should stabilize the
              denatured state.  Hydrophobic to  hydrophilic surface mutations will also be
              investigated to see if  they have the opposite effect on the denatured state
              energy.   Histidines are believed to ligate to the heme of cytochrome c in  the
              denatured state.  Using mutagenesis methods to vary the  sequence position of
              the histidine we will attempt to modulate  the size and shape of the denatured
              state.  The thermodynamics of  all mutants will be characterized by both
              guanidine-HC1 and  thermal denaturation techniques.  A reversible disulfide
              mutation  method and  Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy will be used  to
              directly assess the impact of our mutations on the denatured  state of the
              protein.  %%%  Understanding the factors that stabilize the folded state of a 
              protein relative to the unfolded state is a central issue in  Biochemistry. 
              Being able to rationally control the stability of  a protein would be of great
              importance to the pharmaceutical  industry which is increasingly developing
              protein  pharmaceuticals.  The work to be undertaken will explore methods  of
              selectively perturbing the unfolded state of a protein, by  focussing on
              mutation of amino acids that are exposed on the  surface of a protein.  The
              work will be carried out with the  protein iso-1-cytochrome c which will be
              isolated from Baker's  yeast.  Standard thermal and chemical methods will be
              used to  characterize the energy requir ed to unfold the mutant forms of  the
              protein.  Two methods, reversible disulfide mutation and  infrared
              spectroscopy, will be used to evaluate the degree to  which stability changes
              originate from the unfolded state of the  protein.  These experiments have the
              potential to provide methods  of stabilizing or destabilizing a protein which
              do not affect the  folded structure of a protein and thus would have minimal
              impact  on biological activity.  ***
