Title       : Collaborative Research: A New Approach to Understanding Prey Selection and
               Nutrition in Scyphomedusae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9304219

Award Number: 9304219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara K. Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9304219  SULLIVAN    While the importance of scyphomedusae as predators in
              planktonic  communities has ben amply demonstrated, we are not presently able 
              to clearly predict which components of planktonic populations will  be affected
              by scyphomedusan predation.  Conventional methodologies  such as laboratory
              "black box" feeding studies or gut contents from  field samples have been
              valuable but insufficient approaches to  resolve this issue because they do not
              reveal how the feeding  interactions occur.  The how is necessary to predict
              which prey  will be consumed in novel situations.    A new approach will be
              developed in this project that combines the  separate expertise of two
              investigators specializing in video and  conventional methods for the study of
              prey selection.  First,  laboratory work will quantify relationships between
              medusan body  plan, fluid motions and prey capture.  Second, field studies of 
              prey selection by gut analyses will determine congruence of an  evolving model
              with in situ selection patterns.  Third, mesocosm  studies with controlled
              predator-prey conditions will critically  evaluate the model via hypothesis
              testing.      The research will center on the ephyral through young adult 
              transition period of two abundant and cosmopolitan scyphomedusae,  Auerlia
              aurita and Cyanea capillata.  While sharing similar ephyral  morphologies, the
              adult forms diverge widely in body plan.  The  results of this work will
              contribute to our understanding of these  specific predators, the ephyral form
              shared by most scyphomedusae  and, ultimately, to the mechanics of
              predator-prey interactions in  planktonic communities.
