Title       : Groundwater Flow, Normal Fault Block Motion, and Brine Evolution Within the Rio
               Grande Rift System, New Mexico: Implications for Potassium Metasomatism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9304873

Award Number: 9304873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Person   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Hudleston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is now well established that potassic hydrothermal alteration of            
              igneous and sedimentary rocks is intimately associated with                    
              extensional tectonics and the evolution of regional groundwater                
              flow systems within continental rift basins.  While the                        
              paleohydrology of compressional tectonic systems has received                  
              considerable attention in the literature in recent years, the                  
              hydrodynamics of extensional terrains remains poorly understood in             
              a quantitative sense.  Little is know, for example, about the                  
              effects of listric fault block motion, the relative importance of              
              different fluid flow inducing mechanisms, and the evolution of                 
              brines on basin hydrodynamics.  In this proposal a methodology is              
              presented for investigating crustal scale groundwater flow within              
              continental rift basins using mathematical modelling.  The approach            
              will be used to study the giant potassium anomaly within the Rio               
              Grande Rift system near Socorro, New mexico, a site where                      
              sufficient geologic and hydrologic data are available to evaluate              
              the utility of the analysis.  Finite element models of hydrothermal            
              fluid flow brine evolution, and the kinematics of normal fault                 
              block motion will be constructed along cross-sectional transects               
              through the rift.  Special emphasis will be place on assessing the             
              hydrologic  connection between shallow (0-5 km) and deep (5-15 km)             
              flow systems as well as the relative importance of compaction-,                
              topography-, density-, and seismogenically-induced groundwater                 
              motion.  The quantitative results will be compared with observed               
              potassic hydrothermal alteration of igneous and sedimentary rocks              
              within the Rio Grande Rift system in cooperation with Dr. Charles              
              Chapin, Director of the New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral                 
              Resources, Socorro, New Mexico.
