Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Saddlepoint Methods in Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9304274

Award Number: 9304274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Butler walrus@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The first portion of this research is concerned with the  computation of
              Bayesian predictive densities in settings where  the predictive density does
              not have a tractable form.  Such  settings occur in stochastic network models
              where flowgraph  methods can be used to derive their moment generating
              functions.  Saddlepoint methods are then used to convert these generating 
              functions into densities and cumulant generating functions.   Subsequent mixing
              over the posterior distribution is accomplished  with either simulation or the
              analytic method of Laplace.  We  also develop importance sampling methods for
              p-value computation  in multivariate analysis.  Virtually all the common tests
              in this  subject area will be computable with the simulation schemes we  shall
              develop and the run times should amount to less than five  minutes on a work
              station.  Additional work dealing with  approximation of responses in
              non-linear stochastic systems is to  be considered.  Systems theory encompasses
              such things as the study of production  management, where the flow of products
              along an assembly line is  of interest, queuing theory, reliability of
              electrical networks,  flow of traffic on a highway system, etc.  The
              mathematical study  of these systems when they are subject to randomness is
              based on  an area of mathematics called transform theory.  So far transform 
              theory has not proven to be a particularly useful tool to the  more practical
              engineer for extracting practical answers about  systems.  Engineers are mostly
              inclined to use very  time-consuming computer simulations for this analysis. 
              This  research is concerned with applying new mathematical tools called 
              saddlepoint approximations to these problems that will allow  practical answers
              to be extracted from the transform theory.  Where a random system might now
              take 10 hours of computer  simulation to analyze, it should take only minutes
              on the  computer to analyze when the full power of these saddlepoint 
              approximations are combined with the existing pow er of transform  theory. 
              This research is concerned with using saddlepoint  approximations to analyze
              systems and for extracting practical  answers about such systems. Statistical
              analyses that involve  more than one variable often require that the data are
              analyzed  using multivariate methods.  In this setting testing the 
              significance of various hypotheses is not easily accomplished  since the
              computation of attained levels of significance is not  exact and requires
              approximation.  The proposed research offers  special computer simulation
              methods that will lead to virtually  exact computation of attained significance
              levels for the  majority of multivariate tests.
