Title       : Craft Manufacture and Exchange in Oaxaca: The Residential Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9304258

Award Number: 9304258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Feinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Gary Feinman will                 
              continue his archaeological research at the site of Ejutla which is            
              located in Oaxaca Mexico. During his 1992 field season Dr. Feinman             
              discovered the corner of what he believes to be a 4-6 room                     
              structure. He will now excavate the entire compound, collect the               
              cultural materials it contains and produce a detailed map. His goal            
              is to reconstruct the range of activities which took place in this             
              family context and especially focus on the craft or manufacturing              
              activities represented. Prior work has indicated that a wide range             
              of materials including onyx and at least 80 taxa of Pacific shell              
              were worked at the site. Dr. Feinman believes that specialists                 
              produced materials for trade and that the great majority of the                
              elaborate shell and stone ornaments made were not consumed locally.            
              Most of the shell recovered in prior excavations consisted of by-              
              products and defective pieces.                                                 
                                                                                             
              In the early first millennium much of central Mexico was                       
              incorporated into an empire which, archaeologists believe, had its             
              center at Monte Alban. The site with its large impressive ruins has            
              been extensively excavated and its importance in a broader regional            
              context is clear. However what is less well understood is how this             
              empire functioned and how outlying areas such as Ejutla were                   
              controlled and tied to the core. Dr. Feinman believes that the                 
              development of structured trade networks and the interdependencies             
              which thus developed may have played a central role. In this                   
              context Ejutla is extremely interesting because it appears to be               
              involved in specialized manufacturing which focussed on shell                  
              carving. What makes this unusual is that the site is located far               
              from the ocean. The proposed excavation will provide additional                
              insight into how Ejutla functioned and the immediate social context            
              in which this work took place.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also increase our             
              understanding of the processes which underlie the development of               
              state level societies.
