Title       : High-resolution Stratigraphy: Application to Hydrologic- Climatic Reconstruction
               in Southwestern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9304360

Award Number: 9304360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Y. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a renewal of research to establish a climatic reference                
              section for examining the synchroneity of the exceptionally large              
              and rapid changes in climate that occurred before, during, and                 
              after the last glacial maximum (~35Ka to 12.5ka).  The                         
              hydrologically closed Estancia basin in central New Mexico is                  
              especially well suited as a reference section because of its                   
              previous location under the Polar Front Jet Stream, because of its             
              uninterrupted high-resolution stratigraphic and paleontologic                  
              record, and because it recorded a strong, clear, and measurable                
              response to climate forcing.  Abundant ostracodes and pollen are               
              available for AMS dating.  The sampling interval, owing to a high              
              accumulation rate and weak bioturbation, has a practical resolution            
              for changes in climate of less than a decade.  Closely spaced (~50-            
              yr) analyses of sediment composition, oxygen 18 and carbon 13, and             
              hydrochemistry (ostracode species abundance), along with mass-                 
              balance calculations and a hydrologic model will be used to                    
              quantify P-E on the time scale of centuries to millennia.  Gray-               
              scale images linked to compositional and other changes analyzed at             
              more closely spaced intervals will characterize interannual to                 
              century-scale climatic variability.  Patterns of recorded climatic             
              variability include ~2000-yr highstand and lowstands, very strong              
              ~200-to 250-yr, Maunder-scale oscillations, and ~20-years cycles.              
              A more accurate age model and chronostratigraphy based on AMS                  
              dating of abundant ostracodes will determine the timing of the                 
              unusually large and rapid climatic fluctuations recorded at the                
              Estancia site during the glacial maximum and during the later part             
              of isotope stage 3.  The Estancia reference section will be the                
              first complete, land-based high-resolution chronology for changes              
              in climate during this important time interval.  It will serve as              
              the basis for correlating and interpreting regional shifts in                  
              climate as well as hemispheric and global climatic events.
