Title       : Buoyancy-Dominated Turbulent Transport in Separated Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1993 
File        : a9304485

Award Number: 9304485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ta-Shen Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bassem F. Armaly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT -- CTS-9304485  PI -- Ta-Shen Chen    The proposed research is a
              coordinated experimental and numerical study on buoyancy-dominated, turbulent
              separated flows over backward-facing and forward-facing step geometries that
              are oriented in vertical and horizontal positions.  It is aimed at providing
              quantitative results for the momentum and thermal transport in the separates
              and reattached flow regions under the effect of strong buoyancy forces and low
              flow velocities.  Emphasis will be placed on the experimental study to examine
              the turbulent transport characteristics (including momentum and heat transfer)
              in natural convection and in buoyancy-dominated mixed convection adjacent to
              these geometries.  The existing turbulence models, such as the k-E models for
              high and low Reynolds numbers, the algebraic stress model, and the RNG k-E
              model have been applied with success to forced convection, but they have not
              been fully tested and validated for buoyancy- dominated or buoyancy-affected
              complex flows involving flow separation and reattachment.  This is because at
              the present time there is a lack of experimental measurements of
              buoyancy-dominated turbulent separated flows, even for such simple geometry as
              a backward-facing or forward-facing step.  Such measurements are needed in
              order to test, validate, and/or improve the existing turbulence models for
              applications in strong turbulent buoyant flows involving flow separation. 
              Simple geometries of backward-facing and forward-facing steps are chosen for
              the proposed research in order to establish a benchmark of experimental and
              numerical data for these geometries in buoyancy-dominated turbulent mixed
              convection flows, similar to what has been done for the same geometries in
              laminar mixed convection flows by the authors.  Measurements of the mean and
              turbulent quantities of the momentum and thermal transport under
              buoyancy-dominated flow conditions for these benchmark geometries will be
              carried out and these measured data will be used in the numer ical phase of the
              proposed study, with the hope of validating or optimizing, and maybe, if
              needed, modifying the existing turbulence models.  These measurements will also
              be of great value for future studies by others in modeling turbulent transport
              in buoyancy-dominated separated flows.  Results from the proposed research will
              be correlated to provide the building blocks that are needed in dealing with
              turbulent transport phenomena in complex, buoyancy-dominated separated flows
              that are prevalent in many engineering devices.
