Title       : Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions in the Arabidopsis Flavonoid Enzyme
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9304767

Award Number: 9304767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda S. Winkel-Shirley winkel@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               WPCM               2           B         P     Z                 Courier 10cpi 
              #| x                =V  x   6 X      @   8  ; X @                              
                   Canon LBP-8III (Additional)          CALB8IAD.PRS   x            @        
                     0J  zX @ #| x               2       Z   B     %         X         F   ` 
               Canon LBP-8III (Additional)          CALB8IAD.PRS   x            @            
                 0J  zX @Courier 10cpi Courier Footnote 16cpi .     ? x x x ,          x   6
              X      @   8  ; X @                                          + H H H ,      S ,
              H   6 X      @      ;   @                                          t"   t   } 
              r        }  r       6e  t    t   }  r    6h  t   }  r    .    s         u  t   
              a   < s      }  r'  I                     ut         r          PQV 6e  L     2
                        K                                   9308279 delalleramoya The
              maintenance of proper intracellular levels of cholesterol is dependent on a
              dynamic equilibrium between cholesterol efflux and uptake of the lipid
              component after having bound to an extracellular acceptor in serum.  To study
              this phenomenon, a method was developed to assay the combination of "released"
              cholesterol with serum acceptor molecules. The objective of the present
              research is to extend the current assay in order to obtain more information on
              other parameters that can influence cholesterol efflux.  These factors include
              intracellular cholesterol content and the relative activities of serum
              components, other than those lipoproteins already known to regulate cholesterol
              homeostasis such as lecithin cholesterol ester hydrolase (LCAT) and cholesterol
              ester transfer protein (CETP).  To begin to monitor the movement of cholesterol
              after entry into the extracellular acceptor pool, methods will be developed to
              assay intracellular acyl cholesterol ester transferase (ACAT).  Changes in ACAT
              activity have been shown to correlate with cell cholesterol in numerous cell
              systems.  With the ACAT enzyme assay in place, cholesterol efflux values will 
              be correlated with changes in serum components such as high density lipoprotein
              (HDL) subclasses, other lipoproteins, and standard parameters of LCAT and CETP.
               Finally, the new assay method will be scaled down for screening small volume
              serum samples from genetically engineered mice, that have extra, or missing
              copies, of genes for serum proteins that play a crucial role in cholesterol
              metabolism. %%%          A better method will be developed to measure changes
              in the circulating total concentration of cholesterol in serum. This is
              difficult to do because cholesterol exists in combination with a variety of
              different circulating serum components, and in this combined state, it is not
              detected by ordinary procedures now in use.  Development of such an assay
              system and the identification of more of the different extracellular
              cholesterol absorbing components in serum will provide a better understanding
              of cholesterol metabolism in vertebrate animals. ***                  0*0*0*   
                   9306526 Bode Ascorbic acid is maintained in some mammalian tissue cells at
              concentrations almost 20 fold higher than in plasma.  In the mammalian system,
              ascorbate exists in either of two states; ascorbic acid, the reduced form,
              which may autooxidize to produce dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA).  DHAA is toxic,
              and when it is taken up by cells, it is stored intracellularly in the reduced
              form.  The mechanism of DHAA reduction to ascorbic acid inside cells is not
              clear. DHAA may be reduced nonenzymatically by a variety of  SH containing
              compounds, such as reduced glutathione, glutathione together with NADPH, or
              NADPH alone. In some cells, however, the rate of DHAA reduction to ascorbic
              acid is 2 5 times above the rate of the glutathione dependent chemical
              reduction reaction.  This suggests that a specific DHAA ascorbic acid reduction
              system may be at work in some cells.  In this laboratory, unique reducing
              activities have been detected in at least one type of tissue.  Preliminary data
              indicate that DHAA reduction activiti es are attributable to at least two
              separate proteins; one protein appears in the cytosol and the other is membrane
              associated.  In the present proposal we will attempt to isolate and
              characterize the action and synthetic regulation these presumptive DHAA
              reduction proteins and determine their role in normal cell function. %%%
              Ascorbic acid is as important compound in animal cells.  However, on the way to
              the cells, ascorbic acid may react with oxygen and form a toxic derivative
              called dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA).  To protect themselves, when the cells take
              up DHAA, it is converted to ascorbic acid.  The question arises whether
              ascorbic acid is formed from DHAA by a chemical reaction inside cells, or
              whether there is a specific enzyme system the causes the reaction to occur. 
              The latter case may be correct, because some cells can convert DHAA at a faster
              rate than can be explained by just an ordinary chemical reaction.  Preliminary
              results in this laboratory suggest that two proteins do exist in certain cells,
              which may form a system to change DHAA to ascorbic acid.  One protein exists in
              the cell cytoplasm and the other one seems to be bound to cell membrane
              material.  We will try to purify these two proteins and determine how they
              operated to change DHAA into ascorbic acid.  We will also try to determine what
              causes the cell to form these proteins and whether they are important for the
              cell to have. ***                  0*0*0*         9306820 Borgeson We have
              discovered a novel delta 12 desaturase and have begun the biochemical
              characterization of this enzyme that places the second double bond in the
              essential fatty acid linoleic acid.  Vertebrates require the 18:2(n 6) acid in
              their diet, where it becomes a structural component of membranes and is a
              precursor for eicosanoids.  Until recently, all animals, including insects,
              were considered unable to synthesize linoleic acid.  Only plants, protozoa and
              some fungi readily synthesize the fatty acid.  Studies in our laboratory
              demonstrated, howev er, that a number of insect species do possess a delta 12
              desaturase and are able to produce linoleic acid.  The discovery of the
              desaturase in insects presents an opportunity to examine the evolution of a key
              enzyme in the lipid biosynthetic pathway.  One of the long term goals of our
              research is to examine the delta 12 desaturase in different         ?      
              species, and to determine if the process of delta 12       desaturation is a
              primitive metabolic activity, subsequently lost by most animals, or whether
              possession of this enzyme reflects an example of convergent evolution.  A
              second goal is to examine the regulation of desaturase expression at the
              transcriptional and translational level.  Studies are described in the present
              proposal to clone the enzyme from two representative insect species.  Once the
              gene coding for the enzyme in insects is isolated, future experiments designed
              to answer fundamental questions about the evolution and regulation of this key
              enzyme can begin. %%% Linoleic acid is a type of lipid, or fat, that is
              required in the walls of animal cells.  The lipid molecule is also required in
              animals for the synthesis of eicosanoids, which operate in intracellular
              communication.  Originally it was believed that linoleic acid was only
              synthesized by plants, protozoa and certain fungi, and that animals had to
              ingest the lipid molecule in their diet.  However, a key enzyme in the
              synthesis of linoleic acid, the delta 12 desaturase, was recently found by this
              laboratory in insects.  This discovery provides an opportunity to learn more
              about the evolutionary history of the linoleic acid synthetic pathway.  Could
              it be an ancient pathway lost during the evoulation of the animal cell, or is
              it a property that has been acquired more recently by the insects.  Experiments
              will be undertaken, first to clone and sequence the insect delta 12 desaturase
              gene(s), and th
