Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Domestic Services, Migration, and the
               Transformation of Local Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9304771

Award Number: 9304771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8795               (Estimated)
Investigator: Doreen J. Mattingly  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Although women have been playing increasingly important                   
              roles in the restructuring of the contemporary American economy,               
              relatively little research in geography or other fields has                    
              focused on the impact of individual decision making by women                   
              trying to reconcile responsibilities both at work and at home on               
              their patterns of employment.  This doctoral dissertation                      
              research project will examine the role that acquisition of                     
              domestic services has on the women who provide such services as                
              well as on women in the middle- and upper-income households that               
              employ domestic servants.  Primary quantitative and qualitative                
              data will be gathered through surveys and interviews with                      
              domestic workers and employers of domestic workers in three                    
              different neighborhoods in the San Diego metropolitan area.                    
              Longitudinal and cross-sectional analyses of these data will be                
              undertaken using a range of statistical procedures.                            
                   This project will provide valuable new insights into the                  
              dynamics of employment and locational decision making among two                
              groups of women -- professional women who have entered labor                   
              markets in increasing numbers in recent decades, and domestic                  
              servants, most of whom are recent immigrants from developing                   
              nations whose migration to the U.S. was spurred by other                       
              dimensions of global economic change.  This project will                       
              contribute to understandings of the interplay between paid                     
              employment and domestic responsibilities, the role of women's                  
              paid and unpaid work in local labor-market dynamics, and the role              
              of gender in international migration and the operation of                      
              immigrant labor markets.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement               
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising              
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
