Title       : Controls on the Stable Isotope Chemistry & Major Ion Fluxes Between Lakes &
               Groundwaters in a Northern Hardwood, Glaciated Terrain: Short-Term and
               Long-Term Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9304811

Award Number: 9304811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl J. Bowser bowser@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1325,9189,EGCH,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Funding is requested to conduct studies of lake-groundwater                    
              interaction using stable isotopic and major ion chemical                       
              approaches.  Emphasis will be on isotopic variation in del O18 and             
              major ion chemistry (Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, SO4, Alkalinity, and pH) in            
              a number of lakes, their surrounding groundwaters, and local                   
              atmospheric precipitation.  The research area will extend from the             
              existing NSF-LTER North Temperate Lakes research site, a location              
              where extensive biologic, ecological, geochemical, and                         
              climatological measurements have been made over the past 10 years,             
              an area in a northern hardwood forest, glaciated terrain with                  
              abundant lakes and little drainage integration.  Isotope data will             
              be used to calculate hydrologic budgets for lakes and to establish             
              regional gradient in groundwater isotope chemistry according to                
              methods developed for the NSF-LTER lake study.  Using these isotope            
              based mass balance estimates we will: a) estimate the average                  
              composition of input waters to the lakes; b) understand of the                 
              relative role of in lake cycling vs. external lake loading of                  
              solutes (especially silica); c) determine natural solute loads to              
              lakes that suffer significant Cl and Na contamination from winter              
              road salt; d) model the composition of waters based on observation             
              of the mineralogic phases that determine the chemistry of the input            
              waters; and e) predict chemical and hydrologic changes that would              
              occur in lakes and groundwaters in response to short-term and long-            
              term climate change.  Our studies have implications on the                     
              evolution and variations in lake and groundwater chemistry in a                
              broad region of youthful glaciated terrains in temperate regions,              
              and should help us in differentiate the relative importance in lake            
              geochemical cycling vs. external lake loading.  From the knowledge             
              of present fluxes of waters to and from lakes and the associated               
              solute loading we intend to model the response of the                          
              lake/groundwater chemistry  to short-term and long-term variation              
              in climate, and estimate the sensitivity of this important region              
              to such changes.
