Title       : Radiogenic Isotopic Study of Diagenesis and Low-Grade Metamorphism of Pelites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9304307

Award Number: 9304307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Peacor drpeacor@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris M. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. Halliday  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research is designed to develop applications of                      
              radiogenic isotope analysis to pelitic sediments that have been                
              affected by a wide range of fluid-mediated diagenesis through low-             
              grade metamorphism.  Although data for clay-rich sediments imply               
              that they have a memory for fluid-rock interactions owing to their             
              limited permeability as compared with other basin sediments, much              
              isotope data lead to ambiguous results in part because analyzed                
              samples are heterogeneous and contain unknown proportions of more              
              than one generation of fine-grained clay mineral.  This proposal is            
              a renewal of our current support, in which high resolution scanning            
              electron microscopy (STEM) is combined with isotopic analysis of               
              equivalent pelitic rocks.  The ultimate aim of these studies is to             
              determine the timing and extent of water-pelite interactions and               
              thus of basin- to regional-scale fluid/rock interactions.                      
                   Having previously focused on Rb-Sr and development of Sm-Nk               
              methods, we now propose to develop the 40Ar/39Ar laser technique for           
              pelitic sediments, using well characterized samples (thin sections             
              and separates), and other isotopic techniques to provide supporting            
              data.  We intend to determine the limitations of the methods, both             
              with respect to spatial resolution and age.  Based on our previous             
              observations of shales and slates from a wide variety of                       
              occurrences, we have chosen to obtain data from bentonites (as                 
              standards having clays of a single origin) and shales from the                 
              Texas Gulf Coast and Welsh Sedimentary Basin, as well as other                 
              prograde sequences.  The latter is representative of diagenesis in             
              a passive marginal basin, whereas the former represents                        
              tectonically-induced dissolution and crystallization over the range            
              of diagenesis to greenschist facies conditions.  The samples from              
              each locality represent the complete range of diagenesis through               
              low-grade metamorphism.
