Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Transformation in Aztec and Spanish
               Colonial Periods in Central Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1993 
File        : a9304967

Award Number: 9304967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9335               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl W. Butzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9304957  BUTZER       The need for clearer understanding of the complex ways
              that  humans have altered and responded to changes in their natural 
              environments has become more important as increasing attention is  devoted to
              understanding the complex dynamics of global  environmental change.  The
              relative ecological impact of  indigenous and early colonial land use has been
              a matter of  controversial discussion in recent years, with special attention 
              having focused on the degree to which native people altered the  environment
              and the nature of the impact that early European  settlers had on natural
              systems.  This doctoral dissertation  research project will examine landscape
              changes over the last  millennium in the Texcoco region of central Mexico, with
              emphasis  given to the land-use changes and environmental impacts from late 
              prehistoric times through the period of Spanish conquest and  colonization.  A
              major goal of the project is explanation of the  causes and antiquity of eroded
              landscapes and evaluation of  changes in stream networks.  Through archival and
              field work,  data will be gathered from a variety of different sources, 
              including historical written and pictorial documents; field  surveys;
              interpretation of aerial photography; and  sedimentological, stratigraphic,
              chemical, palynological, and  radiocarbon analyses of soil samples.  A primary
              hypotheses being  tested by the investigator is the conjecture that the main
              causes  of landscape evolution, soil erosion in piedmont areas, and  alluvial
              accumulation in lake margins were rapid increases in  population levels and the
              intensity of land use during Aztec  dominance followed by the abandonment of
              lands and introduction  of new forms of land use during Spanish colonial times.
                    This project will use an integrated methodology to explain  the relative
              environmental implications of both indigenous and  colonial land-use systems. 
              In addition to enhancing  understandings of the historical evolution of
              land-use change  under differe nt cultural and economic regimes, thereby
              expanding  general knowledge about the human dimensions of global 
              environmental change, the project will record human and natural  features in
              the landscape that are being destroyed by  contemporary urbanization and
              mechanized agriculture.  As a  doctoral dissertation improvement award, this
              award also will  provide support to enable a promising student to establish a 
              strong independent research career.  ***
