Title       : Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9304646

Award Number: 9304646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Wadsworth patw@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9161,9181,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Microtubules are intracellular polymers that participate in a                
              variety of events in eukaryotic cells, including mitosis,                      
              intracellular particle transport and the maintenance of asymmetric             
              cell shape.  Microtubules are inherently dynamic, and are observed             
              to alternate between periods of growth and rapid shortening.   The             
              transition from growth to rapid shortening is termed catastrophe;              
              the reverse transition, rescue.  To directly observe the dynamic               
              behavior of microtubules in living cells, a fluorescent analog of              
              tubulin, the subunit protein of the microtubule, will be injected              
              into cells and allowed to incorporate into the microtubule polymer.            
              The fluorescent microtubules will be detected using low-light-level            
              fluorescence microscopy.  The rates of microtubule growth and                  
              shortening and the frequencies of transitions between these two                
              states will be quantified from video records of the living cells.              
              The dynamic behavior of microtubules will be determined as cells               
              progress through the cell cycle.  Previously characterized                     
              molecules which bind microtubules will be injected into living                 
              cells and the resulting behavior of the microtubules measured.  The            
              parameters of microtubule dynamics in epithelial cells will be                 
              determined and factors which promote microtubule rescue events will            
              be isolated from these cells.  A wound model will be used to induce            
              the reorientation and motility of fibroblasts.  Under these                    
              conditions, a new lamella is extended; the formation of stable,                
              paused microtubules and the contribution of microtubules to the                
              formation of focal contacts in the newly formed lamella will be                
              measured.  The results of these experiments will provide new                   
              information concerning the mechanisms that cells utilize to modify             
              and regulate the dynamic behavior of microtubules during these                 
              various events.  Finally, using cell fractionation and functional              
              assays for microtubule behavior, the regulatory factors which                  
              modulate microtubule behavior will be characterized.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Microtubules are ubiquitous in the eukaryotic world and fundamental            
              to life as we know it.  They are scaffolding for cell shape, road              
              maps for intracellular motility, and determinants of post-cleavage             
              cell fate; they form the mitotic spindle apparatus which is                    
              responsible for chromosome segregation to daughter cells, and they             
              are the stuff of cilia and flagella, responsible for cellular                  
              locomotion. Microtubules are polymeric cytoskeletal structures made            
              up of the protein tubulin.  In most situations, the polymers are               
              dynamic, that is, they are continuously undergoing polymerization              
              and depolymerization.  Understanding their dynamic behavior and the            
              molecular basis for this dynamism are important goals for                      
              understanding microtubule functions in nature, as well as for                  
              harnessing microtubules either directly or indirectly for                      
              nonbiological practical applications e.g., molecular switches).
