Title       : Eighteenth Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs,
               Pakistan, June 1993, Participation of U.S. Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1993     
File        : a9304568

Award Number: 9304568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Bary Malik fbmalik@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 5943,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports the travel                                 
              of a delegation of U.S. physicists to Pakistan                                 
              to participate in the "Eighteenth Nathiaghali                                  
              Summer College on Physics and Contemporary                                     
              Needs".  The meeting is an annual activity                                     
              organized by the Pakistan Ministry of Science                                  
              and Technology to offer to the participants a                                  
              forum to discuss advances in physics and their                                 
              relationships to modern needs.  The main topics                                
              for this college are:  recent advances in solid                                
              state physics related to high-Tc super                                         
              conductivity and surface physics; current                                      
              developments in atomic and nuclear clusters;                                   
              reaction theories relevant to atomic, nuclear,                                 
              and solid state physics; and introduction to                                   
              cooperative phenomena or quantum fluids.  These                                
              lectures will be followed by a week-long                                       
              workshop to focus on: progress in many body                                    
              theories related to condensed matter physics;                                  
              atomic and nuclear clusters; superconductivity                                 
              particularly high Tc; phase transformation; and                                
              surface physics.  The program allows for                                       
              participants to attend either of the two one-                                  
              week sessions or both.  Short workshops follow                                 
              the more intense lecture sessions to provide                                   
              for close interaction and collaboration.                                       
              Lecture notes are to be provided to the                                        
              participants, and an attempt will be made to                                   
              publish the proceedings.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The proposed summer college has been                                   
              held annually in Nathiaghali, Pakistan, with                                   
              participation from scientists throughout Asia                                  
              and Africa and with lecturers from the western                                 
              world.  It has received strong endorsement in                                  
              the past from  participants from these                                         
              countries as well as from international                                        
              organizations including the International                                      
              Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste.  It                                 
              receives partial support from that center as                                   
              well as from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in                                
              Beijing.
