Title       : US-Russian Research on Investigations in HTSC, Nonlinear Oxides and
               Unconventional Superfluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9304561

Award Number: 9304561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ketterson j-ketterson@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. P. H. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Russia Joint Cooperative Research on                                   
              Investigations in HTSC, Nonlinear Oxides and                                   
              Unconventional Superfluids will be conducted by                                
              Drs. John Ketterson and R.P.H. Chang,                                          
              Northwestern University and Dr. Peter Brusov,                                  
              Rostov-on-Don State University.  Their                                         
              cooperation will feature three areas of research:                              
              (1) nonlinear optical oxide materials, where                                   
              newly developed sputtering techniques will be                                  
              applied; (2) unconventional superconductors and                                
              superfluids, where tunneling and atomic force                                  
              microscopy will be used to study the magnetic                                  
              field distribution in the vicinity of a vortex in                              
              HFS; and (3) high temperature superconductors                                  
              (HTSC), where ribbon conductors will be produced                               
              using a novel sputtering system constructed at                                 
              Northwestern University and targets made at                                    
              Rostov-on-Don State University.                                                
                                                                                             
              Progress in the fields of high temperature                                     
              superconductivity and nonlinear optics is                                      
              intimately coupled to advances in oxide                                        
              materials.  Interest in nonlinear oxide materials                              
              developed only recently at Northwestern, while                                 
              Rostov is a leading Russian supplier and                                       
              developer of oxide ceramic materials.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research in materials research fulfills the                               
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the                               
              United States and Russia to combine complementary                              
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong                                    
              mutual interest and competence in the field of                                 
              basic scientific research on the basis of                                      
              equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
