Title       : Stochastic Modeling of Reactive Solute Transport in Heterogeneous Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9304481

Award Number: 9304481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Rubin rubin@arimor.ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9304481  Rubin    Predictions of contaminant transport by groundwater, as well
              as  monitoring and management, are based on quantitative models of  solute
              motion.  Present methods for prediction of contaminant  transport are
              inadequate because they fail to account explicitly  for measured data at its
              locations.  They also do not account  realistically for the effects of
              heterogeneity in the conductivity  and temporal variability in pressure (or
              only under some  simplifying assumptions), and they do not offer an economic
              means  of designing a monitoring scheme where the observed data are used  to
              update the predictive models.  Furthermore, little attempt has  been directed
              so far to obtain a better understanding of transport  in highly heterogeneous
              geologic formations and the effects of  chemical reactions on transport at the
              field scale.  Lastly,  current predictive methods fail to link the predictions
              with any  criterion of goodness of fit.  In this study, we propose to develop 
              a modeling strategy which considers the aquifer hydraulic  properties, the
              velocity field, and the solute concentration as  random space functions,
              expressed in terms of initial/boundary  conditions and various physical
              parameters, and which allow, both  spatial variability and prediction
              uncertainty to be analyzed with   probabilistic, quantitative tools. 
              Three-dimensional random  function models will be obtained for steady and
              unsteady nonuniform  velocity fields and will be used for predicting the
              various moments  of the concentration of reactive and non-reactive contaminants
              for  anisotropic conductivity fields.  Bayesian analysis will make the 
              predictions locally conditioned.  The model will be applied to two  field
              studies.  We plan to achieve a better understanding of  transport phenomena at
              the fundamental level and obtain risk-  qualified, locally-conditioned
              estimates of solute spreading in  applications.  We plan to generalize existing
              stochastic transport  theories to account for higher-order variability i n the
              flow field,  to investigate the influence of flow unsteadiness and 
              nonuniformity, to evaluate the relevance of unsteadiness to the  prediction of
              solute transport under typical conditions, and  finally to suggest simplified
              methods to incorporate flow  unsteadiness, flow nonuniformity and chemical
              reactions into  predictions.  ***
