Title       : Grasshopper Agglutinin (Lectin): Molecular Biology of a Pathogen Surveillance
               Molecule
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9304096

Award Number: 9304096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Hapner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304096  Hapner    This research involves the molecular biology and protein
              structure  of the agglutinin (lectin) present in the hemolymph of the 
              grasshopper, Melanoplus differentialis.  Insect agglutinins are  defense
              response molecules that are a component of invertebrate  immune mechanisms. 
              They act as surveillance molecules and take  part in the recognition and
              neutralization of non-self substances  including metamorphic debris and
              pathogenic microorganisms.   Primary objectives of the work are:  determination
              of the  nucleotide sequence of the cDNA encoding the agglutinin protein; 
              determination of the number of genes coding for the agglutinin and  their
              expression and induction; and the extension of known  physicochemical
              characteristics of the 70 kD agglutinin dimer,  including its amino acid
              sequence, molecular homogeneity, subunit  identity, and carbohydrate
              recognition properties of individual  carbohydrate-binding domains, of which
              there are two per  polypeptide chain.  The overall aim of the research is to 
              characterize grasshopper agglutinin as a defensive surveillance  molecule
              exhibiting broad carbohydrate recognition potential.   Methods to be employed
              include molecular cloning and nucleotide  sequence determination of
              agglutinin-encoding CDNA from grasshopper  fat body, Southern analysis of
              genomic DNA and Northern analysis of  mRNA isolated from several grasshopper
              tissues, both naive and  immuno-stimulated.  Physicochemical characterization
              will include  affinity chromatography on glucosidic and galactosidic Sepharose 
              columns, reducing and nonreducing SDS polyacrylamide gel  electrophoresis,
              isoelectric focusing, and reverse phase high  performance liquid
              chromatography.  Protein carbohydrate will be  determined by treatment with
              endoglycosidases.  Individual  carbohydrate recognition domains are to be
              proteolytically excised  from the 35 Kd monomer subunit and their binding
              characteristics  studied by affinity electrophoresis.  Subunit identity or 
              nonidentity of the 70 Kd  dimer will be confirmed by partial amino  acid
              sequence of CNBr or tryptic fragments generated from the  purified 35 Kd
              monomer.  These results should determine whether or  not the dimer represents
              one gene product or two, with consequent  implications for carbohydrate binding
              diversity.  %%%  Insect agglutinins are defense response molecules that are a 
              component of invertebrate immune mechanisms.  They act as  surveillance
              molecules and take part in the recognition and  neutralization of non-self
              substances such as debris left after  metamorphosis and pathogenic
              microorganisms.  The goal of this  research is to understand the structure and
              function of the protein  agglutinin (lectin) present in the hemolymph (blood)
              of the  grasshopper.  Increased knowledge of invertebrate immune mechanisms 
              and their potential vulnerability will contribute to the rational  development
              of insect control methods, and will also enhance  methods for management and
              culturing of beneficial invertebrate  organisms.***
