Title       : RUI: Dogan Point Archaeological Analysis Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9304347

Award Number: 9304347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Claassen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Cheryl Claassen will             
              conduct a third and final season of archaeological excavation at               
              the site of Dogan point which is located in the Hudson River Valley            
              of New York State. She and her collaborators will then analyze the             
              cultural, faunal and floral materials collected, set these in a                
              geomorphological context, and prepare the results for publication.             
              The Dogan Point site was extensively excavated by an amateur                   
              archaeologist in the late 1960s. It produced, from its lowest                  
              levels, giant oyster shell which was dated to the 7th millennium               
              BC. This was of great interest to archaeologists because it                    
              represented the oldest date in eastern North America for human                 
              utilization of shellfish resources. However because of the amateur             
              nature of the excavation and unsatisfactory data recording,                    
              archaeologists have been reluctant to accept the results. Dr.                  
              Claassen's research has indicated that these early dates are in                
              fact correct and the goals of this additional work are to provide              
              further evidence and prepare it for publication.                               
                                                                                             
              While evidence for human use of specialized resources such as                  
              shellfish extend back to a much earlier time period in the Old                 
              World, in North America a similar pattern appears strangely late in            
              time and archaeologists have wondered why this might be so. Some               
              have argued that such specialized resource utilization in fact does            
              extend further back but relevant sites currently lie below sea                 
              level. Others argue that because sea levels had not stabilized,                
              human groups did not recognize the food potential of such areas.               
              The original early dates from Dogan Point were important because               
              they lent strong support to the former contention. However, because            
              of the nature of the early excavations, they were widely questioned            
              and Dr. Claassen's work is significant because it confirms the                 
              original conclusion.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons. It will provide data of            
              interest to many North Americanist archaeologists. It will increase            
              our understanding of prehistoric subsistence adaptations and will              
              assist in researcher and student training in an undergraduate                  
              institution.
