Title       : Immunoglobulin Flexibility in the Generation of Immune Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9304790

Award Number: 9304790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Roux   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 9304790  Roux  Immune complexes will be generated by reaction of monoclonal 
              antibodies representing the various human and mouse Ig classes and  subclasses
              with specific antibodies directed against topologically  defined determinants. 
              Extensive use will be made of previously  investigated systems in which mapped
              idiotypic and isotypic  determinants will serve as probe sites.  molecules with
              altered or  mutant hinge regions will be similarly complexed for comparison.  
              Electron micrographic images will be scored for angular  relationships and
              rotational orientations between the various Fab  and Fc segments of target and
              probe molecules.  These data will be  interpreted in the context of the
              location of the reactive sites  and the class and subclass (i.e., the degree
              and modes of hinge  flexibility) of the reactants.  When reaction mixtures are
              sampled  at defined time intervals, a kinetic profile of the formation of 
              immune complexes can also be documented.  The goals are:  1) To  conduct a
              comprehensive comparative structural analyses of (a)  uncomplexed, and (b)
              tethered Ig classes and subclasses by EM with  emphasis on hinge-imparted
              flexibility of Fab and Fc arms.  2)  To  determine the correlation of idiotopes
              or isotypic determinants to  (a) the geometry and (b) the kinetics of immune
              complex formation  as a result of interaction with ligands.  3) To determine
              the role  of specific hinge structures (or other flexibility-imparting 
              segments) of native Ig in the generation of defined immune complex 
              configurations.  4) To determine the effect of genetically  engineered
              alterations of the hinge regions on the formation and  geometry of immune
              complexes.  %%%  A detailed understanding of the structural and functional
              aspects  of antibodies is of fundamental importance to a wide range of 
              immunological phenomena.  One key element that is rarely defined in  an
              antigen-antibody interaction is the relationship between the  geometry of the
              immune complex and its functional attributes.  This  pro posal describes a
              series of investigations aimed at studying the  three-dimensional geometry of
              immune complexes as a function of  both segmental flexibility and the location
              of reactive sites  (i.e., idiotopes and isotypic determinants).  Additional
              knowledge  on the limitations of Ig flexibility and geometry should enhance 
              the conceptual framework in which many basic observations are  interpreted. 
              Such information may also have practical applications  such as aiding in the
              development of rational approaches to the  design of Ig-based pharmaceuticals. 
              ***
