Title       : Novel Cyclodextrin-Based and Electroactive Rotaxanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9304262

Award Number: 9304262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel E. Kaifer akaifer@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The chemistry of rotaxanes will be pursued. Rotaxanes are                      
              supramolecules in which a bead is threaded by a linear subunit.                
              Bead dissociation is sterically prevented by two bulky groups                  
              (stoppers) attached to both ends of the linear subunit. A                      
              substantial portion of this work will be done with rotaxanes in                
              which cyclodextrins are used as the beads. This project will                   
              investigate the nature of the fundamental interactions leading to              
              self-assembly of cyclodextrin-based ?3!rotaxanes and ?4!rotaxanes,             
              structures with either two or three cyclodextrin beads,                        
              respectively. In a second aspect of the work, rotaxanes will be                
              synthesized where the cyclodextrin bead completely encapsulates a              
              redox-active group. These systems will allow an evaluation of the              
              importance of solvent reorganization in electron transfer                      
              reactions. The third aspect of the work will investigate the                   
              possibility of electrochemically controlling the position of an                
              electron acceptor bead encapsulated on a thread with two different             
              donor stations.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of              
              Professor Angel K. Kaifer at the University of Miami. Large                    
              molecular systems will be prepared that are composed of a bead                 
              molecule which encapsulates a linear string molecule. Bulky groups             
              will be placed at the ends of the string to prevent dissociation of            
              the bead. The assembly process to form these large molecular                   
              systems will be studied. A particular portion of the string will be            
              oxidized to generate a positive charge and the effect of the bead              
              on this process will be evaluated in the context of solvation.                 
              Control of the movement of the bead along the string by oxidizing              
              or reducing different stations on the string, and thereby changing             
              charge at these stations, will be studied.
