Title       : The Components of the CO2 Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9304662

Award Number: 9304662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Moroney btmoro@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9304662  Moroney  Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
              have the  capacity to concentrate carbon dioxide internally, allowing these 
              organisms to grow photoautotrophically at carbon dioxide  concentrations lower
              than most higher plants can tolerate.  This  carbon dioxide concentrating
              mechanism is inducible; it is present  only in cells that have been grown with
              limiting carbon dioxide  conditions.  An important aspect of this Ci (Ci = CO2
              + HCO3- +  CO3-2) accumulation system is located in the chloroplasts.  Intact 
              chloroplasts isolated from low carbon dioxide-grown C. reinhardtii  cells
              retain the ability to accumulate Ci to much higher levels  than intact
              chloroplasts isolated from high carbon dioxide-grown  cells.  During the last
              grant period, Dr. Moroney has identified at  least six polypeptides that are
              specifically induced by growth on  low carbon dioxide and are missing in the
              high carbon dioxide-  requiring strain cia-5.  One of these inducible proteins
              is a  carbonic anhydrase located in the periplasmic space and another is  a 36
              kDa polypeptide localized to the chloroplast envelope.  The  locations of other
              inducible proteins and their functions are  unknown.  In the past year, a cDNA
              library to C. reinhardtii cells  adapting to low carbon dioxide conditions has
              been constructed.  By  differential hybridization, four classes of recombinant
              phages have  been identified that contain genes that are preferentially 
              expressed under four classes low carbon dioxide conditions.    It is proposed
              to study the carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism  in C. reinhardtii by
              characterizing the components of this  transport system and by delineating the
              role of the chloroplast in  carbon dioxide acquisition.  Dr. Moroney will first
              characterize  the low carbon dioxide-inducible genes recently identified and 
              connect these genes with the polypeptides known to be induced by  low carbon
              dioxide growth conditions.  Antibodies will be raised  against fusion proteins
              consisting of t he lacZ protein linked to  the product of the inducible gene. 
              These antibodies will then be  used to localize the proteins within the C.
              reinhardtii cell using  organelle preparations outlined within the proposal. 
              Dr. Moroney  will also generate mutants that require high carbon dioxide, 
              focussing on strains that are missing only one of the inducible  polypeptides. 
              It is hoped to eventually link a specific gene with  its gene product and with
              a strain deficient in that gene product.   The characterization of the proteins
              of this transport system will  increase our understanding of the low carbon
              dioxide adjustment in  algae and the role of the chloroplast in this
              photosynthetic  adaptation.  ***
