Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inference on Synaptic Release Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9304250

Award Number: 9304250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike West mw@isds.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will develop methods of Bayesian statistical  analysis for mixture
              distributions in studies of mechanisms of  neuronal synaptic activity. 
              Physiological analysis of synaptic  mechanisms (such as short- or long-term
              potentiation) is based on  presumptions regarding activity at individual
              synaptic sites, yet  such individual sites can rarely be analyzed directly. 
              Thus, to  infer baseline activity and dynamic changes at individual sites  from
              physiological recordings, statistical/neurophysiological  models have been
              developed which include the output from multiple  sites and cater for
              background noise. These models assume that  the recorded cell output represents
              a random mixture distribution  composed of synaptic signal 'components,' where
              each 'component'  represents one or more synaptic sites. Bayesian mixture
              models  and methods of analysis using (uncertain) mixtures of (uncertain 
              numbers of) components will be explored in this context. This  pilot project
              will aim to benchmark and validate the novel  Bayesian approaches in the
              context of experimental data from  synapses with small numbers of neural
              transmitter sites.  Technically, research will formulate prior distributions
              for  model parameters based on available synaptic noise data,  physiological
              evidence, and experimental conditions;  study  simulations to examine operating
              characteristics and  explore the sensitivity and robustness to prior and model 
              specifications; derive inferences about physiological parameters;  determine
              methods of assessment of goodness of fit; make  comparisons with existing and
              traditional approaches; and develop  computer software development for
              implementation of the modelling  techniques.    The project represents a
              collaborative, cross-disciplinary  initiative to develop novel methods for
              analysis and statistical  inference concerning the mechanisms governing
              electrochemical  signal transmission at neural junctions in animal nervous 
              systems. Interaction between the theoretical development  and  physiological
              data will play a critical role in identifying  and resolving uncertainties
              about physiological processes and  mechanisms in nervous systems, assessing
              site to site variability  in neural signals, synaptic output, identifying
              critical synaptic  characteristics, and assessing changes under differing 
              experimental and physiological conditions.  The project will  involve
              substantial analysis of existing and forthcoming  physiological data sets in
              order to provide assessments of the  validity of the statistical models and the
              derived inferences  with respect to underlying physiology.  The immediate
              objective  is to validate the new statistical approaches proposed by 
              demonstrating their application and improvements over existing  statistical
              analyses in synaptic response analysis. Ultimately  these methods are expected
              to contribute to fundamental  understanding of signalling mechanisms in human
              and other  nervous systems.
