Title       : Landscape-Scale Determinants of the Hydrological and Hydrochemical Responses of
               Mountainous Catchments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9304794

Award Number: 9304794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333549             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Hornberger gmh3k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth W. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Bencala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A quantitative understanding of the hydrochemical response of                  
              upland catchments is a fundamental goal of hydrologists and                    
              environmental chemists.  Such knowledge is needed to ascertain the             
              potential and realized effects, for example, of atmospheric                    
              deposition of acids and agricultural chemicals on the catchment                
              (terrestrial and aquatic) ecosystems, of changes of climate on                 
              water quality, and of the role of hydrology in the transport of                
              heavy metals and other trace contaminants.  In particular, an                  
              improved understanding of the factors controlling the variation of             
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in headwater streams is of                      
              scientific concern for at least two reasons.  First, the overall               
              carbon budget of lotic systems is of primary interest to aquatic               
              ecologists seeking a fundamental scientific understanding of these             
              systems.  Second, DOC interacts strongly with other dissolved                  
              substances (heavy metals in particular) and therefore plays an                 
              important role in the transport of contaminants in streams.                    
              Heterogeneities in the amount of precipitation delivered to the                
              surface of a catchment, in soil properties and vegetation coverage,            
              and in incident solar radiation can pay an important role in the               
              hydrological response of mountainous catchments.  These                        
              heterogeneities may be particularly important in influencing how               
              chemicals (e.g., DOC) are delivered from the terrestrial catchment             
              to the stream.  Complete characterization of heterogeneities over              
              a catchment is essentially impossible, but is likely to be                     
              unnecessary for descriptions of hydrochemical dynamics at the scale            
              of a whole catchment. A possibly fruitful hypothesis is that the               
              heterogeneities that dominate the catchment response are relatively            
              large scale and hence can be identified from readily available                 
              data--topography, aerial photography, and satellite imagery -- in              
              conjunction with a modest data-collection program in the field.                
              The proposed work will explore this idea.  The effects of spatial              
              patterns in topography, vegetation cover, snow accumulation and                
              melt, and soil transmissivity on the hydrochemical response of the             
              Snake River in Summit County, Colorado will be determined.  Spatial            
              data will be analyzed using techniques embodied within geographic              
              information systems (GIS) and synthesized in the context of a                  
              hydrological model (TOPMODEL)  that will be modified to take into              
              account the identified landscape-scale heterogeneities.  Field data            
              on precipitation, flow, hydraulic conductivity, and dissolved                  
              constituents (sulfate and DOC, in particular) will be used to                  
              evaluate the working hypothesis of the links between large-scale               
              heterogeneity, hydrology, and hydrochemical response.
