Title       : Simple Molecular Solids at Ultrahigh Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9304028

Award Number: 9304028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Hemley hemley@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-kwang Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9304028  Hemley    This research sill involve the study of the structural,
              optical,  electronic, and vibrational properties of dense solid hydrogen and 
              related molecular systems at ultrahigh pressures (above 100 GPa) in  order to
              identify, characterize, and understand their  transformations to high-density
              states, including metallic phases.   The experiments to be performed will use
              specially designed  diamond-anvil cells coupled with recently developed
              synchrotron  infrared, Raman, and Brilloouin spectroscopic techniques.  These 
              will permit detailed study of electronic and vibrational  transitions to
              pressures above 300 GPa and at low temperatures (5  K).  Synchrotron x-ray
              diffraction is to be used to directly  determine crystal structure and phase
              transitions as a function of  pressure (50-100 GPa) and tempeature (5-300 K). 
              It will provide  additional information on acoustic velocities and anisotropy,
              the  equation of state, and constraints on chemical effects (including 
              impurities and dopants).  Finally, the research will continue the  development
              of new methods for probing samples at ultrahigh  pressures with the diamond
              cell.  %%%  The prediction that hydrogen will transform to a metallic solid a 
              extremely high pressure is a fundamental problem in solid-state  physics,
              materials science, and planetary science.  During the past  several years,
              there have been major advances in the ability to  produce sustained pressures
              in the laboratory in excess of those  found at the center of the Earth (>300
              Giga-Pascals) using the  diamond-anvil cell.  The present research involves
              studies of the  structura, optical, electronic, and vibrational properties of
              dense  solid hydrogen and related molecular solids at these pressures with 
              these high-pressure devices.  Particular emphasis will be given to  the
              application of recently developed infrared spectroscopic  techniques that use
              high intensity synchrotron radiation.  These  measurements are crucial for
              identifying the onset of metallization  and  other electronic transitions in
              these materials.  This work  will be complemented by parallel studies using
              light scattering  methods and synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements of
              crystal  structure.  The research will also involve continued development of 
              new high-pressure techniques for a wide variety of studies of the  behavior of
              matter under extreme pressure conditions, including the  synthesis of new
              materials.  ***
