Title       : Orientation of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Cells in Spatial Gradients of Mating
               Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9304992

Award Number: 9304992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Segall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine Marsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9304992  Segall  A new method (termed the micropipet assay) has been  developed
              to demonstrate that Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells  direct growth of mating
              projections towards higher  concentrations of mating pheromone.  Current work
              studying  yeast mating has focussed on components that are absolutely  required
              for mating formation.  The micropipet assay allows  analysis of a new aspect of
              this pathway, gradient sensing,  and thus provides the potential for
              identifying proteins  specifically involved in this process.  The work
              described  here focuses on the signal transduction pathway that allows  yeast
              cells to determine the direction of an external  spatial gradient of mating
              factor.  The first objective is  to use this new method to assay mutants in
              genes potentially  involved in gradient sensing.  The second objective is to 
              identify new mutants specifically defective in this  orientation.  The first
              objective will utilize the  micropipet assay to characterize mutants in genes 
              potentially involved in sensing gradients of mating factor.   For example,
              mutants in the mating pathway, bud site  selection, and cytoskeletal proteins
              could have altered  abilities to sense and orient in spatial gradients.  The 
              second objective, identification of mutants defective in  orientation in
              spatial gradients, will involve a two stage  process.  The first stage is a
              genetic screen for mutants  with altered partner selection during mating.  The
              phenotype  expected for cells that no longer can determine the  direction of
              spatial gradients of mating factor is a more  random selection of mating
              partners.  A simple, visual color  assay of colonies on a plate will be used to
              identify  mutants that are still able to mate, but whose choice of  mating
              partner is no longer determined by the amount of  mating factor produced by
              that partner.  Strains that  reproducibly show reduced discrimination in this
              assay will  then be directly assayed using the micropipet assay for 
              orientation.  Strains  with reduced orientati on in the  micropipet assay will
              be grouped into complementation  groups, with the eventual goal of cloning the
              genes via  complementation with a genomic library.  %%%  This research is
              expected to provide insight into the  sensing of spatial gradients of chemicals
              in a wide variety  of organisms.  ***
