Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional and Environmental Change in
               Rajasthan, India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9304259

Award Number: 9304259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Johnson DLJohnson@Clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9304259  JOHNSON       One of the most critical uncertainties regarding 
              relationships between the use of natural resources and  environmental
              conditions is the role and impact of institutions  and their rule systems. 
              Demographic, technological, socio-  economic, and legal pressures have resulted
              in disintegration of  traditional institutional arrangements in many parts of
              the world  in recent decades.  This doctoral dissertation research project 
              will examine the nature and impact of these changes on  environmental
              conditions in Rajasthan, an arid state in  northwestern India.  The research
              will consist of integration of  information from a number of different sources.
               Remotely sensed  images will be interpreted as part of a time-series analysis
              of  land-use change in the region, and information about the  structure and
              rule systems of institutions will be assembled from  surveys and written
              sources.  Analyses of these data will form  the foundation for a more intensive
              comparative evaluation of  three representative villages in the region. 
              Ethnographic  methods will be used to identify institutional formation and 
              adaptations within different rule systems, and ecological surveys  will be used
              to test quantitatively the impact of changing  institution arrangements on
              resource management and changes in  natural environmental conditions.      
              This project will provide valuable insights into a number of  important
              relationships, including links among changing land uses  and institutional
              systems as well as among regional environmental  changes and patterns of local
              resource use.  The project will  enhance understandings of the historical
              evolution of land-use  change under different cultural and economic regimes,
              thereby  expanding general knowledge about the human dimensions of global 
              environmental change.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement  award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising  student to establish a
              strong independent research career.  ***
