Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemistry of the Oxford Clay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9304401

Award Number: 9304401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9304401  Anderson       A detailed study of isotopic biogeochemistry of the
              Jurassic  marine Oxford Clay is proposed.  The goal is to further understand 
              sedimentary microbial processes and how they affect preservation of  carbon and
              sulfur in organic and inorganic phases.  The  relationship between those
              microbial processes and depositional  environments will be elucidated.  Effects
              of specific microbial  processes and the environments in which they are
              prevalent will be  identified.  Results of analyses of organic-sulfur compounds
              in  these rocks should provide new information on the role of these  compounds
              in the carbon-sulfur-iron system.       Samples of the initial phase of this
              study were collected from  active quarries and a core taken in central England.
               The quarry  exposures allowed acquisition of large, fresh samples of this 
              immature, organic-carbon-rich mudrock.  The samples, representing  all
              stratigraphic horizons and biofacies, were obtained in  collaboration with
              experts on the vertebrate and invertebrate  paleoecology of the Lower Oxford
              Clay.  Preliminary measurements  include (i) carbon and oxygen isotopic
              compositions of the  extensive and well preserved biominerals in this unit;
              (ii) carbon  isotopic compositions of bulk organic materials; (iii) relative 
              abundances and carbon-isotopic compositions of organic sulfur  compounds and
              pyrite.  These results have  provided unique  geochemical information which we
              will build upon in our continued  study.        Further goals in the
              continuation of this project include (i)  confirming a phytoplanktonic origin
              for pristane and phytane;  (ii)reconstructing the structure of the community of
              consumer  organisms using compound-specific isotopic analyses; (iii)  expanding
              the scope of the study stratigraphically to include the  Middle and Upper
              Oxford Clay; (iv) elucidating the timing of  organic sulfur formation in the
              widely varying paleoenvironments of  the Oxford Clay.  The work proposed will
              test hypotheses developed  during our  preliminary study and should provide new
              insights on the  coupling of the carbon and sulfur biogeochemical cycles in
              organic-  rich marine sediments.  ***
