Title       : Transcriptional Repression by Polycomb Group Products in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9304936

Award Number: 9304936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304936  Simon    The aim of this research is to understand how stable states of
              gene  expression are maintained during development.  Molecular genetic  and
              biochemical methods will be used to study proteins that control  transcription
              of homeotic genes in Drosophila melanogaster.  The  homeotic genes determine
              the identities of segments in the fly.   Expression of the homeotic genes, in
              restricted positions along the  anterior-posterior axis, is needed throughout
              embryonic, larval and  pupal development.  Segmentation gene products activate
              the  homeotic genes in restricted positions in 2-hr old embryos, but  they
              decay by about 4 hrs.  The Polycomb group (PcG) products then  maintain
              restricted homeotic gene expression throughout subsequent  development.  The
              PcG products repress transcription of homeotic  genes in positions where they
              are not normally expressed.  Current  models suggest that the PcG products
              recognize homeotic genes that  are repressed initially and they maintain this
              repression by  assembling stable protein-DNA complexes in the chromatin at
              these  loci.  This research will investigate the individual roles of PcG 
              repressor proteins.  Much of the work will focus on the extra sex  combs (esc)
              protein, which may play a short-term role in assembling  or guiding other PcG
              proteins that act as stable repressors.  A  major objective of this work is to
              determine the biochemical roles  of esc protein.  This research will test if
              and how esc protein  interacts with other PcG proteins and when during
              development these  interactions occur.  Antibody to esc protein will be
              produced and  the times and places of esc protein accumulation will be
              determined  by protein blotting and whole mount staining of embryos.  Immune 
              precipitations will be performed to test for esc association with  other PcG
              proteins and to check for esc protein binding to DNA.   Site-specific
              mutagenesis, coupled with germline transformation,  will test a protein domain
              found in esc, and the yeast repressor  TUP1, fo r a role in protein-protein
              contact.  An "interaction-trap"  screen will be performed, using yeast cells,
              to identify fly  proteins that associate with esc protein.  Finally, a genetic 
              screen will be performed in flies to identify novel PcG genes.  The  screen
              will use P elements as transposon mutagens.  Transposon-  tagged PcG genes will
              be cloned by PCR methods and their molecular  analysis will be initiated.  Once
              a program of gene expression is  established in cells of a developing embryo or
              tissue, it is  important that inappropriate genes are stably repressed.  
              Repression of homeotic genes by PcG proteins provides a model for  how a
              determined state of gene expression is maintained during  development.  By
              investigating how PcG products work, we will learn  how developmental
              decisions, once made, are stabilized at the  molecular level.  Similar
              molecular mechanisms may be employed  during development in a variety of
              organisms.  Indeed, there are  similarities in sequence, organization and
              function between fly  homeotic genes and similar genes found in organisms as
              diverse as  worms and mice.  ***
