Title       : Primitive Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9631846

Award Number: 9631846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Marchalonis dianah@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel F. Schluter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-31846  Marchalonis    The combinatorial immune response of vertebrates is a
              complex and precisely regulated defense system. An understanding of the
              fundamental nature and mechanisms of operation of this system may be gained by
              exploration of its evolutionary origins. This will be done by determining
              whether the most primitive jawed vertebrates, represented by sharks, possess
              the genetic and biochemical machinery to generate a completely diverse immune
              response. Studies have clearly demonstrated that the genes specifying
              immunoglobulin segments and the biochemical machinery (recombinase activating
              gene RAG1) necessary for their rearrangement emerged early in the evolution of
              vertebrates, being definitively present in all gnathanstomes. The high degree
              of variable region diversity in light chains, in heavy chains, and in the newly
              discovered immunoglobulin IgW as well as the differences in the arrangement of
              gene segments have disclosed novel mechanisms that offer new perspectives in
              understanding the origins and the function of the immune system. The proposed
              objectives of this grant are: to characterize the shark recombination
              activating genes RAG1 and RAG2; to determine the structure, genomic
              organization, and the molecular mechanism for generating diversity in the
              primordial class of immunoglobulin called IgW; and to determine the genomic
              organization and diversity of expression of light and heavy chains that are
              involved in generating the major serum immunoglobulin IgM. The results of these
              studies should allow investigators to develop realistic hypotheses regarding
              the origins of combinatorial immune system which is characteristic of
              vertebrates which in turn should lead to novel approaches to understanding and
              to manipulating the immune system of all vertebrates.  %%%  The combinatorial
              immune response of vertebrates is a complex and precisely regulated defense
              system. An understanding of the fundamental nature and mechanisms of operation
              of this system may be gained by exploration of it s evolutionary origins. This
              will be done by determining whether the most primitive jawed vertebrates,
              represented by sharks, possess the genetic and biochemical machinery to
              generate a completely diverse immune response. The results of these studies
              should allow investigators to develop realistic hypotheses regarding the
              origins of combinatorial immune system which is characteristic of vertebrates
              which in turn should lead to novel approaches to understanding and to
              manipulating the immune system of all vertebrates.  ***
