Title       : MPWG: Model Projects for Women and Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9631519

Award Number: 9631519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle Slaughter gayles@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will provide women college juniors, who have an  interest in
              science and/or engineering with an extensive research  and mentoring program to
              stimulate their interest in SE careers,   improve their opportunities for
              achievement, accelerate their  advancement, and enhance their success for
              entering excellent  graduate programs and then progressing to productive
              careers.   Project components include:  (1) a mentoring-career counseling 
              program by women faculty and graduate students; (2) a ten week  summer research
              program; (3) an option to work in a lab during the  academic year; (4) seminars
              featuring women speakers; (5) a  communications workshop; (6) attendance at a
              national scientific  conference; and (7) GRE performance evaluation and
              preparation.   The program will be coordinated by the Graduate School of Baylor
               College of Medicine (BCM).  Undergraduate campus partners include  Rice
              University, Texas Southern University, and the University of  Houston.  The
              proposed project will capitalize on resources of the  existing SMART Program by
              including the participants in its summer  activities.  The impact of the 10
              week summer experience will be  extended and enhanced through additional formal
              mentoring and  coordinated follow-up events at BCM and the home campuses. 
              Women  scientists or engineering faculty from several disciplines on each 
              campus have expressed enthusiasm for helping young women reach  their career
              goals.    The undergraduate women will be incorporated into a 
              mentoring/research program during their junior year.  Each  participant will be
              matched to a women faculty member and a  graduate student mentor who shares her
              scientific interests.   Students will participate in a 10 week summer research
              program  between the junior and senior years of college.  Preference will be 
              given to placing participants in the labs of women scientists.   Participants
              will be able to work part-time during their senior  year in the same lab or in
              a lab on their home campus.  Students  wi ll broaden their knowledge of science
              through exposure to  research topics in summer seminars and on their own
              campuses.  A  monthly seminar series featuring women scientists from the 
              participating institutions will be rotated among the undergraduate  campuses
              and open to the public.  Students will develop  communication skills through
              formal training and practice,  discussing their research in groups and
              attending a national  conference.  Diagnostic exams for the GRE will be given
              to  participants during the summer and a plan developed for improvement  of
              performance when needed.  Special tutoring sessions or formal  review courses
              will be available.  Counseling regarding graduate  school applications will be
              provided by mentors.
