Title       : Collaborative Research: Empirical Implications of Sunk Entry and Exit Costs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9631766

Award Number: 9631766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Roberts mroberts@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite the important role that sunk costs potentially play in  explaining
              market structure and firm performance there is  relatively little empirical
              evidence on their magnitude, how they  vary across different products or across
              different types of  firms, and whether they are useful in explaining the
              persistent  heterogeneity in firm performance within markets.  The purpose of 
              this research is to estimate the magnitude of sunk entry and exit  costs for a
              number of U.S. manufactured products and test if they  are an important
              determinant of firm turnover and performance  patterns.     This project will
              utilize data from the U.S. Census of  Manufactures for the period 1963-1992 to
              study the entry and exit  process for a number of products that are sold in
              relatively  small geographic markets.  The substantial movements in  population
              across geographic areas over this 30 year period have  produced changes in the
              structure of local markets as firms have  entered and exited in response to
              these changing demand patterns.  The first part of this project will measure
              entry and exit rates  across geographic markets and use these turnover patterns
              to  estimate the magnitude of sunk entry and exit costs faced by  firms in
              specific product markets.  The work will recognize that  there are different
              types of entrants, including new firms and  those diversifying from other
              product and geographic markets, and  that firms can enter through several
              channels, including  constructing new plants or altering the product mix of
              their  existing production facilities. Each of these types and methods  of
              entry is likely to involve very different levels of sunk  investments and thus
              lead to different firm turnover rates.  By  estimating sunk costs that vary by
              type of firm and method of  entry, it should be possible to determine if sunk
              costs are a  significant factor generating the differences in turnover 
              patterns and firm lifetimes.    The second part of the project will utilize the
              estimated  patterns of sunk cost s across products and entry types to 
              determine if sunk costs contribute to the amount of producer  heterogeneity
              observed within different product markets.   Predictions will be tested about
              the relationships among sunk  costs, turnover, and the level and persistence of
              firm  heterogeneity that are derived from recent theoretical models of 
              industry evolution.  The Census of Manufactures data are also  uniquely suited
              to this endeavor because they allow the  characterization of the amount of
              heterogeneity among the entire  set of producers in a market.
