Title       : STTR PHASE I: Electro-Optic Polymeric Integrated Optic Waveguide Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9631193

Award Number: 9631193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: S Sriram srisriram@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRICO Incorporated
	      664 Petworth Court
	      Powell, OH  43065    614/799-0664

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***   9631193   Sriram    This STTR Phase I proposal will demonstrate the
              feasibility of novel integrated optical waveguide devices using the emerging
              technology of electro-optic polymeric materials. Such devices would offer
              significant benefits for optical communication, signal processing, computing
              and sensing applications. The overall objective of Phase I is to  incorporate
              an electro-optic polymer on a silicon substrate to form integrated optic
              waveguide devices. The program will investigate both electro-optic polymers
              with established properties and electro-optic polymers at the forefront of
              development which have potential for improved performance. Polymers developed
              in the polymer research laboratories at the University of Cincinnati will be
              incorporated in the later stages of the device fabrication process. To
              demonstrate feasibility in this Phase I effort, new electro-optic organic
              polymers and novel optoelectronic device technology will be combined to
              demonstrate a commercially viable electric field sensor. Phase I will serve as
              a foundation for exploring in Phase II the possibility of creating other device
              configurations, such as optical modulators for optical communication and signal
              processing.          Applications include external modulation of lasers for
              communication and CATV, modulator arrays for data networks, optical network
              units in Fiber-in-the-Home, hybrid integration of silicon ICs and photonic
              circuits, A/D and D/A converters, voltage and electric field sensors.    ***
