Title       : Design, Construction and Optical Response Properties of Dye/Superconductor
               Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9631394

Award Number: 9631394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343922             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. McDevitt mcdevitt@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9631394  McDevitt  This research focuses on the design, fabrication and study
              of  dye-superconductor assemblies. These dyesuperconductor systems  are
              sensitive to the influence of light, making cryogenic optical  switching
              processes possible. Initial work has shown that  molecular dyes can be used to
              sensitize superconductor junctions  to specific wavelengths of light. Optically
              sensitive assemblies  which display rapid response time, high sensitivity and
              selective  wavelength response characteristics have been prepared. The 
              spectral response behavior of such systems correlate well with  the absorbance
              properties exhibited by the dye layer. Since a  large number of dyes with
              different spectral and photophysical  properties can be incorporated into such
              systems, it is possible  to prepare a plethora of structures which are tailored
              from the  molecular level so as to suit a variety of different  applications.
              Depending on the photophysical properties of the  dye, systems which foster
              rapid and direct energy transfer  between the dye and the superconductor can be
              fashioned. Other  systems can be prepared which function through the
              propagation of  thermal waves from the dye to the superconductor. Moreover, 
              injection of "hot" (i.e. nonequilibrium) electrons can also be  envisioned as
              an alternative method to induce a measurable  electrical response in the
              superconductor. Interesting issues  related to the efficiency of energy and
              electron transfer  phenomena between excited dyes and superconducting
              interfaces can  be explored for the first time with the use of highly oriented 
              thin film structures. Important information related to the  chemical
              compatibility between the molecular dye components and  the cuprate compounds
              can be acquired through an evaluation of  the superconductor interfacial
              properties before and after dye  deposition. From the proposed studies, the
              following information  is anticipated: 1.) Reliable methods to construct 
              dye-superconductor assemblies will be identified. 2.) Che mical  compatibility
              of molecular layers and high-Tc superconductors  will be explored. This
              information will be useful not only for  the development of the optical
              devices, but also will contribute  to the more rapid development of traditional
              high-Tc thin film  devices. 3.) The initial information related to 
              dye-superconductor energy transfer processes will be obtained.  4.) The
              efficiencies of thermal wave, hot electron injection and  direct dipole
              coupling energy transfer processes will evaluated.  5.) Systems which
              incorporate luminescent (fluorescent and  phosphorescent), nonluminescent,
              photoconductive, electrochromic  and photochromic dye structures will be
              evaluated to identify and  to explore the various molecule/superconductor
              communication  channels. 6.) This highly interdisciplinary program will not
              only  target the development of a knowledge base in a novel new field  of
              science, but will also serve as an excellent training grounds  for future
              scientists in a strategically important area.  %%%  A broad program which
              targets the design, fabrication and  characterization of dye/superconductor
              assemblies is described.  Work completed in the Investigator's laboratory has
              already  demonstrated that a number of dye systems can be used in  combination
              with superconductor thin film elements to produce a  variety of optically
              sensitive assemblies that respond  selectively to different wavelengths of
              light. The utilization of  the superconductors yield structures where very
              efficient energy  transfer between the light harvesting dye layer and the 
              superconductor occurs. The use of various molecular systems  affords the
              opportunity to prepare a plethora of optical!y  sensitive structures that can
              be tailored from the molecular  level for a variety of applications. Studies of
              the  dye/superconductor assemblies will yield useful information  related to
              more effective processing methods that can be used for  the more rapid
              commercialization of high-Tc devices.  Moreover,  the dye/superconductor 
              platform should provide a convenient means  to explore dye/dye and
              dye/superconductor energy and electron  transfer phenomena. The ability of a
              hybrid superconducting  assembly to sense different wavelengths of light in a 
              controllable fashion may have important consequences for future  application of
              superconducting sensors and devices.
