Title       : Research in the Foundations and Practice of Social Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9631213

Award Number: 9631213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329999             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Kimball Romney akromney@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Batchelder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research is to contribute scientific methods to improve the
              quality of social measurement.  Social concepts such as cultural beliefs and
              social norms are defined by social conventions, and unlike much physical and
              psychophysical measurement, have no direct outside criteria for comparison and
              validation.  Measurements necessarily must be inferred from the pattern of
              responses among informants.  One major focus of the research is on repeated
              measures of the cognitive representations of semantic structure for a single
              individual.  This would make it possible to measure the extent to which
              representations in the mind of one person correspond to representations in the
              mind of another person.  Such measurement facilitates the development of
              quantitative models of culture as shared cognitive representations.  It allows
              the precise measurement of the overall degree of sharing among members of a
              culture as well as the extent to which each individual, or subset of
              individuals, exhibits cultural differences due to individual variables such as
              gender, first spoken language, or occupation.  Breakdown in sharing in
              individual performance such as in the case of dyslexia or Alzheimer's disease
              might also be measured.  Another major area of the research is in the area of
              `information pooling.`  Information pooling occurs when several informants each
              provide their answers to the same set of questions; e.g., `will candidate A win
              the election` or `how much money can be saved by adopting policy B.`  When the
              informants' answers differ, it is important to be able to pool their answers to
              reach a `consensus.`  Over the last decade, the investigators have developed an
              approach to information pooling called `consensus analysis.`  Consensus
              analysis consists of a collection of statistical information pooling models for
              a variety of questionnaire formats.  In each format, it provides a process
              model for the measurement of the knowledge of the informants where, unlike the
              typical psychometric test-theory case, the answers to the questions posed to
              the informants are not known in advance.  The unknown answers can be estimated
              in the model to provide a `consensus answer key.`  The current research will
              develop the linkage of consensus analysis to the extensive literature on
              consensus algorithms in the area of classification research.  Typically
              consensus algorithms are non-statistical deterministic pooling procedures, and
              one objective of the research will be to develop statistical versions of the
              algorithms to deal with such problems as differential competence among
              informants or questionnaire reliability.  This will provide ways to factor
              error variance and response bias out of the pooling process by using standard
              statistical estimation theory.  The overall significance of the research is
              that it will provide new methods of social measurement comparable in quality to
              those used in areas such as perception and psychophysics, where direct
              comparisons with objective physical stimuli are utilized.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
