Title       : Workshop on Mathematical Psychology, Irvine, California, July 6-25, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9631931

Award Number: 9631931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63997              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Duncan Luce rdluce@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631931  LUCE    A number of decades have passed since the initial lines of 
              research in mathematical psychology were charted out and the  first generation
              of scientists were trained.  This three-week,  parallel track workshop will
              bring together 10-12 senior  mathematical behavioral scientists and 20 junior
              ones (advanced  graduate students and young postdoctoral scientists) to reflect
               on and synthesize these developments, and to lay out the ground  work for
              future research.  The workshop will focus on six areas,  each involving two
              senior people and all of the junior ones.  The  modeling areas will include (1)
              perception and psychophysics,   (2) learning and memory, (3) information
              processing,            (4) measurement,  (5) judgment and decision making, and
              (6)  general modeling and testing issues.    The profession will benefit in two
              major ways.  First, because  much of the existing work is scattered throughout
              many journals  and books and because many of the younger scholars, who are 
              trained primarily in one area, are located in more-or-less  isolated settings
              without senior colleagues, it is difficult for  them to become fully aware of
              state-of-the-art mathematical  modeling approaches arising in other areas but
              potentially useful  in their research.  In a broad sense, then, the workshop is
               designed to consolidate past research of the field and to nurture  the next
              generation of scientists.  Second, by doing this  systematically and providing
              ample time for interactions, it is  possible that new lines of research will be
              initiated.  Materials  prepared in advance, during, and after the workshop will
              be made   available to a much wider audience on the World Wide Web.   Depending
              upon the outcome of the several sections, edited  volumes may appear.    Though
              the goal of such work is deeper scientific understanding  of various aspects of
              human behavior, there is great potential  for direct benefit to society.  In
              the past, such developments  have, among other things, led to better ways t o
              measure student's  accomplishments (first, IQ testing which evolved into a
              large  industry and now, newer, more multi-faceted approaches that are 
              reaching schools), models to describe quite accurately decision  making in
              situations of uncertainty, which has led to the  profession of decision
              analysts, and vastly improved research on  visual and auditory systems, which
              has been used to improve the  performance of people in various human-machine
              interfaces.  New  modeling work can be expected to greatly improve these
              existing  applications, as well as to provide the possibility for  additional
              applications.    ***
