Title       : Project to Revise the Historical Labor Statistics of the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9631387

Award Number: 9631387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Carter susan.carter@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award assists in a major collaborative effort to produce an updated,
              revised, expanded, and electronically-accessible `millennial edition` of the
              United States Census Bureau's Historical Statistics of the United States. 
              Historical Statistics of the United States is a massive, two-volume compendium
              of 54 chapters on topics touching all of the social, behavioral, humanistic,
              and natural sciences, including history, economics, government, finance,
              sociology, demography, education, law, natural resources, climate, religion,
              international migration, and trade.  Over 12,500 statistical time series are
              presented.  It is the standard source for quantitative indicators of our
              country's history.  This award supports the revision of Chapter D, Labor.  By
              the end of the grant period a completed manuscript ready for distribution to
              the scholarly community and to the general public will be available.  The
              project also will develop a protocol for the revision of the remaining chapters
              in Historical Statistics.  Historical Statistics of the United States, now long
              out of date, is the standard reference for quantitative information on American
              history for scholars, authors, reference librarians, journalists, and the
              general public.  It also serves as a guide to more detailed data, to commentary
              on data reliability, and to historical scholarship on virtually every topic in
              American history.  It is found in every academic, corporate, and public library
              in the country and in many libraries around the world.  The new edition will
              thoroughly revise and update the previous edition and has the potential of
              having a major impact not only on historical scholarship but on academic
              research in the social, physical, and biological sciences.  It will also serve
              to reacquaint the general public with the long record of American economic,
              social, and demographic diversity, change, and development.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
