Title       : Regulator and Class Number Computation in Cubic Congruence Function Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9631647

Award Number: 9631647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renate Scheidler scheidle@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is the development of an algorithm  for computing
              the regulator and the ideal class number of a  purely cubic congruence function
              field of unit rank 1.    Recently, the continued fraction baby step giant step
              algorithm  for finding the regulator of a real quadratic number field has  been
              adapted to work in real quadratic congruence function  fields.  This method has
              also been applied to work in real  quadratic congruence function fields.  This
              method has also been  applied to a variety of areas that are not immediately
              related to  the theory of algebraic congruence function fields, such as 
              elliptic curves and public-key cryptography.  An Euler product  technique for
              determining the class number of a real quadratic  number field has also been
              successfully modified to compute the  ideal class number of a real quadratic
              congruence function field.    In a complex cubic number field, Voronoi's
              continued fraction  algorithm for obtaining relative minima in cubic lattices
              is the  base for computing the regulator of the field.  A giant step 
              optimization has been developed for this method as well.  As in  the quadratic
              case, Dirichlet series and Euler products represent  a tool for finding the
              class number of the field, once the  regulator is known.  Considering the
              success of modifying number  field techniques to work in function fields in the
              degree 2  situation, a logical approach is the adaptation of the regulator  and
              class number algorithms in purely cubic number fields to the  corresponding
              function field setting, that is, a purely cubic  congruence function field of
              unit rank 1.  Such a field takes the  form K = k(x)(cube root of D) where k is
              a finite field whose  order is congruent to -1 modulo 3, x is a fixed element
              that is  transcendental over k, and D is a cube-free polynomial in k x   whose
              highest coefficient is a cube in k.    Questions to be addressed during the
              planning period of this  project include embedding a purely cubic unit rank one
              congruence  fu nction field K into the field of power series in 1/x over k in 
              order to obtain a theory of continued fractions in K, the  development of a
              reduction theory for ideals in K, and a first  design of a regulator algorithm,
              initially without giant steps.   The giant step version as well as the class
              number computation  will be the subject of research following the planning
              stage.
