Title       : Foldase Catalyzed Protein Folding and Molecular Biology Workshops for K-12
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9631485

Award Number: 9631485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Noiva bnoiva@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631485  Noiva  Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a "foldase" located in the
              lumen of the rough endoplasmic reticulum where it facilitates several of the
              reactions required for the folding, assembly, and posttranslational
              modification of secretory and membrane proteins. A site on the PDI molecule
              which recognizes unfolded and misfolded nascent polypeptides has been
              identified and demonstrated to be involved in PDI-facilitated folding. In this
              proposal, the role of this peptide binding site in PDI activity will be further
              characterized. The technique of oligonucleotide-directed site mutagenesis will
              be used to generate mutants of PDI lacking the peptide binding site or
              containing single amino acid substitutions in that site. Wild type and mutant
              PDI will be expressed in both E. coli and Pichia pastoris expression systems to
              generate the highest yield of enzyme. The effect of loss of peptide binding
              activity on PDI activity will be assessed on both the activity of the soluble
              enzyme and its ability to catalyze properly folded proteins in dog pancreas
              microsomes. Preliminary evidence indicates that PDI has little or no substrate
              sequence preference, but is hypothesized to recognize a stretch of 6 amino
              acids in the polypeptide chain. Substrate preferences for the PDI foldase
              activity will be further characterized by determining length and sequence
              requirements for peptide binding by PDI using a combination of site-directed
              mutagenesis, affinity chromatography, and affinity panning techniques. The role
              of calcium in PDI function in the cell will also be assessed. Calcium does not
              have any direct effect on PDI-facilitated folding or peptide binding activity
              in vitro, but may be involved in localization of PDI to the lumen of the rough
              endoplasmic reticulum. This calcium-mediated localization of PDI will be
              further characterized using the techniques of pulse-chase labeling, western
              blotting, and confocal microscopy. A series of summer workshops in Modern
              Techniques in Experimental Biology for K-12  students and teachers will be
              developed. Workshops will be composed of a series of experimental modules
              presenting techniques used in the modern molecular biology laboratory and will
              be tailored to the level of junior/senior high school students. Modules will be
              interchanged between workshops depending on the abilities and prior experiences
              of the students. The workshops will use a recently completed Molecular Biology
              Laboratory teaching facility funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 
              %%%  Current technology allows scientists to use bacterial cultures to produce
              recombinant human proteins of clinical and pharmaceutical importance. However,
              bacteria lack chaperone and foldase proteins required to fold these mammalian
              proteins efficiently. In this proposal, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), one
              of the foldases which assists protein folding in humans, will be studied. In
              order to assist proteins in folding, PDI must recognize a motif on the newly
              synthesized protein which identifies that protein as requiring assistance for
              proper folding. In this proposal, the role of protein binding by PDI in
              assisted folding and the motif that is recognized by PDI will be characterized.
              Furthermore, the role of intracellular calcium in directing PDI to the area in
              cells where protein folding occurs will also be studied. This information will
              strengthen our understanding of the cellular function of PDI and lead to the
              better use of PDI in improving yields in the production of recombinant human
              proteins in bacteria. A series of summer workshops in Modern Techniques in
              Experimental Biology for K-12 students and teachers will be developed. These
              workshops will provide opportunities for students from Native American
              reservations and rural communities with limited educational resources to have
              access to current technology used in experimental biology. Students will be
              encouraged to learn biological techniques at the molecular level such as
              electrophoresis, PCR, and cloning recombinant DNA. Experimental module s
              offered at the workshop will reinforce science at their own schools, present
              new and exciting concepts and hopefully motivate students to pursue further
              opportunities in Biology and the Biomedical Sciences.  ***
