Title       : Core Segmentation Tools for Computer Assisted Surgery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1996   
File        : a9631710

Award Number: 9631710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Kikinis kikinis@bwh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham & Womens Hosp Inc
	      75 Francis Street
	      Boston, MA  021156195    617/525-3160

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631710  Kikinis  In surgery it is necessary to recognize the boundary between 
              healthy and diseased tissues.  This is especially true for  surgery in the
              brain where it is important to preserve as much  healthy tissue as possible in
              the process of removing all of the  diseased matter.  Also, the boundary, which
              is irregularly  shaped, must be identified in three dimensions.  Surgeons 
              typically examine medical images from magnetic resonance (MR) and  computerized
              x-ray tomographic (CT) scanners to extract  diagnostic information for surgical
              procedures.  Currently  surgeons are forced to imagine the three-dimensional
              situation  for presurgery planning, something the human brain is not well 
              suited to performing in a precise and reproducible manner.  In  order to
              provide a complete engineering solution to this problem  using high performance
              computers, the following steps have to be  performed: (1) acquisition of data
              in a suitable geometric  raster; (2) generation of three-dimensional (3D)
              reconstructions;  (3) registration of the 3D reconstructions to the patient on
              the  operating room table; and, (4) labeling of relevant tissue  structures in
              the data (segmentation).  The technology required  for achieving steps (1) -
              (3) is being developed outside of  medicine.  However, this is not true for
              segmentation, which is  the least advanced of the four steps; this
              investigation seeks to  develop core segmentation algorithms for solving the
              problem.    Work during this investigation is to concentrate on template- 
              based segmentation and operator-driven segmentation in  neurosurgical
              applications.  In template-based segmentation the  goal is to improve the
              ability to establish correspondence  structures automatically in cases with
              moderate pathology.  The  operator-based segmentation portion of the
              investigation would  develop a working platform for the integration of a volume
              editor  and a force feedback device needed for algorithmically more  complex
              projects such as segmentation in three-dimension s.  ***
