Title       : STTR PHASE I: Polarization-Independent Liquid-Crystal Fabry-Perot Tunable Filter
               for Wavelength-Division- Multiplexing Network Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9631274

Award Number: 9631274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Yu Liu mvtjyliu@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macro-Vision Communication
	      5490 Conestoga Court
	      Boulder, CO  80301    303/939-0027

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9631274  Liu     This STTR Phase I project focuses on developing the
              polarization insensitive liquid-crystal Fabry-Perot (LC-FP) optical filter for
              wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) communication systems. It is well known
              that LC-FP is a high-performance filter due to its large tuning range, high
              finesse, and low voltage operations. However, because the modulation is based
              on the optical anisotropy, only the extra-ordinary wave can be modulated in the
              FP resonator. This results in a polarization sensitive filter that greatly
              reduces its "field application" in the WDM networks. Although
              polarization-diversity has been proposed and demonstrated to overcome this
              problem, it required polarization splitting/combining at the input/output ports
              and resulted in what effectively constitutes two FP cavities. This increases
              packaging and production difficulties, making high-volume commercial device
              manufacturing impractical. This project will use polarization optics to
              manipulate the arbitrarily polarized light in the FP cavity. By positioning the
              liquid crystal phase modulator in between crossed quarter-waveplates within the
              FP resonator, the filter becomes polarization independent. The device structure
              is simple and mass producible. Successful completion of this STTR program can
              resolve the polarization-sensitive drawback of the LC-FP filter and widen its
              application in the WDM networks.   The primary applications for this filter are
              in cable TV broadcasting, fiber-in-the-loop WDM networks, long distance
              telecommunication, and all-optical networks. This filter can also be applied to
              spectroscopic analysis and fiber-based environmental sensor applications.   
              ***
