Title       : (ESH) Collaborative Research: Relationship Between Global Climate Change and
               Lake Bonneville Fluctuations: Analysis of Sediment Cores from the Great Salt
               Lake, Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9631363

Award Number: 9631363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26019              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Verosub verosub@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9631363  Roberts    An important aspect of global climate change studies, that
              is lagging behind studies of marine environments, is the study of climate
              change in continental interiors.  Such studies are clearly necessary in order
              to understand the effects of changes in atmospheric dynamics on the climate
              system.  Large inland lakes provide an excellent source for such studies
              because they sensitively record significant changes in inflow which are usually
              controlled by changes in atmospheric dynamics.  Preliminary data strongly
              suggest that global climate change phenomena are responsible for lake-level
              fluctuations in the Great Salt Lake in the period between about 21 and 10 ka. 
              Less is known about the Holocene history, although there are some suggestions
              that the Great Salt Lake also responded to global-scale climate changes during
              this interval.    We propose to produce a complete and well-dated
              reconstruction of lake-level changes for the last 40 ka in the Bonneville basin
              through study of sediment cores from Great Sale Lake and by integrating the new
              results with previous work in the basin.  This work will test the hypothesis
              that late Pleistocene lake sediments in the Bonneville basin provide a regional
              response record of atmospheric dynamics associated with global climate change. 
              This work will also provide the basis for paleoenvironmental reconstructions in
              future studies of older, less well-known, Bonneville basin lake cycles.    This
              project represents a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional collaboration
              between Jack Oviatt (Kansas State University - Physical stratigraphy), Andrew
              Roberts (University of Minnesota - Stable isotope stratigraphy, and U.S.G.S.
              personnel (including Bob Thompson - pollen; Blair Jones - clay mineralogy;  
              Rick Forrester - ostracodes).  ??
