Title       : MPWG: Young Women's Technical Institute at Binghamton University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9631841

Award Number: 9631841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle D. Feisel feisel@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda B. Biemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In an attempt to address the paucity of  young women going into technical
              careers,  this Model Project seeks to  encourage enrollment and performance in
              science and  math for middle school girls; to improve the quality of
              instruction in middle school  science;  and, by establishing a support network
              of students, teachers and parents, to  encourage girls to pursue technical
              careers.   Half of the participants will come from  urban  schools, while the
              other half will be from rural ones.  Classroom teachers  from the students 
              schools, as well as university faculty, will work with the girls.   They will
              be assisted by students who had participated in previous institutional 
              programs.  There will be special resources and assistance available to the
              teachers to  enable them to enhance their own classroom instruction.  This
              project  will build upon  and  significantly expand a prior program.      The
              Young Women s Technical Institute will be comprised of a three week summer 
              program combined with  activities during the school year  involving students,
              teachers  and parents .  These include student research project presentations,
              career discussions  with professionals, special seminars and field trips.  Year
              round mentoring is planned.   The New York State Framework for Mathematics,
              Science and Technology will be  utilized in the project s curriculum planning. 
              Activities will be in the areas of  physics, chemistry, mechanical and
              electrical engineering, astronomy, space science,  geology, and computer
              science.  The approach will be to help students to understand  the basic
              science behind the projects with which they are having fun through a hands-  on
              learning experience.
