Title       : Evolution of Cellular ATP Buffering and Energy Transport Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9631907

Award Number: 9631907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308536             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Ross Ellington elling@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9631907  Ellington    Living  cells,  in  effect, behave  as  internal 
              combustion  engines.  Various  fuels such as fats and carbohydrates  are 
              metabolically combusted yielding water, carbon dioxide and a  form  of chemical
              energy currency known as ATP. ATP provides  the  energy for most useful
              processes in the cell  including  biosynthesis, pumping of materials across
              membranes and cell  movement.  Muscle and nerve cells display high and 
              variable  rates of ATP utilization  which often exceed the capacity for
              metabolic ATP synthesis.  In  vertebrates, these cells stockpile a chemical 
              known  as  creatine  phosphate  which acts as  a  reservoir  of  energy  during
               periods  of intense energy use.  Creatine  phosphate  belongs to a family of
              energy storage compounds collectively  known  as phosphagens.  A variety of
              other phosphagens (ca.,  arginine phosphate, taurocyamine phosphate) are found
              in the  non-vertebrate animal groups. These compounds function in  a  manner 
              analogous  to  that of creatine phosphate.  However,  certain fundamental
              functional differences are evident.  The  present research project will further
              investigate functional  differences in the diverse phosphagen compounds  using 
              high  field  nuclear  magnetic  resonance (NMR)  spectroscopy  and 
              conventional  biochemical methods.  Once  these  differences  have  been
              delineated, mathematical models will be developed  to  evaluate the functioning
              of these compounds  in  various  kinds  of  biological contexts (different cell
               types,  cell  ultrastructure,  rates of ATP utilization).   The  resulting 
              simulations  will  be  used  to  evaluate  and  subsequently  explain  the 
              distribution  of  particular  phosphagens   in  various  animal groups.  These
              studies will provide  insight  into  the evolution of cellular energy
              metabolism, a process  vital to the functioning of all cells.
