Title       : Analysis of a Regulatory Pathway for Transcriptional Regulation by Intercellular
               Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9631365

Award Number: 9631365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Gill Ron.Gill@UCHSC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631365  Gill  Myxococcus xanthus is a Gram negative bacterium that undergoes a
              simple cycle of multicellular development.  These studies will focus on one
              mutant group, bsgA, which is defective in producing one of the required
              cell-cell interactions occurring early in development. The primary defect in
              these mutants is loss of an ATP-dependent protease. As a result of the protease
              defect, these strains fail to transcribe any of the known developmentally
              induced genes, and fail to form fruiting bodies or spores. One of the
              components of the regulatory pathway through which the BsgA protease regulates
              transcription, and a putative substrate of the protease, has been identified.
              It bears significant homology to the NtrC family of response regulators of two
              component regulatory systems. These regulators are phosphorylated by their
              cognate histidine protein kinase in response to a specific input signal, and in
              their phosphorylated form bind to DNA in a sequence specific manner at
              promoters which are transcribed by a particular minor form of RNA polymerase.
              When bound to these promoters, these proteins stimulate transcription in an
              ATP-dependent fashion.  The objective of this project is identify the
              components of the regulatory pathway through which bsgA-dependent cell-cell
              signaling regulates transcription and to determine the specific role of the
              BsgA protease in the pathway. The substrate of the BsgA protease which is
              critical for regulation will be identified among a collection of suppressor
              mutants which bypass the requirement for the protease. Candidates will be
              cloned, and expressed as fusion proteins in E. coli. The fusion proteins will
              be purified by affinity chromatography and used to produce antibodies.
              Immuno-blotting will then be used to assess whether the protein is degraded by
              the BsgA protease in vivo.  A genetic approach may be attempted to identify
              additional components of this regulatory pathway. Mutants will be isolated
              which interfere with the BsgA dependent gene expression. The  genes identified
              in this way will identify additional component involved in sensing and
              responding to BsgA signaling.  The ultimate goal of this project is to
              understand the means by which this organism coordinates the behavior of
              individual cells during multicellular activities. The problem of multicellular
              coordination is a fundamental problem in developmental biology. The information
              provided by this work may help to provide a framework for thinking about cell
              interactions within tissues in more complex organisms.  ***
