Title       : Involvement of Pseudomonas syringae harpins, Avr Proteins, and the Type III
               (Hrp) Secretion Pathway in Plant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9631530

Award Number: 9631530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Collmer arc2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631530  Collmer  The hypersensitive response (HR) of higher plants is a rapid
              cellular suicide associated with defense against incompatible pathogens,
              including plant pathogenic bacteria.  The hrp genes of Pseudomonas syringae are
              necessary for the bacterium to elicit the HR in nonhost plants or pathogenesis
              in host plants.  hrp genes are known to be widespread (perhaps universal) in
              necrogenic, gram-negative plant pathogens, to be clustered in the bacterial
              genome or on megaplasmids, and to encode components of a type III secretion
              pathway that is used by both plant and animal pathogens to secrete virulence
              proteins, and which appears dedicated to bacterial pathogenesis of higher
              eucaryotes.  Thus, an understanding of this pathway and the proteins that
              traffic it appear key to understanding bacterial plant pathogenicity.  The
              functional cluster of hrp genes from P. syringae pv. syringae 61, which was
              cloned to produce cosmid pHIR11, has provided a particularly useful tool for
              exploring the type III pathway, in general, and the Hrp system, in particular. 
              Cosmid pHIR11 enables saprophytic bacteria, like Pseudomonas fluorescens and
              Escherichia coli, to elicit the HR in the leaves of tobacco and many other
              plants, and it thereby demonstrates that a 25 kb region of the P.
              fluorescens(pHIR11), but not P.s. syringae 61 and other model P. syringae
              stains, to elicit the HR.   Mutations affecting the four hrp operons containing
              type III components that are highly conserved in plant and animal pathogens
              produced different patterns of immunoblot-detected HrpZ subcellular
              localization and suggest that the four operons differentially control
              translocation across the inner and outer membranes of the bacterium.  avr
              genes, which interact in a gene-for-gene manner with corresponding resistance
              genes in plants, control host specificity at the race-cultivars level in P.
              syringae. P. fluorescens(pHIR11) does not elicit the HR in soybean, but when
              cultivars carrying the RPG1 resistance gene are inoculated with P. 
              fluorescens(pHIR11) expressing avrB (which interacts with RPG1) in trans, the
              HR is elicited.  However, no HR is elicited if either hrpZ or a hrp gene
              encoding a  type III pathway component is mutated.  The hrmA gene is located
              next to the hrp cluster in P.s. syringae 61 and is required for P.
              fluorescens(pHIR11), but not P.s. syringae 61, to elicit the HR in tobacco. 
              Surprisingly, P. fluorescens(pHIR11) hrmA mutants were found to secrete
              wild-type levels of HrpZ.  Like a typical avr gene, hrmA is missing from many
              P. syringae strains, including the tobacco pathogen P.s. tabaci, and it
              conferred incompatibility and HR activity when heterologously expressed in that
              bacterium.  The HrmA protein does not elicit the HR when infiltrated into
              tobacco leaves, but when hrmA is transiently expressed in
              biolistically-transformed tobacco suspension-cultured cells, it produced
              apparent cell death.  These observations and the known ability of the type III
              pathway in Yersinia spp. To deliver anti-host proteins directly into animal
              cells leads t the following model upon which this proposal is founded. 
              Harpin-like proteins are secreted "promiscuously" into the apoplast, while
              Avr-like proteins are delivered directly into plant cells upon receipt of some
              signal.  Thus, there are two classes of proteins that differ with respect to
              the control of their secretion and the site of their action, and the type III
              pathway holds the keys to the coordinated delivery of these proteins.  The
              specific objectives of the proposed work are:   1.  Determine if HrmA, AvrB,
              and/or AVRPto can elicit cell death and active oxygen generation or other
              readily assayed responses when heterologously expressed in appropriate plant
              leaves, if the proteins are secreted into plant cells by bacteria in a hrp
              dependent manner, and if their secretion can be observed in culture with
              appropriate hrp mutants or plant signals.    2.  Determine the basis for the
              apparent need for both HrpZ and an Avr protein in bacterial elicitation of the
              HR, and  further define the function of hrpZ in pathogenesis.  3.  Identify
              additional proteins traveling the Hrp pathway.  4.  Construct nonpoplar
              mutations in hrpJ, hrpA, and hrcU in the pHIR11 hrp cluster and determine the
              role of each in the deployment of Avr signals, the secretion of HrpZ across the
              inner and outer membranes, and other Hrp related phenotypes.       ***
