Title       : How are Restriction Systems Controlled, and How Do They Recognize DNA Sequences?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9631137

Award Number: 9631137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Blumenthal rblumenthal@mco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3000 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436142598    419/381-4172

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631137  Blumenthal  Restriction endonucleases (REases) are enzymes that cleave
              both strands of double-stranded DNA at specific nucleotide sequences.  Bacteria
              that produce REases must protect their own DNA, and this is generally done by
              producing a methyltransferase (MTase) that transfers a methyl group from
              S-adenosyl-L-methionine to the DNA: the REases do not cleave DNA sequences that
              have been properly methylated.  Two questions stand out.  First, the genes for
              REases and their cognate MTases are often located on mobile genetic elements
              such as plasmids. When such a plasmid is transferred into a new host cell, how
              are the genes and enzymes controlled to ensure that the new host's DNA is
              methylated before REase activity appears? This question has not been fully
              answered for any REase / MTase pair. One major goal of this project is to
              answer this question  for the PvuII REase / MTase pair. The proposing
              laboratory has discovered three features affecting PvuII a predicted hairpin in
              the mRNA for the PvuII REase which may modulate initiation of translation; an
              apparent transcriptional activator that is required for expression of the PvuII
              REase gene and a small protein that appears to prevent the two identical
              subunits of PvuII REase from associating with one another.  The second major
              question regarding REases and MTases is how they recognize their substrate
              nucleotide sequence amongst all of the other DNA that is present.  REases and
              MTases must not only bind to a specific DNA sequence, but must then bring the
              relevant portions of the DNA molecule into contact with an active site or
              sites. Does this impose particular constraints on how the DNA sequence is
              recognized? One way to approach this is to compare several proteins that
              recognize the same sequence (or closely related sequences). This project seeks
              to characterize the DNA sequence recognition by the following proteins "^"
              indicates cleavage, 5mC and N4mC indicate methylation of the cytosine at the
              indicated position:  PvuII REase CAG^CTG  PvuII MTase CAGN4mCTG   AluI  Ease  
              AG^CT AluI MTase AG5mCT   These proteins will be compared to those basic region
              helix-loop-helix transcription factors, studied by others, which recognize the
              sequence CAGCTG but do not catalyze any reaction.  %%%  Certain bacteria
              produce specialized DNA modifying enzymes, restriction endonucleases (REase),
              that destroy DNA from other bacteria or viruses.  Protection of the organism's
              DNA is done by a different type of  DNA modifying enzymes, methytransferases, 
              that change the chemical nature of the DNA so that the REase does not destroy
              the DNA of the bacteria that produces the REase.   REases are utilized in
              biological research to cut  DNA at precise locations like microscopic lasers to
              dissect genes.  This project will provide insight into the regulation,
              structure, and function of  these modifying enzymes providing information for
              the eventual design of new molecular biological tools, and the ability to
              devise mechanisms to manipulate genetic transfer in bacteria.  ***
