Title       : Significance of Natural and Anthropogenic Changes in Ultraviolet Radiation to
               the Development of Anurans in Temperate South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9631146

Award Number: 9631146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley F. Fox foxstan@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Bantle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Van Den Bussche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1318,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9631146  Fox    Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation is known to elicit strong
              selective pressures on life on earth. UV-B radiation has been increasing
              worldwide, and the Southern Hemisphere has experienced stronger increases in
              biologically active ultraviolet radiation than comparable latitudes in the
              Northern Hemisphere.  The greater increase there is exemplified by the severe
              ozone hole that occurs over Antarctica each austral spring.  The southern cone
              of South America provides a unique opportunity for studying the biological
              impacts of the austral spring ozone hole because it is the only land mass of
              significant size to reach the high latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere.  Life
              there has been experiencing recent, severe, anthropogenically-elevated levels
              of UV-B radiation.  The southernmost extent of any amphibian species in the
              world occurs in Patagonia, in the southern tip of South America.  This is of
              particular significance in light of recent evidence of the lethal effects of
              ambient UV-B radiation on amphibians in North America, and the potential link
              of stratospheric ozone depletion to the proposed global decline in amphibian
              populations.    UV-B field exposure experiments will be performed with
              eggs/larvae of South American anuran species (using a similar protocol to that
              of North American experiments) at high and low elevations in the mid to high
              latitudes of South America.  Teratogenesis, growth inhibition, mortality, and
              DNA damage of larvae under different UV exposures will be quantified.  This
              approach will allow us to accomplish the following objectives: (1) examine the
              ability of anuran species that lay their eggs in open water near the surface to
              mitigate the harmful effects of UV-B radiation across latitudinal and
              elevational gradients of UV-B radiation, and (2) determine if the large
              increase in biologically active UV-B radiation in the Southern Hemisphere is
              having a negative impact on early life stages in high latitude anuran species.
