Title       : Mechanism of Chromatin Assembley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9631121

Award Number: 9631121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283210             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Kadonaga jkadonaga@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631121  Kadonaga  The objective of these studies is to gain a better
              understanding of the mechanism of chromatin assembly.  A crude Drosophila
              embryo extract was developed that allows the preparation of factors that
              mediate ATP-facilitated chromatin assembly.  The crude extract was fractionated
              into a 56 kDa core-histone-binding protein and a partially-purified fraction
              termed the 'dCAF- 1 -containing fraction', which was thus designated because it
              contains dCAF-l, the Drosophila homologue of a previously-studied factor termed
              chromatin assembly factor-1 (CAF-1).  cDNA encoding the 56 kDa
              core-histone-binding protein was isolated, and it was found that the 56 kDa
              protein is the Drosophila homologue of a previously-identified factor known as
              NAP-1. Purified, recombinant Drosophila NAP-1 (dNAP-1) was found to function
              with components in the dCAF- 1 fraction in the ATP-facilitated assembly of
              nucleosomal arrays.  The dCAF-1-containing fraction was separated into dCAF-1,
              which was purified to ~50% homogeneity, and a novel chromatin assembly factor
              termed dCAF-6.  These components will be used to:  1. Determine the minimal set
              of factors that is sufficient for the assembly of regularly-spaced nucleosomal
              arrays.  The dCAF-6 chromatin assembly activity will be purified by using
              biochemical procedures and assays that are similar to those that have been
              employed thus far in the fractionation and purification of this novel activity.
              If possible, the cloning of dCAF-6 will be attempted.  2.  Perform mechanistic
              studies of chromatin assembly with purified factors.  These studies include:
              biochemical analysis of the reaction pathway; investigation of the ATP
              requirement for efficient assembly; examination of potential modifications of
              histones or assembly factors; and analysis of histone Hl incorporation into
              chromatin; investigation of potential protein-protein interactions among the
              assembly factors.   %%%  Genes are associated with an elaborate protein
              structural framework called chromatin.  DNA is woun d in a precise fashion
              around spools of proteins into complexes called nucleosomes which with other
              proteins form chromatin.  The components can be taken apart and put together to
              study how each component fits into the overall process.  These studies will
              purify the factors that are needed to assemble the essential components of this
              process and identify the role different components play in the organization of
              chromatin.  ***
