Title       : Spectral Persistence and the Anharmonic Dynamics of Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9631298

Award Number: 9631298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Sievers sievers@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9631298  Sievers    Technical Abstract  The  proposal experimental study focuses
              on identifying the static and  dynamic properties of multiple elastic
              configurations in crystals  and  glasses.   The method is to examine the energy
              transport  between  the  low lying equilibrium and non-equilibrium states and
              configurations of  solids with a variety of  linear  and  nonlinear 
              spectroscopic tools, including  persistent  IR  spectral  hole  burning, IR
              pump-probe transient hole  burning,  Raman  scattering and fourier transform IR
              spectroscopy.  Interest has  grown  in  the  possibility that intrinsic
              localized modes, made possible  by  the lattice anharmonicity,  may  exist in
              bulk crystals, at their surfaces or at their edges.  The  progress  in 
              localized vibrational mode studies  is  leading  to  the  exploration  of 
              intrinsic localized excitations  in  other  nonlinear  dynamical  systems.   
              Antiferromagnetic  crystals   provide   new   experimental  opportunities to
              search for intrinsic localized excitations.  %%%  Non-Technical Abstract  An 
              outstanding problem in condensed matter physics is identifying the  source   of
               the  static  and  dynamic  behavior  of  near-equilibrium  vibrational states
              in crystals and glasses.  The proposed method is to  examine the energy
              transport between the low lying equilibrium and non-  equilibrium 
              configurations of solids with a variety of  spectroscopic  tools.   Recently,
              interest has grown in the likelihood of a new  type  of  localized  vibrational
              excitation made  possible  by  the  lattice  nonlinearity that may exist in
              bulk crystals, at their surfaces or  at  their edges.  Progress here is leading
              to the exploration of intrinsic  localized  excitations  in nonlinear magnetic
              systems.   The  proposed  measurements  should  impact on topics  as  diverse 
              as  the  role  of  structural defects in optical materials used for information
               storage,  amplification  and  optical  transmission,  and  on  the  science 
              and  technology of fast-ion conductors  and that of magnetic structures.  ***
