Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Graduate Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Research in
               Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9631618

Award Number: 9631618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196242             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene H. Golub golub@sccm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Durbin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Homsy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Stuart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Heegaard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Stefan G. Shaqfeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9631618  Golub  The award will permit the creation of a graduate fellowship
              program in applied and computational mathematics which fully integrates
              mathematics with a variety of application areas.  In particular, students in
              the program will be expected to actively participate in the experimental
              laboratory whose results provide the impetus for the mathematical modelling,
              analysis and computation that the student will engage in.  The program will be
              built upon the existing Program in Scientific Computing and Computational
              Mathematics (SCCM).  The goal of merging applied mathematics with an
              application area will be achieved in a variety of ways:  the student will be
              jointly advised by two people, one with interests  in applied mathematics or
              numerical analysis, and a second with interest in a specific scientific or
              engineering discipline; after passing written qualifying exams in applied
              mathematics and numerical analysis, the student will be integrated into the
              laboratory of the external input to, as well as evaluation of, the
              interdisciplinary training can be achieved.    The technical area around which
              the program is organized is that of constitutive modelling for complicated
              nonlinear phenomena arising in science and engineering.  In particular the
              areas of turbulence modelling, non-Newtonian fluids (such as polymers), the
              biomechanics of growth, and computational chemistry form the primary areas of
              application.    This activity is being funded by the following programs:  New
              Technologies (CISE), Office of Multdisciplinary Activities (OMA), MPS,and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences.
