Title       : RUI: Biochemistry of Nitrogen-Limited Growth of Wood Decaying Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9631340

Award Number: 9631340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245689             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walt W. Lilly wlilly@biology.semo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen C. Gathman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast Missouri State U
	      900 Normal
	      Cape Girardeau, MO  637014753    314/651-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631340  Lilly     The overall goal of this research program is to understand
              the regulation of cellular autolysis in basidiomycete fungi. Under natural
              conditions, nitrogen is the limiting nutrient in the growth of wood-decaying
              fungi. The wood-decaying basidiomycete Schizophyllum commune is a tractable
              model system for the study of autolysis as a response to the limited supply of
              nitrogen found in wood. Autolysis of older mycelia and subsequent relocation of
              nutrients to the expanding mycelial margin occur during nitrogen starvation.
              Increased proteolysis is an integral part of the general autolytic activity.
              Proteolytically released amino adds have been shown to be incorporated into
              proteins in the growing mycelial margin. This research focuses on the
              regulation of proteolytic activity as a model for the regulation of autolysis
              in general. Two putative vacuolar proteases, ScPrA (a serine protease) and
              ScPrB (a metalloprotease), appear to be most important in general proteolysis.
              The research has two main objectives: the first objective is to develop means
              to bst rigorously the hypothesis that the metalloprotease ScPrB is critical to
              autolysis and amino acid recycling. ScPrB will be purified and partially
              sequenced. Using ths sequence inforrnation, the gene for ScPrB wiU be cloned
              and charactereed. Constructs containing the ScPrB gene inbrrupted by a
              phleomycin selectable marker gene will be prepared. Gene replacement via
              transformation of S. commune protoplasts will be used to generate ScPrB
              mutants. These mutants will be charactereed using molecular techniques. The
              second objective is to initiate experiments to assess the role of the serine
              protease ScPrA in nitrogen-limited growth and study its properties. ScPrA is
              the second most active mycelial protease during nitrogen starvation. ScPrA'
              will be pyrified and partially sequenced. The sequence data will be used to
              construct probes for screening S. commune DNA libraries for the ScPrA gene. The
              demonstration that these enzymes are critical fo r nitrogen-limitation induced
              proteolysis would provide a model system for studying the regulation of the
              transition to mycelial autolysis. In addition, creation of mutants lacking
              these proteases will provide a system for defining the role of the vacuole in
              many physiological and developrnental processes in filamentous fungi.  %%%  The
              wood-decaying fungus Schizophyllum commune is a model system for the study of
              mycelia growth and development. When nutrients are limited, the older cells in
              the center of the fungus break down, releasing nutrients that are transported
              to the cells at the growing margin. This mechanism allows for the continued
              expansion of the mycelium in the nitrogen-poor environment provided by wood. In
              this project two major enzymes re'sponsible for breaking down proteins in the
              older cells will be purified and studied. The gene for one of them will be
              isolated, and mutant fungi will be constructed with a modified fomm of this
              gene. These mutants will make it possible to study the role of this enzyme in
              nutrient recycling. Understanding mechanisms of fungal growth may provide
              insight into means for control of fungal decay of wood, which has a rnajor
              economic impact. This project was,submitted under the Research in Undergraduate
              Institutions program. In addition to its sdentific significance, the research
              will provide opportunities for experiential leaming and scientific training of
              undergraduate students.  ***
