Title       : Reconstruction of Quaternary Climates Using Stable Isotopic Analyses of Packrat
               Middens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9631420

Award Number: 9631420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valery J. Terwilliger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9631420  Valery J. Terwilliger  U. Kansas    This award funds a project to
              study the climate variations at a regional scale by measuring the stable
              oxygen, hydrogen and carbon isotopic ratios of plant remains in packrat middens
              found in two mountain ranges in the western U.S.  To constrain the variables
              that affect the isotopic compositions in plant materials, the PI also propose
              to grow plants in a greenhouse under controlled conditions.  From a climatic
              study point of view, the 40,000 year-old long plant remains in packrat middens
              are very valuable samples for stable isotope work.  The possibility of
              comparing leaves and stems provides further advantage to examine the isotopic
              variations due to a change in source water versus a change in the atmospheric
              conditions (e.g. humidity).  Such isotopic analyses of plant remains are widely
              used to interpret climate.  This project pushes interpretations to address more
              directed questions about climate at a finer scale than has previously been
              attempted.  To interpret the isotopic records, it is important that the
              contemporary leaves and stems be studied and compared between the two species
              and two locations.  The controlled experiments proposed are useful for
              understanding the physiological pathways of oxygen, hydrogen and carbon
              isotopes.    Climatic processes that operate within regional scales are poorly
              understood.  This limited knowledge is the primary reason that predictive
              models of climatically induced environmental change are least rigorous for
              small areas.  Reconstruction of environmental developments in the climatically
              changeable Quaternary period is considered to be the most promising source of
              information for improving the sophistication of these models.  This requires
              not only efforts to answer more directed questions about past environments but
              also efforts to improve the resolution of climatic inferences that can be made
              from proxies.  This project should contribute to these wider needs for
              knowledge about environmental development s within small areas.
