Title       : Topology of Archaeal Transcription Pre-Initiation Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9631093

Award Number: 9631093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Scott  9631093  Biophysical and biochemical methods will be employed to study
              the structure and assembly of protein and DNA components of the transcription
              pre-initiation complex of the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus.
              The single archaeal transcription system exhibits more homology to the eucaryal
              than the bacterial transcription apparatus, suggesting that an ancestral
              archaeal system evolved into the three eucaryal transcription complexes that
              synthesize rRNA, mRNA, and tRNA, using RNA polymerase (RNAP)I, II, and III,
              respectively. The resulting understanding of the molecular topology and
              mechanism of archaeal basal transcription is expected to shed light on eucaryal
              transcription as well as providing evolutionary information related to the
              divergence of the three eucaryal systems. The P. furiosus transcription system
              was chosen for study because: (a) little is known about archaeal transcription
              and its regulation; (b) the archaeal system is expected to be less complex than
              the eucaryal descendants; (c) the transcription complex components and their
              interactions are expected to be more robust given their hyperthermophilic
              source.  In eucaryal basal transcription of protein-coding genes using RNAPII,
              the assembly of the PIC starts with recognition by the TATA-binding protein
              (TBP) of TATA-containing promoter sequences ca. 25 bp upstream of the
              transcription start site. Then, transcription factor (TF)IIB binds to the
              TBP/promoter complexes and recruits RNAPII and other transcription factors to
              the complex to initiate transcription. This proposal focuses on archaeal
              homologs of TBP and TFIIB. Structural data are available on the interaction of
              eucaryal TFIIB with TBP/promoter; they indicate that the ca. 200 residue
              C-terminal core of TFIIB binds to TBP and DNA sequences both up- and downstream
              of the TATA box, which interacts with TBP. No structural information is
              available on the disposition of the N-terminal ca 100 residues of eucaryal
              TFIIB . Our work has elucidated the NMR solut ion structure of a 50 residue
              N-terminal fragment of P. furiosus TFB (homologous to eucaryal TFIIB), which is
              shown to adopt a "zinc ribbon" structure very similar to that displayed by the
              C-terminal domain of human TFIIS, a transcription elongation factor. The
              DNA-binding ability of the C-terminal portion of TFIIB suggests that the
              N-terminal domain of TFIIB may interact with the DNA downstream of the
              TATA--box, perhaps near the transcription start site. Point mutations in the
              N-terminal domain of eucaryal TFIIB are known to affect the location of the
              transcription start site.  This unique structural information will be put to
              use in studies designed to probe the structure, interactions, and function of
              the N-terminal portion of TFIIB. NMR will be used to characterize structurally
              a larger (125 residue) N-terminal fragment of P. furiosus TFB, to provide the
              context to assemble a structural model for the full-length protein. NMR will
              also be used to solve the solution structure of the N-terminal fragment of
              human TFIIB for comparison with that of P. furiosus TFB. This is important
              since higher eucarya have putative (Cys, His, Cys, Cys) zinc binding residues
              compared to four Cys in archaea (and yeast). A sensitive method will be
              developed using tethered Fe(EDTA) as a local artificial nuclease to probe the
              region of DNA contacted by the N(and C-)terminal regions of P. furiosus TFB. A
              functional transcription assay will be developed using an established hybrid
              cell-free system from Methanococcus thermolithotrophicus transcription
              components. This and the nuclease-probe method will be used to study the
              effects of targeted mutations in the N-terminal domain of P. furiosus TFB. Of
              particular interest is the requirement of zinc binding for proper functioning
              of TF(II)B in transcription initiation.  Finally, several strategies will be
              used to identify other required components of the P. furiosus transcription
              apparatus, including the RNA polymerase. Ultimately, a functioning in vitro
              basal transcription  complex will allow the study of transcriptional regulation
              in P. furiosus.  %%%  Production of  proteins from the genes that encode them
              consists of transcription of the DNA (gene) to messenger RNA, then translation
              of the mRNA into protein.  A detailed picture of the proteins involved in
              transcription and the regulation of this process is expected to provide, for
              example, targets for therapy of genetic diseases.  The archaeal domain of life
              was discovered in the past decade as a separate group of microorganisms
              distinct from bacteria as well as from eukaryotes. The transcription system of
              archaea appears to be more closely related to that of eukaryotes, rather than
              that of bacteria.  This project will study the topology (arrangement of protein
              and nucleic acid components ) of the archaeal transcription complex to
              discover: (a) more details of the functioning of  the archaeal complex, about
              which little is known; (b) whether the archaeal transcription complex is unique
              in being able to produce all three types of RNA, (mRNA, rRNA, tRNA); and (c)
              how the transcription system of he hyperthermophilic marine archaeal Pyrococcus
              furiosus can carry out its function at the optimal growth temperature of 100
              degreeC.  We will build on structural work already available on components of
              the eukaryotic transcription complex to study the arterial components.  Of
              particular interest is the possible interaction of the N-terminal domain of
              transcription factor IIB with promoter DNA near the transcription start site
              and several sets of experiments are targeted at elucidating  these
              interactions.  ***  ??
