Title       : Campaign Finance and Political Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9631640

Award Number: 9631640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52564              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Snyder millett@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Ansolabehere  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631640  Snyder    In prior research these investigators began an empirical
              investigation of the productivity of campaign spending in House elections. 
              Some early results from this work indicate that the "vote production functions"
              facing U.S. House incumbents and challengers are remarkably similar, and are
              not statistically distinct.  This finding contrasts sharply with the
              conventional wisdom, which holds that incumbent spending is far less productive
              than that of challengers.  The results suggest that the central issue in the
              study of campaign finance is not simply how money translates into votes but why
              some candidates are able to raise vastly more than others.    In the current
              investigation the researchers proceed along two tracks.  First, they validate
              their initial investigation of the effects of campaign expenditures in
              incumbent-contested U.S. House elections.  To validate these estimates they
              extend their analysis to U.S. Senate races and to open seat U.S. House races. 
              They also improve their measurement techniques through the use of LEXIS/NEXIS
              and are thus allowed to make the most complete and accurate data set of who
              runs for Congress.    Second, they investigate how the productivity of campaign
              spending varies across different kinds of candidates, across electoral settings
              (such as congressional district, state, and media market), and over the course
              of political careers.  Political lore and public opinion research frequently
              emphasizes that the effectiveness of a campaign depends very much on the
              context.  With only a few exceptions, research on campaign finance has ignored
              these contextual factors, though there has bee much speculation.  Among the
              specific hypotheses, the marginal product of spending is thought to be lower
              (1) if the candidate is already well-known, (2) if the campaign is conducted in
              an expensive media market, (3) if the challenger is running for the second
              time, (4) if the challenger is a political novice, and (5) if the electorate is
              composed largely of vote rs of the opposite party of the candidate.  Using the
              instrumental variables approach presented in their earlier work, they test
              whether the productivity of campaign spending money varies in any of these
              ways.  While the statistics are relatively straightforward, additional data
              collection is undertaken.    This project produces three highly useful new data
              sets for use by other scholars:  one on the personal and professional
              backgrounds of congressional candidates; one on the locations, resources, and
              activities of business and other interest groups; and, one tracking the
              histories of important federal legislation of the last two decades.  ***
