Title       : Comparative Statics: Theory and an Empirical Framework for Testing Predictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1998   
File        : a9631760

Award Number: 9631760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Athey athey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since Paul Samuelson's text in mathematical economics, economists have studied
              and applied mathematical tools for making predictions.  They accomplish it by
              deriving comparative statics predictions in optimization problems and in
              equilibrium problems. Recently, this topic has received renewed attention. The
              first goal of this project is to develop and apply new methods for deriving
              comparative statics predictions in formal economic models of stochastic
              problems and games of incomplete information. The second goal of the project is
              to develop a framework for empirical testing of the theoretical predictions
              about comparative statics, focusing on problems with multiple endogenous
              variables.    The theoretical part of the project concerns monotone comparative
              statics in stochastic optimization problems and equilibrium problems.  Theorems
              are introduced which can be used in conjunction with the new methods on
              comparative statics,  or with traditional methods of analysis in stochastic
              problems.  A number of potential economic applications are explored, some of
              which require further theoretical research.  In addition a monograph is
              developed, providing a systematic approach to the analysis of comparative
              statics based on the new literature.  It advances a particular set of themes
              which is to some extent implicit, but far from fully articulated, in the
              published research to date, and also included some new results, particularly in
              the area of equilibrium analysis.     The empirical component is motivated by a
              growing theoretical and empirical literature which studies complementarities in
              a wide variety of economic problems (two variables are complementary if
              increasing one variable increases the returns to increasing the other.)  An
              econometric strategy is developed to test theories about complementarities,
              evaluate the properties of these tests using Monte Carlo experiments, and
              finally, to apply this strategy to an economic problem.
