Title       : From the Rights Revolution to Reengineering: The Construction of Corporate
               Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9631604

Award Number: 9631604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Dobbin dobbin@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of emergence and diffusion of new kinds of departments in
              corporations.   Prevailing theories of corporate structure, whether they
              address the presence of particular departments or the level of internal
              differentiation, point to functional causes such as size, economic performance,
              and technical complexity. These theories predict cross-sectional variation
              well, however they do not predict longitudinal variation at all well.  Over the
              past three decades, many new kinds of departments emerged and diffused among
              American corporations, from environmental protection to total quality
              management. Established departments, such as personnel and accounts payable,
              have been replaced or eliminated entirely.  Institutionalists suggest that
              these changes were brought about by two kinds environmental forces: the federal
              employment rights revolution and efficiency-oriented management movements.  The
              employment rights revolution of the early 1970s coincided with the civil
              rights, women's, and environmental movements.  In contrast, the Occupational
              Safety and Health Act and the Pension Reform Act were not associated with
              social movements.  Thus one key question is the significance of new federally
              established rights versus social movements in leading firms to create equal
              employment and environmental protection departments.  A series of
              efficiency-oriented management movements between 1965 and 1996 prescribed the
              creation of new internal departments; chief among them were strategic planning,
              quality management, and human resource management.  Many corporations responded
              by establishing new departments. Other movements, such as the reengineering and
              core competence movements, prescribed large-scale elimination of internal
              departments.  A second question, therefore, concerns the significance of these
              movements in causing change.  The answers to these and related questions lie in
              analysis of where and when particular departments appeared and where and when
              the wholesale elimination of departments oc curred.  For the period 1965-1996,
              annual data on the vice presidential-level offices of 500 large corporations
              will be collected from Standard and Poor's directories. These data will be
              merged with annual financial data and data on corporate networks and analyzed
              using dynamic methods. Event-history analyses of the adoption, and elimination,
              of particular departments will be used to evaluate political, economic, and
              institutional theories of how new structures emerge and diffuse across
              corporations.  Pooled time-series analyses of the level of internal
              departmental differentiation will be used to evaluate competing theories of how
              broad structural changes come about.     The goal of this project is to improve
              understanding of the processes by which changes in the corporate environment
              affect the composition of departments within firms.  Thus the findings will
              contribute to increased organizational effectiveness and better use of human
              capital resources by American corporations.
