Title       : Collaborative Research: Multi-Unit Demand Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9631845

Award Number: 9631845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Levin dlevin@econ.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Recent theoretical developments in multi-unit demand (one sided)  auctions
              make it clear that uniform price auctions create an  incentive for demand
              reductions (bid shaving) resulting in  inefficient outcomes.  In contrast,
              extensions of the Vickrey  auction rule to multi-unit demand auctions promise,
              in theory, to  restore economic efficiency and to raise expected revenue 
              relative to uniform price auctions under a wide variety of  circumstances. 
              These predictions rest critically on bidders  recognizing and responding
              appropriately to the strategic  opportunities for demand reductions in uniform
              price auctions and  following a "sincere" bidding strategy in the Vickrey
              auctions.  The purpose of this research is to explore behavior in multi-unit 
              demand auctions through both theory and experiments.  The  experiments will
              focus on the extent to which bidders reduce  demand, and the resulting
              inefficiencies and revenue impact, in  uniform price auctions when bidders have
              equal and unequal  demands and with more or less intense competition.  Vickrey 
              auction experiments will focus on the effects of different  implementation
              rules for inducing sincere bidding using a  relatively transparent, open
              English clock auction procedure and  a sealed bid version of the clock
              procedure that may prove more  tractable in field settings.  Behavior will be
              studied in both  interactive and non-interactive (games against computerized 
              bidders) environments with the latter designed to eliminate the  "noise"
              associated with other players' actions on learning to  behave strategically. 
              Theoretical work will provide benchmark  models against which to evaluate the
              experimental outcomes and to  identify conditions where there are tradeoffs in
              theory, between  efficiency and revenue under the different auction
              institutions.    Work in multi-unit demand auctions is important because (i)
              most  auctions involve multi-unit demands and (ii) a number of insights 
              obtained from unit demand auctions fail to hold with multi-un it  demands. Many
              of these issues have come to the forefront-with the  design and implementation
              of the recent spectrum auctions.
