Title       : Translational Regulation in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9631066

Award Number: 9631066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest M. Hannig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631066  Hannig   Initiation of protein synthesis appears to be the
              rate-limiting step in the translation of many, if not most, eukaryotic
              messenger RNAs. Our current understanding of the initiation pathway is derived
              largely from in vitro biochemical studies of partial reactions using mammalian
              systems. The biochemical data suggest an intricate set of protein-protein and
              protein-RNA interactions involving messenger RNA, initiator tRNA, ribosomes,
              and protein initiation factors (eIFs). One of the key initiation factors is
              eIF-2, and is the primary focus of this proposal. eIF-2 is a heterotrimeric
              guanine nucleotide-binding protein that delivers the charged initiator tRNA to
              the small ribosomal subunit. eIF-2 executes this function in the GTP-bound
              state and once executed, is released in an inactive GDP-bound form. Recycling
              of eIF-2 to the active state requires eIF-2B, a hetero-pentameric guanine
              nucleotide exchange factor for eIF-2 that is present at substoichiometric
              levels relative to its substrate. The recycling reaction is regulated in vivo,
              and can be inhibited in yeast and mammals through protein kinases that
              specifically phosphorylate the a subunit of eIF-2. This effectively
              down-regulates global protein synthesis. PKR, a mammalian eIF-2a kinase, may
              also function as a tumor suppressor in vivo.  Protein synthesis in mammals and
              in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae appears to be highly similar.  Genetic
              studies in yeast have identified structural genes encoding the three and five
              subunits of eIF2 and eIF-2B, respectively. Where known, the corresponding
              mammalian cDNAs predict polypeptides that are highly similar to the yeast
              proteins, and some of these can substitute for the yeast gene in vivo. Analysis
              of mutant phenotypes in yeast has provided clues to the function of individual
              subunits. Combined with biochemical studies in mammalian systems, the genetic
              studies in yeast have begun to elucidate the complex macromolecular
              interactions that occur during the initiation process. However,  the full
              potential of the genetic studies in yeast has not been realized due to the lack
              of a suitable purification for yeast eIF-2 and eIF-2B that would facilitate
              biochemical analysis of the wide array of available mutants.  This proposal
              describes the development of novel and rapid procedures for purifying both
              eIF-2 and eIF-2B from yeast. In the former case, this has lead to the first
              quantitative biochemical analysis of both wild-type and mutant yeast eIF-2
              proteins. The proposed experiments combine these newly available biochemical
              tools with the genetic analysis of mutants to form a powerful approach to
              studying eIF-2 and eIF-2B function at the molecular level. Specifically, the r
              subunit of yeast eIF-2 will be used as a model to test this combined approach
              to determine the role of the y subunit in eIF-2 function. eIF-2r is an
              excellent model for this approach because of its predicted structural and
              functional similarities to the well-studied eubacterial elongation factor Tu.
              These similarities predict a major and direct role for eIF-2g in ligand binding
              by eIF-2 and interactions between eIF-2 and the eIF-2B exchange factor. Genetic
              screens will be used to identify mutations in eIF-2g that may affect one or
              more of these functions. Biochemical analysis of eIF-2 purified from mutant
              strains will identify activities of eIF-2, for which the g subunit is critical,
              that are important for that function. These studies will also establish a
              structure/function map for the g protein, and lead to further studies that will
              provide a more complete understanding of the function of two critical factors
              involved in initiation of eukaryotic protein synthesis.  %%%  The "decoding" of
              genetic information into proteins is a critical process shared by all
              organisms. In eukaryotic organisms the expression of a number of important
              genes, including a subset of those encoding tumor suppressors, may either
              regulate or be regulated by this decoding step. This step, referred to as
              "translation" or "protein synthesis ", is an intricate (but precise) process
              that requires cooperation among multiple complex molecules. Unfortunately,
              little detail is available concerning the precise mechanism for normal protein
              synthesis, much less its regulation. We have identified mutations in genes
              encoding these complex molecules involved in translation that have given us
              clues to their functions. We are now developing procedures to facilitate the
              purification of these complexes, in order that we may examine the function of
              normal and mutant proteins under controlled conditions. These experiments will
              give us a more complete understanding of this basic but essential biochemical
              process, and mechanisms whereby this process can be altered to enhance gene
              expression. These studies can ultimately allow us to devise means to correct
              defects in, or otherwise alter, the translational mechanism itself or the
              expression of translationally regulated genes.  ***
