Title       : Information Processing in the Electrosensory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9631785

Award Number: 9631785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masashi Kawasaki mk3u@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    Processing of complex sensory information to generate behavior is a major
              function of the brain, and one very useful model system for studying this
              integration has been the brain of weakly electric fish.  These fish generate a
              repetitive weak electrical signal from special organs, and detect the electric
              field around them by specialized electroreceptors all over the body.  The
              signal is used for social communication and for spatial "electrolocation" in
              much the way bats or dolphins use echolocation to identify and locate objects. 
              A population of electric fish has the same problem as a city with multiple
              radio stations: if the signals used by two separate individuals are too close
              together in frequency, each one effectively "jams" the signal reception of the
              other.  Some electric fish that use highly regular signals have overcome this
              problem by a behavior called the "jamming-avoidance response" (JAR); the fish
              with the slightly higher frequency moves its emission frequency up just a bit,
              and the fish with the slightly lower frequency moves its frequency down just a
              bit, to widen the separation and so help each fish to identify of its own
              signal against the background environment of other fish.  This behavior
              requires the fish to recognize not only that the jamming signal is present, but
              whether its own signal is higher or lower in frequency than the jamming signal.
               Recently it has been found that some species of electric fish in Africa, not
              at all closely related to the better-studied South African electric fish
              species, have the same JAR behavior, but apparently produce it by a different
              circuit in the brain.  This project uses physiological and anatomical
              techniques of recording and tracing the connections of single nerve cells in
              the brain to clarify how this response is controlled by the brain in the
              African fish.  Particular emphasis will be on the spatial and temporal patterns
              of two sensory cues, known as amplitude modulation and differential phase
              modulation, which both are essen tial for the behavior.     The results will be
              important for understanding mechanisms for the independent evolution of similar
              adaptive behaviors, and also will be important to understanding general
              principles of brain organization related to sensory behavior in such systems as
              vision and hearing.
