Title       : Role of Nitrogen in Compensatory Response of Hybrid Poplar to Ozone-Induced
               Accelerated Foliar Senescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9631030

Award Number: 9631030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva J. Pell ejp@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9631030  Pell    When plants are grow in an environment with elevated ground
              levels of the air pollutant, ozone, a common response is accelerated aging of
              foliage.  During the normal aging process, foliage exhibits a gradual decline
              in rate of net photosynthesis accompanied by a decrease in a key enzyme known
              as Rubisco.  This enzyme is responsible for fixation of carbon dioxide; Rubisco
              is also the most ubiquitous protein in the leaf accounting for up to 70% of
              soluble leaf protein.  As leaves at the base of a plant age and eventually
              abscise, protein breakdown products are transported elsewhere in the plant for
              synthesis of new protein.  One result is that in some species, including
              poplar, young tissue of ozone-stressed plants may actually exhibit a
              transitory, relative increase in Rubisco concentration and associated net
              photosynthesis.  This response is thought to provide some compensation to the
              air pollution injury.  Plants grow in a complex environment, often with other
              limitations.  Since Rubisco, as a protein, provides an internal source of
              nitrogen, the investigators are interested in determining whether nitrogen
              limitation in the soil might enhance these ozone responses.  The question has
              relevance since many plants growing in the natural ecosystem are found in
              nutrient limited soils.  Models are being developed to try and predict plant
              responses to multiple stresses.  Inherent in these models is an understanding
              of how plants minimize stress and what conditions will influence the way plants
              respond.  The results of these studies will aid in the refinement of these
              models. In these studies hybrid poplar plants will be treated with chronic
              doses of ozone.  We will follow the development and aging of leaves at the base
              and crown of the canopy.  We will focus on the changing status of Rubisco and
              relate synthesis and degradation of the protein to availability of nitrogen.
