Title       : Society for Developmental Biology Annual Symposium: May 30-June 4, 1996;
               Nashville, TN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9631654

Award Number: 9631654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Dev Biol
	      9650 Rockville Pike
	      Bethesda, MD  208143998    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631654  Jeffery    Funds are requested for partial support of the expenses for
              invited plenary and minisymposium speakers, including junior scientists, and
              graduate and post-doctoral student speakers and poster presenters, for the 55th
              annual symposium of the Society for Developmental Biology. The meeting,
              entitled, "Patterning Mechanisms in Development", will be held May 30-June 4,
              1996 at Vanderbilt University. The meeting is organized by William Jeffery,
              President of the SDB, and will be attended by a national group of researchers
              and teachers interested in the study of development, including graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows. The organizers expect that, as during the
              past eight years, the meeting will be of medium size (300-400 registrants), and
              they encourage junior level participation by providing financial support and
              the opportunity to present platform talks and poster presentations. The meeting
              will include a broad range of topics, considered to be new frontiers in pattern
              formation, continuing and building on the format that has evolved in the past
              four year. Plant and animal systems as well as different contemporary
              approaches will be represented. Particular emphasis will be on early
              developmental mechanisms, localization, cell signaling, morphogenesis,
              regeneration, organ formation, and the evolution of these developmental
              processes. They plan 53 invited scientific talks in seven plenary sessions and
              4 minisymposia, the latter arranged in two sessions(two minisymposia running
              concurrently), and a keynote lecture. The plenary sessions and minisymposia
              will be chaired by experts in the area, and some talks will be given by junior
              scientists, thus providing them with an opportunity to speak a the national
              level. Contributed platform and poster sessions will also provide opportunities
              for graduate and postdoctoral students to present their work. The posters will
              be available for viewing during most of the meeting, providing ample time for
              discussion. Reflecting the growing role  of the SDB in the affairs and concerns
              of its membership, this symposium will continue to feature issue oriented
              workshops on education and minority interests.  ***
