Title       : Microsequencing of a Putatve Myosin I Isoform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9631833

Award Number: 9631833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Primal de Lanerolle Primal@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631833  de Lanerolle     The term "myosin" describes a family of motor proteins
              that are characterized by their ability to hydrolyze ATP when they bind actin. 
              Myosin II, the most familiar and best characterized member of this family, is a
              filamentous protein that uses the energy released when ATP is hydrolyzed to
              move filaments past each other, an essential step in muscle contraction and in
              cytokinesis.  In contrast to our understanding of the physiological properties
              of myosin II, little is known about the other members of this superfamily, many
              of which do not form filaments.  Of these non-filamentous myosins, myosin I has
              been studied most extensively.  Myosin I was initially described in
              Acanthamoeba and is now known to be widely distributed in mammalian cells. 
              This protein has been studied extensively at the molecular and biochemical
              levels, and there is an abundance of information about the cellular
              distribution  of myosin I.  The physiological role of this protein,
              particularly in mammalian cells, is less well defined.  In an effort the
              investigate the physiological role of myosin I in mammalian cells, the protein
              was purified from bovine adrenal glands and a polyclonal antibody was raised
              against it.  While characterizing these antibodies, it was observed that the
              affinity-purified antibodies to myosin I stained the nucleus in interphase
              cells.  In light of the recent demonstration by others of actin-like proteins
              in the nucleus, this data prompted the hypothesis that myosin I is involved in
              nuclear functions.  However, before such a putative role can be investigated,
              the protein in the nucleus which reacts with the antibody must be unambiguously
              identified.  Therefore, the goal of this research is to purify sufficient
              protein to identify it by microsequencing it.  ***
