Title       : Bioluminescence: Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical Control in Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9631935

Award Number: 9631935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hastings hastings@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Therese Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631935  Hastings     This project is concerned with the fundamental biochemical
              mechanisms of light emitting systems in bacteria and dinoflagellates, two major
              and evolutionarily independent groups of bioluminescent organisms. Studies of
              model chemical systems will be carried out in parallel. In the bacterium Vibrio
              fischeri strain Y-l, experiments are designed to determine the mechanism by
              which an accessory yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) causes not only a shift
              from blue to yellow luminescence and an increase in the rate of the
              light-emitting reaction, but also confers a negative temperature coefficient to
              the reaction, such that the intensity is greater at lower temperatures over the
              range of 4  to 20  C. YFP acts by interacting with a reaction intermediate, and
              recombinant proteins will be used to determine if YFP turns over, i.e., acts
              catalytically. A goal will be to pinpoint the peroxidic luciferase
              intermediate(s) with which YFP reacts; dim V. fischeri luciferase mutants in
              which the reaction rate is very slow will be constructed by site directed
              mutagenesis in order to test the effect of YFP on the rate of altered kinetic
              mutants. In the dinoflagellate system, the luciferase gene has recently been
              found to possess three regions with similar sequences. We will characterize the
              catalytic properties of the individual active peptides expressed by these
              repeat sequences, and determine the structural features required for activity,
              as well as a mechanistic role for the tandem catalytic sites. We will complete
              the determination of the sequence and structure of full length luciferase
              genomic and cDNAs and look for the promoter and for introns. We will search for
              a regulatory mRNA binding protein involved in the translational control of
              luciferase. In the efficient chemiluminescence of oxalate ester, experiments
              are planned to identify the reactive, energy-rich intermediate(s) and the role
              of electron or charge transfer in chemiexcitation.  %%%   The flash of
              fireflies at dusk and the brillia nt "phosphorescence" of the ocean at night
              are two examples of bioluminescence, present also in a few members of each of
              many different groups of organisms. The functions of bioluminescence are also
              very different; some animals use it to avoid or escape predators while others
              use it to attract prey. Still others, like fireflies, use flashing for
              communication, in courtship for example. An understanding of the basic
              mechanisms in bio- and chemiluminescence can be expected to advance our
              knowledge in several fundamental areas, for example energy metabolism and
              cellular damage caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS), including the possible
              roles of ROS as cellular messengers. There are also many applied uses of
              luminescent systems in medicine, particularly in clinical analysis for
              measurements of drugs and metabolites, and in genetic research for the
              sensitive and unambiguous visualization of gene expression. The systems to be
              studied in this laboratory are largely unexplored, and the problems addressed
              are novel in many respects; it is thus expected that the results will
              contribute significantly to both basic knowledge and its applications.  ***
