Title       : Photoprotection During Winter Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9631064

Award Number: 9631064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200486             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Adams william.adams@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Demmig-Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9631064  Adams    The proposed studies will examine the low temperature
              acclimation  of   a   photoprotective   process  facilitating   the   harmless 
              dissipation  of  excess excitation energy in plants  that  retain  leaves 
              during  the  winter.  Excess  excitation  energy  can  be  removed   directly  
              within   the  chlorophyll/carotenoid-binding  pigment   complexes  in  a 
              process  requiring   the   carotenoid  zeaxanthin and a low pH within the
              chloroplast membrane. On  warm  days,    under   otherwise   favorable  
              conditions,   zeaxanthin  accumulates  during  midday  when  light  is 
              excessive  and   is  reconverted  to  its precursor by the end of  the  day  as
               light  levels  become nonexcessive.  During the winter large amounts  of 
              zeaxanthin  can  be  retained throughout cold  nights,  ready  to  become 
              engaged  in  energy dissipation the  instant  chlorophyll  absorbs  light  in 
              the  morning.  In the  proposed  studies  the  mechanisms  underlying the
              nocturnal retention of  this  pigment,  and  its  continued  engagement for
              energy dissipation,  will  be  examined.    The   first  mechanism  involves 
              the   hypothesized  maintenance  of a pH gradient across the photosynthetic 
              membrane  of  leaves  exposed  to winter conditions which  results  in  the 
              sustained   engagement  of  zeaxanthin  in  energy   dissipation,  primarily 
              in  the minor, proximal chlorophyll-binding  proteins.  The  second  mechanism 
              to  be tested involves  the  hypothesized  synthesis  of  zeaxanthin from
              beta-carotene in the core  antenna  proteins  that  may  accompany acclimation
              to the  conditions  of  excess  light  during  the winter.  To test this 
              hypothesis  the  carotenoid composition of specific chloroplast proteins  will 
              be  determined  from  leaves acclimated to favorable temperatures  in  the
              summer as well as low temperatures in the winter.  Ultimately  the information
              gleaned through these studies may prove useful in  improving the tolerance of
              agricultural species planted in  areas  th at experience lower temperatures
              than those experienced by  the  plants during their evolutionary history.
