Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Center for Applied Probability: Infrastructure
               Support for an Interdisciplinary Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9631392

Award Number: 9631392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Heyde Chris@wald.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Yao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heyde  9631392  The Center for Applied Probability (CAP) at Columbia University
              was established in late 1993 as an interdisciplinary center concerned with the
              study of uncertainty in all areas of human endeavor.  Its creation reflected
              the substantial interest and expertise in applied probability of many faculty
              members at Columbia, who, collectively, represent a broad range of disciplines,
              span-spanning major research and educational activities of the Graduate School
              of Arts and Sciences, the Graduate School of Business, and the School of
              Engineering and Applied Science.  CAP's unique strength lies in its integration
              of probability with a spectrum of applications in science, engineering, and
              industry.  With its location in metropolitan New York, CAP also has unique
              opportunities for significant impact on the research and educational needs in
              industry sectors as diverse as telecommunications, computing, financial
              services and insurance, retail and distribution, and engineering and management
              consulting.  Each of these sectors faces vital issues of risk, reliability, and
              quality that mesh with CAP's strengths in theory and modeling.  Four
              application areas (mathematical and computational finance, stochastic networks,
              logistics and distribution, and population dynamics), and four methodological
              areas (control and optimization, stochastic analysis, numerical methods, and
              statistical inference), with extensive cross linkage, form CAP's focal areas
              for building research and educational programs.  Infrastructure support is
              needed for three specific objectives: (a) to support doctoral research in the
              focal areas, with an emphasis on the integration of mathematics, computing, and
              applications; (b) to facilitate bringing several key visiting scientists to CAP
              for collaborative research; and (c) to build a computer laboratory to support
              computation, which is central to all the focal areas.  Ten key players of CAP
              form the team of investigators.  This group includes several nationally and
              internationally r enowned leaders in applied probability and operations
              research.     This Group Infrastructure Grant will permit expansion of this
              activity.
