Title       : Analysis of Neural Crest Cells in the Cx43 Knockout Mouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9631544

Award Number: 9631544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia Wen-Ya Lo clo@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lo, Cecilia  IBN9631544    Gap junctions are membrane pores that connect
              adjacent cells. These molecular pores allow certain kinds of amall organic
              molecules and ions to pass between cells and thus represent a form of
              intercellular communication. As gap junctions are found in almost all cells and
              tissues, and usually are expressed from very early stages of embryogenesis, it
              is likely that they may play an important role in regulating tissue homeostasis
              and development. The most definitive evidence of a role for gap junctions in
              development has surfaced with the recent success of Kidder and Rossant and
              their colleagues in making a Cx43 gene knock out (KO) mouse line. Cx43 is one
              member of the gap junction gene family that is widely expressed in a variety of
              tissues, both in the embryo and in the adult. Mice homozygote for the Cx43 KO
              allele die soon after birth from heart conotruncal or heart outflow tract
              defects. As occipital neural crest cells are known to play an important role in
              morphogenesis of the outflow tract, the phenotype of the KO mice may indicate a
              role for Cx43 gap junctions in neural crest development. This is further
              suggested by the finding of conotruncal heart defects and other defects
              associated with structures of neural crest origin in transgenic mice containing
              gain or loss of function Cx43 constructs    Based on these observations, the
              investigators hypothesize that Cx43 gap junctions may play an important role in
              regulating the emergence and migration of neural crest cells, in particular
              neural crest cells that participate in heart morphogenesis. They plan to carry
              out experiments outlined in four specific aims. These studies will focus on the
              Cx43 KO mice, examining how the complete absence of Cx43 may affect the
              migration and gap junctional communication (GJC) competency of neural crest
              cells. Analysis will be carried out with neural crest cells cultured in vitro,
              and also in the living embryo. This combination of in vitro and in vivo studies
              should reveal if the migrat ory behavior of neural crest cells may be affected
              by the modulation of gap junctional communication resulting from the loss of
              Cx43 function. The outcome of these studies will serve as the basis for the
              planning of future experiments for further examining the mechanism by which
              perturbations in Cx43 function may lead to conotruncal heart defects, i.e. how
              is the proliferation, survival, and differentiation of cardiac neural crest
              cells affected by changes in GJC, and also what might be the signaling pathways
              disrupted by these changes in GJC.    Accordingly, the investigators:  1)
              Characterize the migration competency of neural crest cells in vitro by 
              monitoring neural crest outgrowth in neural tube explant cultures. 2) 
              Characterize neural crest cell emigration in vivo using DiI method of cell
              labeling. 3) Quantitate the level of gap junctional communication in neural
              crest cells with dye injection studies of neural tube explant cultures. and  4)
              Characterize gap junctional communication in living embryos, specifically in
              the region containing neural crest cells destined for the heart outflow tract.
