Title       : SBIR Phase II: In-Line Process Monitoring & Control for Poly-Silicon Formation
               Inside Cluster Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9631216

Award Number: 9631216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Solomon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9631216  Solomon    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              Project will develop Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) instrumentation for
              in-line monitoring and control of poly-silicon and dielectric fabrications
              processes within a cluster tool..  An FT-IR based method to determine
              polysilicon and dielectric film thicknesses, and free carrier concentrations
              and scattering rates of doped poly films has been developed.  The technique is
              adaptable to multilayered and patterned samples, and the measurement and
              analysis can be performed in real-time, while the wafer is in the cooldown
              chamber of the cluster tool.  Field tests in Phase I on a cluster tool at Texas
              Instruments established the capability to measure doped and undoped poly films,
              relatively thich ((250 nm) field oxides, thin ((10nm) gate oxides, and
              patterned wafers.  A collaborative effort  will be made to:  1) develop test a
              refined in-line FT-IR process monitor on the cluster tool, 2) Develop robust
              automated software for analysis of multilayered poly/dielectric films on
              blanket and patterned wafers, 3) Develop a high speed wafer mapping system for
              measuring uniformity of dielectric and poly properties, and 4) Develop process
              monitoring, optimization and control software and analysis methodology.    
              This project will result in rugged multi-applications instrumentation for
              in-line monitoring and control of a wide range of fabrication processes
              performed in a cluster tool.  This project can increase integrated circuits
              (IC) production yield, eliminate scrapped batches due to undetected out-of-spec
              wafers, reduce manpower requirements, and reduce the time between start-up and
              high yield production.  The wafer mapping tool will also be useful for quality
              control of many other IC fabrication processes such as epi and ion
              implantation.  ***
