Title       : Web-based Data Management System for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9631091

Award Number: 9631091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Helly   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steward T. A. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,9198,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project will implement a scalable, World Wide Web-  interfaced, data
              management system to support the mission of  the National Center for Ecological
              Analysis and Synthesis  and further the ecological community's efforts to
              integrate  ecological data over increasingly broader ranges of space,  time and
              discipline. The project will expand on the work  that has been done for the San
              Diego Bay project at the San  Diego Supercomputer Center by integrating
              systematics  collection data from the Bishop Museum in Hawaii, ecological 
              survey data collections for selected California bioregions,  and researcher-
              supplied data collections to be used at the  ecology center. This range of data
              will provide pathfinders  to develop standards and practices within the
              ecological  community enabling it to anticipate and resolve known and 
              yet-undiscovered problems to improve the predictive value of  ecology,
              facilitate data sharing, and preserve valuable  ecological data.    The project
              will also address the issues of intellectual  property rights in data,
              publication of data, and funding  mechanisms for the long-term maintenance of
              ecological data  in conjunction with the Ecological Society of America (ESA). 
              These issues have been identified by the ESA as key to the  utility of large
              and long-term data sets, and the sharing of  those data by the ecological
              community. The ESA has  established a special committee to initiate consistent 
              practices and propose policies to facilitate data sharing  and archiving by the
              ecological community. The ESA will  utilize this project to participate and
              assist in the  construction of a system that can satisfy its mandate to 
              explore the structure, operation, and use of ecological data  archives. The ESA
              is working to ensure the financial  sustainability of an effective ecological
              data archive.
