Title       : The Allosteric Mechanism of Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9631143

Award Number: 9631143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan R. Kantrowitz evan.kantrowitz@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631143          Kantrowitz  The long term objectives of this project are to
              acquire an understanding of the relationship between structure and function of
              a critical component in the regulation of cellular metabolism. More
              specifically, we are studying one member of a class of enzymes that both
              catalyze a metabolic reaction and, at the same time, control the rate of that
              metabolic pathway. These allosteric enzymes sense the level of the metabolic
              intermediates and use this information to regulate their own activity.
              Allosteric regulation, in its broadest sense, underlies all biological
              regulation; however, our understanding of its molecular basis is very limited. 
              The particular system selected for study is the enzyme
              fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, an allosteric enzyme that exerts metabolic control
              over gluconeogenesis by a combination of mechanisms also found in many other
              systems. Gluconeogenesis is the metabolic pathway involved in the biosynthesis
              of glucose, the primary energy source for the brain. Detailed structural data
              are currently available only for the fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase from pig
              kidney. Therefore, during the last grant period we cloned the cDNA for pig
              kidney fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, determined its DNA sequence, developed a
              purification procedure for the enzyme overexpressed in E. coli, and began our
              studies of its allosteric mechanism. Our work has involved both the creation of
              single amino acid substitution mutants at sites that could provide molecular
              details of its function, as well as structure determination of these mutant
              enzymes by X-ray crystallography to provide the data necessary to correlate
              structure and function. This renewal proposal builds upon the groundwork we
              have achieved, and now concentrates on determining the mechanism by which
              binding of the cellular signaling compounds triggers inactivation of the
              enzyme.   The behavior of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase is like that of a
              molecular machine which has two states, "off" and "on". In the "off" state cata
              lysis is severely hindered, while in the "on" state catalysis is very
              efficient. In addition to these two states, the rate of the machine is variable
              and is controlled by sensors.   In order to develop a unified scheme to explain
              the mechanism of cellular control exerted by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, we
              will apply a structure/function based approach to: (1) probe the subunit
              interfaces for residues critical to signal transduction, (2) examine the
              effects on the transition between the "on" and "off" states when the interface
              is altered, and (3) analyze both functionally and structurally mutant enzymes
              that have alterations in residues critical to allosteric control. We will use a
              multifaceted approach concentrating on the determination of the relative
              importance of direct conformational changes on the allosteric mechanism. Our
              ability to generate the mutant enzymes, characterize them by biochemical and
              biophysical methods, and also to determine their three-dimensional structures
              provides us with a unique opportunity to learn how this complex regulatory
              enzyme functions on the molecular level.  %%%  In order for us to survive,
              there are enzymes within our cells that speed up biochemical reactions that
              would occur too slowly if they were absent. These enzymes are involved in all
              the functions that our cells perform. Some enzymes, the allosteric enzymes,
              take on two jobs, they not only speed up a biochemical reaction but they also
              control the rate of an entire biochemical pathway. Allosteric regulation, in
              its broadest sense, underlies all biological regulation; however, our
              understanding of its molecular basis is very limited. When little food is
              available, a series of enzymes go to work to make glucose, the sugar required
              by the brain via a biosynthesis pathway call gluconeogenesis. One of the
              enzymes involved in the control of this pathway is the allosteric enzyme
              fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase. When the control of gluconeogenesis and the
              related pathway glycolysis goes wrong diabetes results. Th e behavior of
              fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase is like that of a molecular machine which has two
              states, "off" and "on". In the "off" state catalysis is severely hindered,
              while in the "on" state catalysis is very efficient. This project involves
              experiments to understand the mechanism by which this enzyme exerts control
              over the gluconeogenesis pathway. It is also our hope that this information
              well lead to an understanding of how gluconeogenesis is controlled, and that
              these data can be applied to the general problem of cellular control and signal
              transduction in other biological systems as well.  ***
