Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Immersive Methods (Virtual Reality) for Exploratory
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9631351

Award Number: 9631351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Wegman ewegman@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,9216,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9631351   Wegman      This research focuses on the development of a
              synthetic environment to be   used as a tool for exploring data.  The synthetic
              environment will be   constructed from and involve the integration of a number
              of exploratory   data analysis tools some of which have already been created,
              some of   which will be created under the scope of this research.  Topic areas
              being   explored include 1) a fractal-based grand tour, 2) 1-dimensional grand
              tour   for images and random fields, 3) visualization using two- and three- 
              dimensional wavelets, 4) exploratory signal analysis, and 5) visualization of  
              huge data sets.  Mathematical issues being addressed include a new method   for
              constructing grand tours so that all the tour spends equal time in all  
              regions of the multidimensional space and a new methodology for   integrating
              multivariate (multispectral) image data into a single image.    Computational
              issues being addressed include the establishment of a new   metaphor for data
              exploration involving the creation of a data world and   portals through
              regions of it.  The research uses three-dimensional models   extensively.      
                %%%   This research focuses on the exploitation of virtual reality techniques
              for   the analysis of statistical and stochastic data.  The thesis of this
              research is   that virtual reality offers a better technology for
              human-computer   interaction as it relates to exploratory analysis than does
              the desktop   metaphor.  Virtual reality technology not only offers a much more
                compelling visual focus than does a standard computer screen, but also a  
              more complete engagement of the investigator with the data world.  The   major
              thrust of this research is to combine scientific visualization,   exploratory
              data analysis and virtual reality into a new technology for   exploring data. 
              The plan is to create a data world made of analysis   modules that can be
              accessed directly simply by moving from one domain   within the data world to
              another domain via port als. As one moves   seamlessly from one domain to the
              next through a portal, the current data   set will be ported into the
              appropriate analysis or representation technique.   The data explorer will be
              able to interact with the data in the current   representation, either directly
              and/or by means of icons.  The main task of   this project will be to  create a
              total synthetic environment for the   exploratory analysis of data. The impact
              of this work should be wide   ranging.  The interactive focus on
              high-dimensional data analysis has   immediate impact on settings where large
              amounts of multiattribute data   are collected.  Settings such as biotechnology
              (e.g. human genome),   NASA's EOS-DIS and similar projects (e.g. monitoring
              global change),   manufacturing settings in which many parameters are monitored
              in both the   design and production processes, and materials science where
              optimization   involving a large number of  parameters of materials mixtures
              are examples   of data amenable to the type of analyses being facilitated with
              this research.   ***
