Title       : Modified Uridines, Contributors of Novel Chemistries to Functional RNA
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9631103

Award Number: 9631103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Agris agris@bchserver.bch.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wanda S. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631103  Agris   The project has two overall objectives. The first objective is
              to determine the chemistry/structure/ function relationships of selected
              modified uridines that have specific, yet unexplained, biological relevance. In
              the second objective, the chemical and structural contributions of modified
              nucleosides that explain these biological observations will be used to predict,
              design and produce RNA structures with certain characteristics.  The specific
              aims are to: (i). Determine the physicochemical properties of mnm5s2U34 and
              mcm5s2U34 that contribute to a biologically important and possibly atypical
              anticodon conformation in tRNALys. Preliminary data indicate that the modified
              uridines interact with N6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine-37 (t6A37) creating a
              novel, non-covalently produced loop even in as small a model system as a
              pentanucleotide. This unique structure within the anticodon domain may explain
              both lysyl- and/or glutamyl-tRNA synthetase recognition of cognate tRNAs and
              the observed behavior of tRNALys in codon reading. Using information from the
              study of tRNAs and model systems, a modified nucleoside-dependent interaction
              resulting in a novel covalently bonded, pseudo-circular RNA will be designed
              and synthesized. (ii). Determine if the metal-binding properties of modified
              uridines and adenosines contribute to tRNA's binding of Mg2+. tRNA's binding of
              Mg2+ is important to function. Amino acid modified uridines and adenosines bind
              metals and the localization of dihydrouridine (D) in Dloops and extra arms of
              tRNAs correlates with the appearance of the hydrophilic, metal-binding uridine,
              3- 3-(S)-amino-3-carboxypropyl -uridine (acp3U). Preliminary data indicate that
              D is almost 100% 2'-endo and that it induces 2'-endo pucker in 3'-adjacent
              nucleosides. The combination of the D and TpsC domains of tRNA produces a high
              affinity Mg+ binding site. However, there is too little information to predict
              which structures constitute high affinity Mg2+ binding sites in RNA, in
              general, and tR NAs in particular. An understanding of metal chelation by amino
              acid modified nucleosides and the influence of D on local structure will aid in
              understanding the functional significance of metal binding. As part of this
              specific aim, a modified nucleoside-dependent, high affinity metal binding RNA
              will be designed and synthesized based on knowledge of the chemical and
              structural contributions of the modified nucleosides in this study.  Modified
              uridines and t6A will be introduced into small (3-6mers) and large (17-19mers)
              naturally-occurring sequences using manual and automated chemical syntheses.
              Sufficient quantities of oligomers will be produced to confirm, using
              ultraviolet and circular dichroism spectroscopy, preliminary evidence of the
              effects of metal ions and solution conditions on chemistry and structure.
              Interactions with aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase will be assessed by analysis of
              enzyme activity and gel shifts. Functional interactions with the ribosome will
              be detected by inhibition of codon-dependent tRNA binding and chemical
              modification. Selected structures, analyzed by NMR, will be modeled with
              molecular dynamics refined, NMR derived distance and torsion angle constraints.
              Computer-assisted design will lead to the synthesis and analysis of novel
              modified uridine-containing, pseudo-circular and Mg2+ binding RNAs.  %%% 
              Encoded within DNA is genetic information for the production of proteins. 
              Transfer ribonucelic acids, tRNAs, decode this gentic information into the
              correct sequence of amino acids in each new protein.  tRNAs are composed of
              four nucleosides, adenosine, guanosine, cytidine anduridine, and minot amoounts
              of modifications of these four.  Modified uridines are of particular interest
              because they occur at positions in tRNA where they contribute to the correct
              reading and progress in translating the genetic code.  The project has two
              objectives.  Since modified uridines may affect tRNA structure, and thus tRNA's
              ability to decode, the decoding structures of tRNAs that have  the same
              modified uridin, but are responsible for bringing two different amino acids,
              glutamic acid and lysine, to the protein manufacturing unit, the ribosome, will
              be determined.  Modified uridines may bind metal ions, such as magnesium, and
              affect code-reading strucute and function.  The ability of glutamic acid and
              lysin tRNAs are responsible for unexplained biological observations in both
              bacterial and mammalian cells.  ***
