Title       : An Interdisciplinary Information Model for Biodiversity Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9631581

Award Number: 9631581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Allison allison@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley D. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,9198,BIOT,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The biological exploration of the earth has resulted in  enormous museum
              collections. Museum specimens and their  associated data document biodiversity
              and provide vital  infrastructure supporting the missions of systematics. 
              Access to collections data is crucial for the rapid progress  of systematics
              and ultimately for the assessment, analysis,  and management of biotic
              resources. U.S. collections are  held by more than 150 museums and botanical
              gardens, and the  highly partitioned distribution of collections data among 
              autonomously managed databases impedes their effective use.  The unmet need is
              for technology that enables users to  assemble data from distributed sources,
              while hiding the  complexity of data distribution, and the heterogeneity among 
              local systems and schemas.    The federated databases model architecture has
              repeatedly  been identified as appropriate for developing information 
              interoperability within the biological sciences.  Establishing a federation of
              collections databases imposes a  minimal set of requirements for cooperation
              within a  community. While technical solutions for enabling database 
              interoperability will be developed in the computer science  community, the
              required semantic data standards can only  result from efforts arising within
              and carried out by the  collections community.    This project is being
              conducted under the auspices of the  Association of Systematics Collections
              (ASC) Committee on  Computerization and Networking, and represents a 
              continuation of an effort on behalf of the systematics  community (museums and
              similar institutions) to develop an  information model for biological
              collections. The model will  encompass all disciplines, not just plants or
              single animal  groups, and all taxa, not just endangered or threatened 
              species. The goal is to develop a unifying, consensus-based, 
              implementation-independent (conceptual) schema for  collections information,
              down to the level of the atomic  data concept. This project does not propose to
               build a  collections database management system, but rather, to  establish a
              semantic data standard that will enable specimen  data to be combined across
              systematics disciplines to  address pressing resource management needs and to
              test  complex research questions.
