Title       : Computational Studies of Biological Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9631050

Award Number: 9631050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Jakobsson jake@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631050  Jakobsson  The general objectives of the proposed work are to improve
              our understanding of the physical principles underlying the structure and
              functional mechanisms of biological membranes.  The methodologies employed are
              computer simulations and statistical mechanical theory.  The overall strategy
              of our laboratory is to validate computational methods on relatively simple
              systems that are well characterized by experimental measurement.  Then we can
              extend the methods to using them to explore more complex systems of  biological
              interest.  In ion channels, the simplest and best characterized channel is the
              antibiotic channel-former gramicidin.  In membranes themselves, the simplest
              system is a homogenous lipid bilayer.  Our initial approach then has been to
              use gramicidin channels and pure homogenous lipid bilayers as test systems to
              develop efficient and accurate methodologies for the simulation of membrane
              proteins and membranes themselves.  We have now begun to use these
              methodologies to understand more complex systems of interest.  These more
              complex systems include the gramicidin channel-lipid complex, biologically
              important specific ion channels, such as voltage-gated sodium and potassium
              channels, and membranes interacting with signal peptides and organic molecules.
               An ultimate goal is to understand the complete interactions of large proteins
              with membranes and to understand the structure of heterogenous membranes, that
              include  proteins, different species of lipids, and other molecules such as
              cholesterol.  But the necessary intermediate goal, which we are pursuing in the
              next phase of our laboratory's work, is to understand the details of the
              interactions of different types of molecules in the membrane environment. 
              These details will provide the building blocks for the more comprehensive
              understanding that it our ultimate goal.  %%%  Membranes are the surfaces of
              the cells that make up the building blocks of all living things.  The forces
              that cause biological membranes to fo rm are much like the forces that cause
              the formation of soap bubbles, but membranes are much more chemically
              complicated than soap bubbles.  In fact, many physicists believe that
              biological membranes are the most complicated condensed matter (liquid or
              solid) in the known universe.  The basic building blocks of biological
              membranes are fatty molecules called phospholipids.  In addition to
              phospholipids, biological membranes have many proteins embedded in them that
              carry out important biological functions.  These functions include transporting
              materials between the inside of the cell and the outside, and sending and
              receiving chemical signals from other cells.  For many complicated systems,
              computer simulations can help in understanding how the systems work.  This is
              because the computer can show details that are very hard to measure directly. 
              The current project is to use computer simulations to see the details of how
              membranes form, and how they function.  In the computer simulations, we can see
              details of the interactions between the membrane phospholipid molecules and the
              surrounding water, details of the interactions between phospholipid molecules
              and proteins in the membrane, and details of the protein function.  This
              project looks especially at one type of membrane protein called an ion channel.
               Ion channels are proteins whose function is to move across the membrane
              charged atoms called ions.  One of the ion channels studied in this project is
              gramicidin, an antibiotic which kills cells of other organisms when it is
              inserted in their membranes, by making them too leaky to ions.  Other ion
              channels studied in this project are important in generating electrical signals
              in cells. The goal of the project is to contribute to a basic understanding of
              biological membrane function.  This is important both because of the inherent
              fascination of this extremely complicated type of matter and also because of
              the importance of understanding how biological function comes from the behavior
              of individua l molecules.  ***
