Title       : Social Comparison Proxy Model for Ability Self-Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9631808

Award Number: 9631808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry M. Suls jerry-suls@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A new theory -- the Proxy Model -- addresses the use of social comparison
              information in realistic appraisals of ability.  Previous social comparison
              theories have not provided a systematic explanation of how social comparison
              information is used to answer the question: Can I do X?  Recent empirical
              studies of social comparison have primarily attended to comparison processes
              motivated by self-enhancement or self-protection purposes, rather than
              self-assessment.  The present investigation returns to the question of how
              comparison information is used when people want or need accurate predictions of
              future performance.  The Proxy Model builds on insights from Heider (1958) and
              extends the related attributes hypothesis developed by Goethals and Darley
              (1977).  In essence, the Proxy Model contends that future performance in some
              domain can be predicted by comparing with a proxy who has already completed the
              task of interest.  An informative proxy is one who either (1) performed
              similarly, under conditions of maximal effort, to the comparer on a related,
              previous task or (2) shares related attributes with the comparer that allow him
              or her to infer that Proxy's maximal capability is similar to his or her own. 
              Eight experiments are proposed; all share a common paradigm in which
              participants predict performance after receiving various types of comparison
              information.  Incentive for accuracy is also manipulated, providing high vs.
              low motivation to make accurate estimates.  The proposed studies should provide
              evidence for the Proxy Model, and add to deeper understanding of the psychology
              of self-evaluation.  The proposed research both advances basic knowledge about
              social comparison theory and increases understanding of related phenomena for
              which social comparisons play a vital role, such as self-esteem, goal setting,
              and self-efficacy.  %%%  The proposed experiments are concerned with how people
              decide whether they are capable of achieving performance tasks involving
              physical or intellectual abilities.  For some time, social scientists have
              recognized that the comparisons people make with others influence, and
              partially determine, our performance predictions about what we can achieve
              ourselves.  The factors that determine which persons' performances affect us
              are not well understood.  The proposed studies are based on a new theory, the
              Proxy Model, which identifies the characteristics of other people which make
              them useful for making performance predictions and choices for one's self. 
              Eight experimental studies will examine basic elements and implications of the
              Proxy model.  The proposed research will not only contribute to our
              understanding of a classic phenomenon in social psychology, but also provide
              useful information in understanding how people choose academic and job
              performance goals, and how social factors contribute to the maintenance of
              motivation to learn and perform in school and work settings.  By specifying how
              social factors influence the predictions people make about their future
              academic and job performance, we also learn about the goals people are likely
              to strive for, and the reactions they should have when they meet or fail to
              meet their expectations, two topics of pressing importance for our society.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
