Title       : Numic Comparative Lexicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9631333

Award Number: 9631333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215744             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. McLaughlin jmclaughlin@english.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Numic Comparative Lexicon is a cooperative effort among four  specialists to
              build a computerized data base for the seven  languages of the Numic branch of
              the Uto-Aztecan language family  and to make a new and definitive
              reconstruction of Proto-Numic.  Bands speaking Numic languages lived in every
              western state in  the United States, except for Washington, and in early 
              postcontact times ranged as far north as Alberta and  Saskatchewan. One band
              also occupied a large area in the South  Plains. A complete reconstruction of
              these languages is therefore  an important link in the understanding of the
              prehistory of the  western United States. In addition to internal
              relationships, the  Numic languages also had extensive contact with neighboring
               groups speaking unrelated languages. A complete data base of the  Numic
              languages will aid in the identification of borrowings in  other languages and
              further clarify the history of the region  surrounding the Great Basin. The
              project brings together all  known lexicons and vocabularies using commercially
              available  software on a Power Macintosh 7100 computer. This makes possible 
              not only detailed cross-linguistic comparisons, but also  comprehensive
              historical analyses and wide-ranging dialect  studies. The data base is
              designed for efficiency and flexibility  of data handling. After gathering all
              the data in a single  location, a larger and more reliable body of
              reconstructed  Proto-Numic forms and cognate sets will be ready for 
              incorporation into Uto-Aztecan cognate sets than has heretofore  been
              available. The use of commercially available software with  compatible
              Macintosh and IBM versions will make the computerized  data base readily
              available to as broad a spectrum of scholars as  possible. In addition, the
              data base will be available for use to  supplement tribal literacy courses
              throughout the Numic area. The  number of speakers of Numic languages ranges
              from fewer than 10  (for Kawaiisu and Panamint) to more than 500 (for Southern 
              Paiute).  The vast majority of the speakers listed above are over  50 years of
              age. This state of affairs makes the compilation of a  thorough comparative
              dictionary of the Numic languages quite  pressing while there are still
              speakers who command their  languages and can provide information where data
              are lacking in  currently available sources.
