Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: "Group Infrastructure Grant for Stanford Statistics"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9631278

Award Number: 9631278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Iain M. Johnstone imj@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Art B. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingram Olkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Statistics at Stanford University will enhance its research
              and research training programs by developing the following, interconnected,
              aspects of its infrastructure:  A.  Graduate Student Support with
              Interdisciplinary Orientation.   Building on a base of faculty joint
              appointments in application areas and prior experience, Stanford will expand
              its training of interdisciplinary Ph.D.s.  by supporting four additional
              students. There is an extensive network of faculty contacts in relevant
              departments at Stanford, and support in the curricular structure for building
              competence in the application area while acquiring a thorough research training
              in statistics.  B.  Summer Mentoring programs for Women and Minority faculty
              and for Post-doctoral scholars.   The department will continue and expand a
              highly successful program to help launch the careers of pre-tenure women and
              minority faculty and post-doctoral scholars by involving them in the already
              active program of visitors, seminars and research at Stanford each summer.  C.
              Computer Infrastructure.  The department aims to provide a research computing
              environment for its faculty, students and visitors that enables maximum
              productivity. The department will acquire hardware and software on a staged
              basis in support of the core equipment already in place. Examples include X
              terminals to maximize student and visitor access to computing, and extra disk
              and memory to support increasingly memory intensive research, such as in
              statistical image processing.
