Title       : Sociopolitical Determinants of Perceived Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9631635

Award Number: 9631635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Numerous studies have found that the level of perceived risk is higher for women
              than for men, across a wide range of hazards.  Many explanations for this
              finding have been proposed, focusing upon biological factors, socialization,
              and differences in knowledge about risk.  A recent study by Flynn, Slovic, and
              Mertz found, however, that the difference between men and women was primarily
              due to white males, who exhibited very low levels of perceived risk.  Among
              persons who were not white, there was no difference between men and women. 
              Moreover, nonwhite persons held perceptions of risk that were similar to those
              of white women.  These results and other findings lead Flynn et al. to
              hypothesize that sociopolitical factors such as status, power, alienation, and
              trust play a major role in perception and acceptance of risks.  The present
              research tests this hypothesis.   The research plan includes the development of
              a survey instrument designed to assess sociopolitical constructs such as power,
              control, influence, alienation, social class, and trust, along with other
              variables predictive of risk perceptions (such as worldviews).  Demographic
              information pertaining to race, gender, age, occupation and income will also be
              obtained.  Respondents will be members of targeted groups varying on race,
              gender, and social status.  Standard multivariate analyses and structural
              modeling will be used to determine the extent to which the effects of race and
              gender on risk perception can be explained by the sociopolitical constructs
              measured in the survey.   Finding that sociopolitical factors play a major role
              in determining perception and acceptance of societal risk would have enormous
              implications for risk communication and risk management.  On the communication
              side, it would indicate why traditional approaches based on translating and
              disseminating technical information have had so little success.   No form of
              message `framing` is likely to overcome alienation and distrust.   On the
              management side, a number of recent proposals have called for better technical
              risk assessment and expert oversight as the key to conflict reduction and
              better risk management.  However, conflicts due to incompatible values,
              pervasive distrust, alienation, and other social and political factors would be
              unlikely to be reduced by technical analysis.  Trying to address such risk
              controversies with more science, in fact, would be likely to exacerbate
              conflict.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
