Title       : Serotonin Regulation of Spawning and Oocyte Maturation in Zebra Mussels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9631008

Award Number: 9631008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Ram jeffram@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631008  Ram    The zebra mussel is a bivalve that was recently introduced
              accidentally into North America. It has been considered a biological pest and
              has drastic environmental impacts on water and power utilities and also an
              enormous negative impact on biodiversity, particularly with respect to native
              bivalves. However, because of its prolific reproductive capabilities (which are
              part of the reason it is a problem), the zebra mussel has also proven to be a
              highly suitable organism for studying the regulation of reproductive behavior.
              Many of the basic mechanisms regulating maturation of eggs prior to
              fertilization in bivalves are similar to those in our own bodies, yet these
              mechanisms are only now beginning to be understood at the molecular level. This
              project will investigate the mechanisms by which the neurochemical serotonin (a
              chemical also found in human nervous systems) regulates reproductive behavior
              and oocyte maturation.    The specific aims of the project will be to determine
              the structure(s) of serotonin receptors in zebra mussels and to begin
              characterizing their coupling to cellular mechanisms through G-proteins. Zebra
              mussel serotonin receptors will be cloned and sequenced; their responses to
              serotonin and related drugs will be characterized; and their location will be
              determined. Binding and responses of cloned receptors to serotonin will be
              compared to effects of serotonin and related compounds on reproductive behavior
              of the mussels.    This project will have significance for understanding
              reproductive mechanisms, for understanding serotonin mechanisms in general,
              and, in the long run, it may also have an impact on investigations of new ways
              to control zebra mussels.
