Title       : Thermal Transport in Copper and Manganese Oxides: Lattice Interactions and the
               Superconducting and Magnetic Phase Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9631236

Award Number: 9631236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua L. Cohn cohn@phyvax.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9631236  Cohn
                 This research involves systematic experimental studies of lattice  and 
              electronic  transport in doped transition  metal  oxides  of  perovskite-like 
              structure.  The goal  of  these  studies  is  to  elucidate and model the role
              of lattice vibrations in determining  the   superconducting  and  magnetic 
              phase  behavior  in   these  materials,  particularly  in  the copper  and 
              manganese  oxides.  Thermal  conductivity and thermopower will be employed as 
              probes  of  interactions  between the lattice and  the  charge  and  spin 
              degrees  of  freedom.  The evolution of these  interactions  with 
              charge-carrier  doping and their dependence  on  temperature  and  magnetic 
              field  are  a central focus of this research.  Analogue  systems  with  similar
               crystal structure,  but  with  transition  metals  other  than copper and
              manganese, have been  selected  as  "controls"  in these studies. These include
              ruthenium and  nickel  oxide  compounds  for which the strength of
              electron-lattice  and  electron-electron interactions appear to be very
              different  %%%    This  research focuses on the physics of electronic  and 
              thermal  conduction in transition metal oxides, a broad class of materials 
              that  have attracted considerable attention in recent years  both  for  the 
              novel physics their properties manifest, and for  their  potential  use in
              future technologies. Of particular interest  in  this study are the
              interactions which control the superconducting  and  magnetic  phase 
              transitions in  the  copper  and  manganese  oxides, respectively.  These
              transitions vary with charge-carrier  concentration in systematic ways within
              each class of  materials.  Signatures  of  the mechanisms underlying these 
              phase  behaviors  will be sought in the temperature and magnetic field
              dependencies  of  the  thermal transport properties, where some anomalies  have
               already been identified.  ***
