Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG:Infrastructure Needs for Preparing Students for the
               Industrial and Business Workforce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9631347

Award Number: 9631347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1017497            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fadil Santosa santosa@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Avner Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Lowengrub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Bernardo Cockburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9631347  In response to the shrinking academic job market for
              mathematicians, the School of Mathematics at the University of Minnesota has
              developed new educational programs to train mathematics students for
              nonacademic positions and an active industrial research program to provide
              mathematics faculty with new research opportunities.  The Minnesota Center for
              Industrial Mathematics (MCIM) and the well-established faculty in Numerical
              Analysis propose to join forces to enhance further these existing educational
              and research activities. The MCIM, established in 1993, is devoted to
              conducting research in partnership with industry and to providing career
              training and opportunities for students seeking employment in business,
              industry and government laboratories. The industrial/business student
              internship is the cornerstone of this program.  The program in Numerical
              Analysis and Scientific Computing is devoted to conducting multi-disciplinary
              research primarily with university based scientists.  The educational program
              serves to train mathematics students for both academic and industrial
              employment as well as to provide service training for many engineering
              students.  Partnership with Industry is being developed through the MCIM. In
              fact, the two groups, MCIM and Numerical Analysis, have an overlapping
              membership.  A common goal of these groups is to improve the quality of
              education, research and career opportunities for students bound for the
              industrial, business and scientific workplace.  This award will expand and
              strengthen these educational and research programs through support for graduate
              students, an experimental computing laboratory and career development services.
               This award is consistent with the GOALI activity, in that the funding awarded
              is centered on the activity of graduate students who will be in real industrial
              settings.
