Title       : Mechanism of Protein Retention in the Golgi Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9631129

Award Number: 9631129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Gerard Waters gwaters@molbiol.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-31129  Waters     The secretory pathway of eukaryotic cells consists of a set
              of membrane-bounded compartments that are involved in delivery of newly
              synthesized proteins to their final destinations. The Golgi apparatus is
              involved in the post-translational modification and sorting of proteins that
              pass through it. The Golgi consists of several topologically distinct
              cisternae, each contains a unique set of resident proteins. These proteins
              resist dispersion by the large flux of vesicular traffic to and from the Golgi
              apparatus. The maintenance of the Golgi integrity is an essential process, yet
              it is poorly understood. Do newly synthesized Golgi proteins simply cease their
              forward movement upon reaching the correct cisternae, or do they localized by a
              more dynamic mechanism involving retrieval from distal compartments?   The goal
              of this proposal is to gain insights into Golgi retention mechanisms. The
              budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is used as a model system since it is
              amenable to biochemical, cell biological, and genetic analyses. The Golgi
              mannosyltransferase, Och1p, will serve as the model protein because the
              inability to retain Och1p in the Golgi is readily detectable by both
              biochemical and genetic techniques. Fusion proteins of Och1p fused to the
              reporter protein invertase have been used in initial studies. Inclusion of a
              cleavage site specific for a late Golgi endoprotease, Kex2p, in some of the
              fusion proteins, allows monitoring of the release of the invertase moiety if
              the fusion protein reaches the distal compartments of the Golgi. Initial
              results from these studies imply that newly synthesized Och1p is not retained
              efficiently on its first passage through the Golgi apparatus, that is, Och1p
              moves to distal compartments and is retrieved. Retention in the Golgi apparatus
              is not a static process, but is dynamic, involving, apparently, both
              anterograde and retrograde vesicular transport.    The mechanism of this
              process will be further investigated by identifying components o f the cellular
              machinery that retains Och1p and mediates its retrieval from distal
              compartments; by determining if Och1p recycles through the ER and the
              endosomes, as well as the Golgi, by using mutants that can "trap" recycling
              Och1p in the ER or divert it from the endosomes to the plasma membrane; and by
              biochemically characterizing the statically-retained form of Och1p. Known
              mutants of the retrograde vesicular traffic will be examined to study their
              impact on the recycling of Och1p through the Golgi. New components of the
              retrograde transport apparatus will be identified by selecting mutants
              defective in recovering Och1p from distal compartments. These mutants will be
              phenotypically characterized and the gene will be examined at the molecular
              level.   Studying protein retention in the Golgi of S. cerevisiae will be
              relevant to Golgi retention processes in mammalian cells as well as to the
              maintenance of other organelles. Since there exist numerous examples of
              evolutionary conservation of biological processes among various species, these
              studies will help reveal how human cells maintain compartmentalization that is
              so critical to cell viability.  %%%    The secretory pathway of eukaryotic
              cells consists of a set of membrane-bounded compartments that are involved in
              delivery of newly synthesized proteins to their final destinations. The Golgi
              apparatus is involved in the post-translational modification and sorting of
              proteins that pass through it. The Golgi consists of several topologically
              distinct cisternae, each contains a unique set of resident proteins. These
              proteins resist dispersion by the large flux of vesicular traffic to and from
              the Golgi apparatus. The maintenance of the Golgi integrity is an essential
              process, yet it is poorly understood. Do newly synthesized Golgi proteins
              simply cease their forward movement upon reaching the correct cisternae, or do
              they localized by a more dynamic mechanism involving retrieval from distal
              compartments? The goal of this proposal is to gain insi ghts into Golgi
              retention mechanisms. Studying protein retention in the Golgi of S. cerevisiae
              will be relevant to Golgi retention processes in mammalian cells as well as to
              the maintenance of other organelles. Since there exist numerous examples of
              evolutionary conservation of biological processes among various species, these
              studies will help reveal how human cells maintain compartmentalization that is
              so critical to cell viability.  ***
