Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Developing a Bispectral-Based Test for Gaussianity and
               Linearity of a Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9631326

Award Number: 9631326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane L. Harvill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Correct model specification is arguably the most critical  aspect of reliable
              time series analysis.  In the past decade,  significant advances have been made
              so it is now possible to  analyze a time series as non-gaussian or non-linear. 
              Therefore,  it is desirable to have reliable tests for determining linearity 
              or non-linearity and to have comprehensive tools for performing  proper
              analysis.    An initial investigation of existing bispectral-based tests  for
              gaussianity and linearity of a time series revealed many  areas for study. 
              Examinations of different functions of the  bispectrum and normalized
              bispectrum for various types of  non-linearity will be conducted.  A second
              area of investigation  is the development of a test statistic that will not
              result in  vastly different values when different smoothing procedures are 
              used in estimating spectral quantities.  It is the hope of the  principal
              investigator that after such examinations are  conducted, a test statistic will
              be developed that not only  reliably tests for linearity, but will aid in
              diagnosing  the type of non-linearity when rejecting the null hypothesis.    A
              second goal of this research is to continue to develop a  time series analysis
              package in S-Plus which will include devices  for analyzing non-linear time
              series.  The package will have  functions that may be used for linear and
              non-linear time series  analysis.  Since the package is in S-Plus, graphical
              examination  of relevant time series quantities is a "built-in feature."  
              Documentation will also be developed.  When complete, the  package, along with
              documentation, will be submitted to statlib  for public use.
