Title       : Carotenoid Cyclase Enzymes from Arabidopsis thaliana: Structure, Function, and
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9631257

Award Number: 9631257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis X. Cunningham fc18@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Gantt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631257  Cunningham   The cyclization of lycopene is a key branch point in the
              pathway carotenoid biosynthesis.  Two types of cyclic end groups are commonly
              found in higher plant carotenoids:  the ( and ( cyclase enzymes are encoded by
              homologous genes in Arabidopsis thaliana, and both enzymes us the linear,
              symmetrical lycopene as a substrate.  However, the ( cyclase adds only one ring
              while the ( cyclase introduces a ring at both ends of the molecule.  The
              objectives of this research are to examine and compare substrate utilization
              and product formation by the ( and ( cyclases of A. thaliana, to identify
              functional regions and amino acid residues within these two enzymes, and to
              ascertain whether cyclase-cyclase interactions play a role in enzyme function. 
               Carotenoids with cyclic end groups are essential components of the
              photosynthetic membranes in all plants, algae and cyanobacteria.  These
              lipid-soluble compounds protect against photooxidation, harvest light for
              photosynthesis, and dissipate excess light energy absorbed by the antenna
              pigments.  The accumulation of carotenoid pigments in the photosynthetic
              membranes is closely coordinated with the biosynthesis and assembly of the
              photosynthetic apparatus.  The regulatory mechanisms that serve to coordinated
              these processes are obscure.  The classical biochemical approaches have been of
              limited value in the study of the membrane-associated enzymes of the carotenoid
              pathway, therefore the approach to be taken is largely a genetic one.  The
              results of this research will provide valuable information on the operation and
              control of the essential plant pathway of carotenoid biosynthesis, and can
              provide insights on the functioning and regulation of other metabolic pathways
              that involve membrane-associated multienzyme complexes.
