Title       : Collaborative Research: (ESH) Hydrologically Coupled Estimates of Decadel to
               Millennial Climate Variability During the Holocene and Late Pleistocene:
               Estancia Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9631538

Award Number: 9631538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Y. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9631538  Anderson      A high-resolution record of climate changes,
              reconstructed from lake sediments and shoreline features in Estancia Basin,
              central New Mexico, has documented a land-based record of large and abrupt
              shifts in climate during the latest Pleistocene.  Nine major fluctuations in
              lake level between ~24 and ~12 kyr correspond, within errors of dating, to
              major isotopic shifts between stadial and interstadial conditions in Greenland
              ice cores.  Four of the lowstands coincide with changes in ocean circulation
              and zones of anoxic sediment in Santa Barbara Basin, at the same latitude. 
              Estancia Basin also contains a record of changes in hydrologic balance for
              conditions of extreme, dry climate in the mid-Holocene.    Previously funded
              research is providing the temporal, spatial, compositional, and hydrochemical
              data and framework needed for coupling hydrologic responses to Estancia Basin
              to changes in atmospheric parameters through the application of physically
              based, landscape-scale hydrologic models.  This project will obtain the
              temporal, spatial, and geomorphic data needed to define the mid-Holocene
              hydrologic response and subsequent changes in hydrologic meteorological system
              will be employed in order to modify and apply existing hydrologic models.    We
              propose to use the highly responsive hydrologic setting and a tested physically
              based model to link the extreme changes in climate recorded in Estancia Basin
              with changes in atmospheric conditions and climatic variables.  Output from
              high-resolution atmospheric models will be used as input to the hydrologic
              models in simulations of key climate events.  Hydrologic simulations for key
              climatic events, including stadials, interstadials, and mid- to late Holocene
              climate changes will be reconciled with output from atmospheric models, with
              the long-term objective of testing hypotheses for explaining abrupt, decade- to
              millenium-scale changes in climate.   ??
