Title       : Dissertation Research: Radiation, Evolution, and Interaction of Two Sulawesi
               Macaque Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9631767

Award Number: 9631767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don J. Melnick djm7@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Speciation, a process whereby a new evolutionarily independent entity arises,
              underlies much of the biological diversity seen today. For this reason, it has
              been the focus of much theoretical work leading to many models of how new
              species arise and many, often controversial  definitions of what a species is. 
              Despite this work, few empirical studies of primates have shed light on the
              dynamics of speciation.  The researchers propose to examine in detail two
              putative species of cercopithecine monkey and their hybrids, in order to gain a
              clearer understanding of the genetic consequences of geographic separation and
              subsequent intergradation.  The two species are members of the macaque complex,
              Macaca maurus and M. tonkeana, on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi.  Genetic
              material will be collected from several hundred individuals within the range of
              each species and across the intervening hybrid zone.  Using automated DNA
              sequencing technology, the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes will be surveyed
              for informative markers that reveal the direction and rate of gene flow across
              the hybrid zone, the relative contribution of  males and females of each
              species to this hybridization process, and the genetic effects of hybridization
              on the long term evolutionary integrity of each species. Female contributions
              will be tracked using mtDNA markers, while male mediated gene flow will be
              reconstructed using nDNA microsatellites.  This study will shed light on the
              process of species formation among higher primates, factors leading to its
              subsequent breakdown, and possibly why there are so many species of macaque
              monkeys on Sulawesi.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
