Title       : Reconstructing the Past 1000 Years of Climate Variability in Equatorial East
               Africa with Decade-Scale Resolution, from the Sediment Record of a Submerged
               Crater Basin (ESH)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9631222

Award Number: 9631222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert E. Wright hew@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dirk Verschuren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen R. Laird  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9631364  H. Wright    The proposed research will investigate the nature and
              timing of climatic transitions in the Northern Rocky Mountains while assessing
              the reliability of small lakes in mountainous regions to record regional
              climate.  The study is aimed at refining the scope and chronology of climatic
              events described in earlier glacial and pollen studies by identifying annual to
              century-scale variations that were previously too fine to be described.  To do
              so, the project will use a high-resolution, multi-proxy approach, with emphasis
              on two innovative techniques for the region:  stable-isotopic composition of
              bio-induced carbonates and dating with varved sediment.  The research strategy
              includes calibrating proxy data from single varves to the instrumental climate
              record, interpreting and dating short-term climatic variations for the last
              12,000 years, producing a detailed time series to analyze frequencies of
              change, and comparing a small varved site (Marl Lake) with a larger lake
              (Flathead) to assess the ability of small lakes in complex climatic regimes to
              record a regional signal.    Climatic interpretations from Marl Lake will rely
              principally on the stable-isotopic composition of authigenic carbonates,
              changes in diatom assemblages associated with salinity changes, sediment
              characteristics, and trace-elements of ostracodes.  A pollen profile will be
              constructed for correlation with regional vegetation studies.  Climatic
              interpretations from the larger Flathead Lake will rely on isotopic- and
              lake-level fluctuations.  The combined sediment-core and seismic records will
              be used to infer the timing and duration of drought.  Synthesis of
              effective-moisture estimates and drought frequency for the two lakes will be
              beneficial in the assessment of long-term water yield of major rivers, such as 
              the Columbia, which are critical sources of irrigation.  A secondary benefit
              from the seismic survey of Flathead Lake is the opportunity to reconstruct the
              history of Glacial Lake Missoula in the Mi ssion Valley region.  The results
              will provide guidelines regarding the regional accuracy of data collected from
              small basins and can be used to test the fidelity of a new generation of
              climate models.  ??
