Title       : Neural Receptors as a Problem in Surface Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9631969

Award Number: 9631969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Hicks hicksj@gusun.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631969  Hicks  Advanced techniques in neuroscience and spectroscopy will be
              utilized to study the n-methyl d-aspartate (NMDA) neuronal receptor.  This
              receptor is involved in the long-term potentiation, memory and developmental
              structuring; its central role in long-term changes in the brain make its study
              of  particular value.  It binds several agonists including NMDA, glutamate and
              the drug PCP.  The receptor is known to be a ligand-gated ion channel, and to
              consist of two protein subunits, both of which have been cloned.  The NR1
              subunit has a predicted mass of 103 kDa, and is thought to consist of a large
              extracellular N-terminus, three trans-membrane-spanning domains, a hairpin
              domain within the membrane and an intracellular carboxy terminus.  The exact
              structure of the protein and the agonist binding sites are not yet known.  The
              objectives of this proposal are to use site-directed mutagenesis to identify
              residues that control glutamate and PCP binding.  Mutationally altered
              receptors will be expressed in Xenopus oocytes and analyzed functionally by the
              two electrode voltage clamp technique.  In addition, surface plasmon resonance
              spectroscopy will be used to study the binding of glutamate, PCP and PCP
              analogs to the mutant receptors, providing additional kinetic information about
              adsorption and desorption processes.  The long term goal is to design
              experiments utilizing spectroscopic laser methods that will address questions
              regarding the structures of native and mutant receptors and bound
              ligand/receptor complexes.  Previously, the PI has developed sensitive methods
              for measuring circular-dichroism spectra at interfaces (SHG-CD).  Circular
              dichroism spectroscopy is a well known method for the analysis of protein
              secondary structures; the laser method SHG-CD has the added advantage of
              surface sensitivity.  The PI proposes to spend one year working with Dr.
              Suzanne Zukin, Professor, and Dr. Michael Bennett, Professor and Chair, in the
              Department of Neuroscience at the Albert Einstein Colle ge of Medicine.  The PI
              is a physical chemist who has 12 years of experience developing laser methods
              that probe molecular interfaces in situ.  She has studied small molecule
              surface chemistry and the adsorption of polypeptides at crystalline surfaces. 
              Dr. Zukin has been actively engaged in research in the area of neuroreceptors
              for twenty years, focusing on the molecular biology and physiology of the
              excitatory amino acid and opiate receptor systems of the central nervous
              system.  Dr. Bennett's work in neuroscience research spans 40 years, with
              current interests in ligand-gated channels mediating excitatory postsynaptic
              potentials, studies using electrophysiological methods.  The sabbatical
              research will allow the PI to learn manipulation of cloned genes in, handling
              and microelectrophysiological measurement of Xenopus oocytes, cells which are
              large and possibly amendable for direct laser study.  Specific techniques here
              include engineering of mutant receptor constructs, expression and functional
              analysis of receptors by electrical recording of cells and by surface plasmon
              resonance spectroscopy.  %%%  The passing of information from one brain cell to
              the next allows for all of brain activity, such as a memory, thought and
              responses to our senses like vision, hearing, feeling, etc.  This transmission
              of information is accomplished by the transport of molecules called
              neurotransmitters from one cell surface to the next.  A cell's surface is
              composed of fatty acids (lipids) and many other components including proteins
              called receptors.  Receptors receive the incoming neurotransmitter molecules in
              what is usually envisioned as a "lock and key" mechanism.  That is, the shape
              of the neurotransmitter allows it (the key) to "fit" into the receptor (the
              lock).  The details of the geometry and the forces around the lock and the key
              hold the secret of the transmission of signals in the brain.  Drug design for
              brain disorders relies heavily on this knowledge.  Dr. Hicks will apply
              advanced laser methods  to study one particular neural receptor called the NMDA
              receptor, which is responsible for memory and long-term changes in the brain. 
              The laser based methods (second harmonic generation (SHG) and surface plasmon
              resonance (SPR) spectroscopy) will allow details of the transmitter/receptor
              interaction to be measured.  These laser methods have proven to be surface
              sensitive, but are new in the field of biophysics.  For example, SHG has not
              yet been applied  to a working cell membrane.  This award supports a novel
              interdisciplinary approach to an important issue in brain chemistry.  ***
