Title       : Regulation of Calcium Entry in Cerebral Arteries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9631416

Award Number: 9631416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Nelson mark.nelson@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Patlak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9631416  Nelson    Calcium ions within cells regulate muscle contraction,
              cell motility, cell proliferation and growth, and the secretion of hormones. 
              The ("smooth") muscle cells that line the hollow organs of the body (e.g. blood
              vessels, airways, stomach, colon, bladder, uterus) contract when intracellular
              calcium raises, and relax when calcium falls.  A decrease in the calcium within
              smooth muscle cells that comprise the wall of the arteries in the brain would
              lead to a dilation of the blood vessel, and increase in blood flow in the
              brain.  The level of calcium in smooth muscle cells in arteries in the brain is
              regulated by the amount of calcium that enters these cells through specialized
              proteins in the cell membrane, called voltage-dependent calcium channels. 
              Pharmacological agents such as the "calcium channel blockers" inhibit calcium
              entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels, and thus ultimately lead to
              vasodilation.  One focus of Dr. Nelson's project is to understand how the
              cell's membrane potential (or "voltage") controls voltage-dependent calcium
              channels in smooth muscle cells from small brain arteries, under physiological
              conditions.  The cell's membrane potential is key regulator of calcium entry,
              and thus exerts a profound control over blood vessel diameter.  Dr. Nelson has
              recently discovered the calcium within these muscle cells is not uniform, and
              that rapid and high increases in intracellular calcium ("Calcium sparks") occur
              within about 1% of the cell's volume.  These calcium sparks arise from the
              release of calcium through specialized proteins ("ryanodine-sensitive  calcium
              release channel") in the membranes of compartments ("sarcoplasmic reticulum")
              within the cell.  These calcium sparks appear to regulate indirectly calcium
              entry through alterations in the cell's membrane potential.   Another goal of
              the project is to understand how voltage dependent calcium channels in the
              surface membrane regulate calcium sparks, and how calcium sparks in turn
              regulate calci um entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels. This work
              suggests a new paradigm for understanding the control of calcium entry in
              smooth muscle cells of arteries.  Specifically, calcium entry through
              voltage-dependent calcium channels increases average calcium throughout a
              smooth muscle cell which leads to muscle contraction, and calcium entry also
              stimulates local increases in calcium ("calcium sparks"), which, through the
              membrane potential, acts as a negative feedback mechanism to decrease calcium
              entry.  It would be the balance of these processes that would determine calcium
              entry, and ultimately blood vessel  diameter.  Dr. Nelson expects that these
              results would find parallels in other types of smooth muscle cells, in motile
              cells and in secretory cells, and should provide new insights in the control 
              of  cell function.
