Title       : Protonation and Conformational Control of Photosynthetic Reaction Center
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9631063

Award Number: 9631063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wraight cwraight@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631063  Wraight  The photosynthetic reaction center (RC) provides an almost 
              ideal system for studying the roles of internal  electrostatics and
              conformational mobility in protein  function, and this project focusses on two
              important topics:  (1) intra-protein proton transfer, which plays a crucial 
              role in almost all catalysis, and (2) conformational  relaxations in response
              to internal charge generation and  displacement, also of universal importance 
              in catalytic  function.  Specific experiments are proposed for RCs from  Rb.
              sphaeroides and Rps. viridis, both of which have known  atomic structures. (i)
              Site-specific mutagenesis of selected  residues in the L, M and H subunits of
              the bacterial RC,  chosen to probe their role in proton transfer coupled to the
               reduction of QA and QB.  Charge movements will be monitored  by electrochromic
              effects on the RC pigments, by direct  electrical measurements on membrane
              systems, and by infra-  red spectroscopy (ii) Studies of osmotic pressure and 
              solvent isotope effects to probe the role of internal waters  as a reservoir of
              protons inside the protein, and of bulk  water in the exchange of quinone and
              quinol at the QB site.  Both effects will be assayed by measurements of
              multiple  turnovers of the RC, driven at high light intensity, to  reveal
              limiting steps in the steady-state turnover.  (iii)  Studies of P+  QA - charge
              recombination as a function of  temperature and pre-illumination, using the
              charge  recombination kinetics as an assay of the energentics, and  spectral
              responses of the pigments as an assay of the  internal electric field.  The
              research will probe the nature  of the important conformation events by
              controlling the RC  ground state through the ionic milieu and the pH, and by 
              using selected mutants.  This work will be extented to P+ QB-  recombination,
              over the temperature range that it works.  %%%  All aspects of protein
              structure and function depend on the  myriad of electrostatic interactions
              between atoms and  groups inside the  molecule.  Almost all aspects of protein 
              function require movement of the molecule, at all levels of  organization from
              individual atoms to coordinated motions of  sections of the macromolecule. 
              Such movements respond to  and generate electrostatic effects, so that the two
              are  intimately entwined., have been increasingly recognized in  recent years. 
              Although of very general importance,  experimental systems suitable for
              studying these processes  are extremely limited and, especially with respect to
               dynamic events, they are essentially restricted to light  activated protein
              reactions.  This project utilizes the  photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from
              a bacterium as an  ideal model system for studying these fundamentally 
              important processes.  The light-driven reaction of the RC  generates charge
              movements inside the protein, which  initiate molecular motions (conformational
              relaxations)  which then modify the subsequent behavior of the charges.  These
              events can be disentangled by selective modification  of the structure of the
              RC by mutagenesis, and by  restricting the time-evolution of the RC states by
              cooling  to low temperatures.  Conformational motions are also  necessary to
              allow small molecules in and out of a protein,  as part of the protein's
              functional cycle.  This, too, will  be studied in terms of how protons pass
              through the protein  to reach their site of reaction,  how water inside the 
              protein is involved in this, and how water comes and goes as  other molecules
              enter  and leave their active sites.  ***
