Title       : Electronic Facilitation of Functional Recovery Following CNS Trauma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9631560

Award Number: 9631560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Borgens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Borgens  9631560  Spinal cord injuries are devastating to those that survive 
              them, producing lifelong losses in important bodily  functions.  The loss of
              function is in part due to a break  in the nerve fibers from the spinal cord to
              the brain, and  those that carry impulses from the brain to various parts of 
              the body.  One possible means to restore this "two-way"  impulse conduction is
              to induce and guide the regeneration  of nerve fibers around or through the
              area of injury.  Such  regeneration does not normally happen in mammals, but
              occurs  naturally in other vertebrates, usually leading to  functional recovery
              after spinal cord injury.    A novel means to accomplish this task is to impose
              a weak  voltage across the injury site.  This approach arises from  very clear
              evidence that  the application of this electrical  field can both initiate and
              direct the growth of fibers;  this has been shown in studies of nerve cells
              grown in  culture, as well as in various "whole animal" studies (for  example
              in the spinal cord of primitive fish and guinea  pigs).  Nerve processes grow
              towards the negative pole, and  degenerate away from the positive pole of the
              applied  voltage.  Weak applied voltages may also induce a  predictable
              orientation of other cells important to the  injury process such as astrocytes,
              that form scar tissue in  the spinal cord, and macrophages, which also play a 
              prominent role in acute injury.  To be clinically useful, an  applied voltage
              must influence nerve processes projecting in  both directions within the spinal
              cord.  Since growth  response towards the negative pole are immediate, and 
              degenerative responses occurring at the positive pole occur  much later, the
              direction of the applied voltage can be  reversed every 15 to 30 minutes to
              produce nerve growth in  both directions.  This is called oscillating field 
              stimulation (OFS).  OFS has produced significant levels of  functional recovery
              in naturally injured paraplegic dogs in  veterinary clinical trials.  An
              implantab le OFS unit is now  in development for the first trial in human
              patients;  however, before human clinical trials may begin, more  information
              must be gathered on the effects of OFS in other  mammals.  Up to this point,
              experiments involving laboratory  rats and guinea pigs have been limited due to
              the large size  of the prototype OFS device.  In this study, the  investigators
              will use a recently developed miniaturized OFS  device, combined with a
              hand-held sensor to test the  function of the unit from outside the body, to
              determine the  mechanisms of action, target cells and critical aspects of  this
              new technology.
