Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Nonlinear Modeling of Spatially Correlated Data:
               Preliminary Investigations"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9631877

Award Number: 9631877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver hughesol@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver  North Carolina State University    Data collection
              in the semiconductor industry is such that  repeated measurements --- obtained
              over a spatial grid on a  single wafer --- are the norm, not the exception. 
              Following this  proposed planning period, the projected research goal is the 
              development of methodological advances for nonlinear modeling of  spatially
              correlated data with nonstationary, nonnormal errors.   This work is well
              motivated by two real-life applications, which  both indicate immediate need
              for these advances.    A major result of research on the analysis of repeated 
              measurements  is the discovery that careful representation  of the correlation
              structure is not necessary, provided the  number of experimental units far
              exceeds the number of repeated  measurements.  The cost of wafers in the
              semiconductor industry,  however, prohibits collection of data for very many
              wafers.   Hence, careful representation of the possibly nonstationary error 
              covariance structure must be undertaken.  This constitutes the  first of the
              planning activities.  Specific modeling and  estimation techniques must also be
              investigated in light of the  (new) correlation structures.  These constitute
              additional  planning activities.  Realistic modeling of these semiconductor 
              processes require relaxing the assumption of normality, and a  willingness to
              consider nonlinear models.  Planning activities  include preliminary
              investigations of the complications arising  from these generalities.  The
              final activity is the development  of the regular NSF proposal.
