Title       : Characterization of Metargidin, A Cellular Disintegrin with an RGD Integrin
               Binding Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9631601

Award Number: 9631601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl P. Blobel c-blobel@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631601  Blobel     The proposed studies aimed at understanding the role of the
              membrane-anchored cellular disintegrin protein metargidin
              (metalloprotease-RGD-disintegrin), which contains the integrin binding sequence
              RGD in its disintegrin domain, in cell-cell and cell-matrix intera6tions. 
              Cellular disintegrins are a family of cellular proteins that are closely
              related to soluble snake venom integrin ligands and metalloproteases. 
              Metargidin is the first known cellular disintegrin protein to contain the RGD
              sequence in a position analogous to RDG-containing snake venom disintegrins. 
              Since snake venom disintegrins are high affinity integrin ligands, the presence
              of the RGD sequence in metargidin strongly suggests that it is also an integrin
              ligand.  Since most known cellular disintegrins contain a membrane anchor, they
              may function as membrane anchored integrin ligands and thus mediate important
              cell-cell interactions.  The cellular disintegrin metargidin also contains a
              metalloprotease domain, and is therefore likely to have an additional role as a
              protease.  This project focuses on the biochemical characterization of the
              disintegrin domain and the metalloprotease domain of metargidin.  There are two
              specific aims.  The first is to determine whether the metargidin disintegrin
              domain binds integrins.  This will be done using affinity purified metargidin,
              and metargidin protein domains expressed in COS-7 cells.  As sources of RGD
              binding integrins, platelets and cell lines with known integrin receptors will
              be employed.  The second aim is to determine whether the metalloprotease domain
              is functional.  Again, purified metargidin and expressed domains will be used
              in protease assays.  If the protease is active, the potential regulatory
              function of the pro-domain through a cysteine switch mechanism will be
              investigated by site directed mutagenesis.  It is anticipated that the proposed
              studies will shed light on the structure and function of this intriguing
              protein, will serve as a model for the st udy of other cellular disintegrins,
              and will contribute to the understanding of how members of this new protein
              family contribute to cell-cell interactions.  ***
