Title       : Constructing and Manipulating Presentations in Multmedia Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9631214

Award Number: 9631214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu ozsoy@ces.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gultekin Ozsoyoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multimedia presentation refers to the concurrent presentation of multimedia data
              using monitors for text, video or still images, and speakers for audio. Each
              presentation contains multimedia segments retrieved from a database and is
              constructed and played out by a  presentation manager software.      For novice
              users of multimedia databases, general-purpose techniques and methodologies are
              developed for automated assembly of semantically coherent presentations from
              multimedia databases. These techniques are extended into automated assembly of
              presentations from electronic books and electronic classroom lectures and
              notes.   For intermediate users, a graphical interface is developed for
              constructing concurrent presentations. Such an interface (i) provides control
              on the number and contents of concurrent presentation streams, (ii) has the
              ability to specify dynamic (i.e., playout-time)  changes in a presentation
              order, and (iii) allows playout-time communication and synchronization among
              multiple concurrent presentation streams.  For advanced users, graph-based
              query and update languages for advanced users, tailored specifically for
              retrieving and manipulating presentation objects, are developed.  A multimedia
              database system is developed, populated, and experimentally evaluated. The
              system has an Automated-Presentation-Assembler, a graphical interface for
              presentation manipulation, and a presentation query and manipulation language.
              The system will contribute to our understanding of software tools for using
              digital libraries.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
