Title       : Cleavage in Xenopus Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9631765

Award Number: 9631765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. Danilchik danilchi@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Danilchik  96-31765      Fertilized eggs become multicellular through a
              series of rapid, synchronous cell divisions, or cleavages, that serve to
              populate the egg's volume with zygotic nuclei, clonally segregate the egg's
              developmental potential, and reduce daughter cells' volume to that of somatic
              cells. In animal cells, cleavage furrowing is generally recognized to be a
              microfilament-dependent process. Recently, however, Dr. Danilchik discovered a
              novel microtubule-containing array in the early cleavage furrows in eggs of the
              frog Xenopus laevis. This structure consists of numerous thick, short bundles
              of radially arranged, acetylated microtubules that emanate from the vicinity of
              the contractile ring of all cleavage furrows until the midblastula stage. Dr.
              Danilchik hypothesizes that the microtubule array functions to recruit membrane
              vesicles to the site of new membrane formation at the furrow's leading edge,
              and perhaps also to draw a thick layer of peripheral cytoplasm inward along
              each cleavage furrow, a process known as ingresson. Since all receptormediated,
              cell-cell interactions depend on the composition of the membranes deposited
              between cells, it is clear that the directed membrane deposition and ingression
              have potentially significant roles in events of early development, such as
              specification of the primary tissue layers. The specific aims of this proposal
              are to carry out: 1) a structural analysis, to define further the cytoskeletal
              organization of the furrow, 2) functional studies, to understand how membrane
              deposition and ingression are accomplished, and 3) developmental
              gene-expression studies, in which vesicle delivery or ingression will be
              locally inhibited to learn the developmental significance of cleavage. Results
              from this project will contribute to our understanding of how animal cells
              divide, one of the most fundamental problems in Cellular and Developmental
              Biology.
