Title       : Genetic Analysis of Eukaryotic DNA Mismatch Repair Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9631061

Award Number: 9631061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334908             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Michael Liskay liskaym@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631061  Liskay  Genetic stability in eukaryotic cells requires the proper
              functioning of a number of DNA replication, repair and recombination processes.
               One such repair process, DNA mismatch (DMR), plays major role in preventing
              mutations and in the correction of mispairs that from during genetic
              recombination.  Therefore, a defect in DMR leads to higher rates of spontaneous
              mutation, a "mutator" phenotype.  Several lines of evidence indicate
              evolutionary conservation of DMR.  Conservation of DMR is also illustrated by
              the isolation and characterization of mutS and mutL homologs in yeast and
              mammals that appear to be functionally as well as structurally conserved. 
              Studies with the yeast S. cerevisiae has have identified at least five genes
              DMR genes:  three mutS homologues, MSH2, MSH6 and MSH3, and two mutL
              homologues, PMS1 and MLH1.  Although information on the mechanism of eukaryotic
              DMR is now emerging, mechanistic insight into the process is limited.  For
              example, one significant unanswered question in eukaryotic DMR is "What
              determines 'strand-choice', i.e., the preferential repair of the newly
              synthesized strand"  As a first aim to extend the studies of yeast DMR, the
              interactions between the MLH1 and PMS1 proteins will be characterized.  The
              portions of each protein that are responsible for heteromer formation will be
              determined.  The regions of these proteins that are likely to interact with
              other proteins involved either in DMR or interacting process will be
              determined.  As a second aim, proteins that interact with the known DMR
              proteins MLH1 and PMS1 will be identified.  Such interacting proteins will
              represent candidates for other DMR proteins or, alternatively, proteins that
              function in process that "cooperate" with DMR, e.g. proteins of the DNA
              replication apparatus.  In summary, the characterization of the MLH1 and PMS1
              proteins, and identification of additional proteins for DMR, and/or other
              pathways, will increase our understanding of DMR and related cellular
              processes.  Ever y time a cell divides its genetic material must be duplicated
              with a minimum errors.  Insuring such fidelity is a daunting process because
              the genetic material is comprised of many millions of building blocks that must
              be assembled in specific order.  Cells use a variety of processes to insure
              this fidelity.  One of the mot important is a process termed "DNA mismatch
              repair".  This repair process directed by a group of proteins that act in a
              manner analogous to a spell checker on a word processing program on one's
              computer.  If "spelling" errors are not detected in fixed before a cell
              replicates again the errors become a part of that cells genetic program, namely
              a mutation.  Such mutation can alter a cell's behavior dramatically. 
              Understanding fully the process of DNA mismatch repair and each of the proteins
              involved is therefore of importance.  The goal of the research described here
              is to better understand the DNA mismatch repair process in a model system,
              namely yeast cells.  ***
