Title       : MPWG: Engineering Summer Camp for Middle School Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9631386

Award Number: 9631386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Nicoletti nicolett@ece.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chrysanthe Demetry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9631386  Worcester Polytech Inst.  Nicoletti, Denise    "Engineering Summer
              Camp for Middle School Girls"    The goal of the proposed effort is to create a
              residential summer  camp for seventh grade girls that will generate interest
              and  excitement about engineering and technology and the ways it can be  used
              to help individuals, organizations, and society.  This camp  will address a
              need for an intervention program in Central  Massachusetts that will reach
              girls at an early enough age such  that they develop self-esteem and
              self-confidence in the areas of  math and science and realize the importance of
              taking four full  years of mathematics in high school.  The central and unique 
              feature of the camp experience will be a community service design  project in
              which teams of students solve a problem for a "customer"  in the Worcester
              community using teamwork and an engineering design  process.  Other program
              activities will include hands-on  experiential workshops and field trips.  The
              administrative  structure of the camp will be designed to expose girls to a
              broad  spectrum of female role models along the "pipeline," from female  high
              school students to engineering faculty and practicing  engineers.    Several
              strategies will be used to ensure long-term effects of the  camp experience, as
              well as to magnify the camp's sphere of  influence.  Follow-up activities will
              be planned during the school  year, and wherever possible, participants will be
              funneled into  math and science intervention programs for high school students.
                Outreach to parents will be an important aspect of the intervention  program,
              and middle school math and science teachers will be part  of the camp's
              administrative staff, learning about engineering and  career opportunities
              along with the girls.  A unique and  potentially powerful aspect of this
              project is that summative  evaluation of the camp will be conducted using a
              control group of  girls with similar backgrounds who did not experience the 
              intervention program.  T hus, the effect of the intervention program  on girls'
              interest in technology and their progress and educational  planning for the
              remainder of middle school and high school will be  measured relative to the
              effects of other variables.  ***
