Title       : Studies of the Molecular Structure and Local Ordering in Conducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9631575

Award Number: 9631575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Winokur winokur@romano.physics.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9631575 
              Winokur    This project investigates the structural properties of conducting 
              polymers.  These  polymers  exhibit  an  enormous  diversity   of  interesting 
              and technologically important physical behavior.  X-  ray  and  neutron
              scattering techniques will be used to determine  the  local atomic structural
              characteristics which influence  the  structure/property  relationships  in 
              these   materials.   These  experimental  methods will be complemented  by 
              modeling  methods  which generate physically accurate molecular structures.
              Finally,  methods will also be developed for studying the evolution in situ  so
               that  subtle  and  transient effects  can  be  discerned  and  analyzed.  The 
              knowledge and techniques  developed  through  the  course  of this research
              will provide basic and accurate  answers  to  many  fundamental questions that
              currently  exist  concerning  structure  and  its  evolution in conducting
              polymer  hosts.  The  project is co-funded by the Condensed Matter Physics
              Program  and  the Polymers Program.  %%%  This project investigates the
              structural properties of conducting  polymers.  These  polymers  exhibit  an 
              enormous  diversity   of  interesting  and technologically important physical
              behavior.  X-  ray  and  neutron scattering techniques will be used to
              determine  the  local atomic structural characteristics which influence  the 
              structure/property  relationships  in  these   materials.   These  experimental
               methods will be complemented  by  modeling  methods  which generate physically
              accurate molecular structures. Finally,  methods will also be developed for
              studying the evolution in situ  so  that  subtle  and  transient effects  can 
              be  discerned  and  analyzed.  The  knowledge and techniques  developed 
              through  the  course  of this research will provide basic and accurate  answers
               to  many  fundamental questions that currently  exist  concerning  structure 
              and  its  evolution in condu cting polymer  hosts.  The  project is co-funded
              by the Condensed Matter Physics Program  and  the Polymers Program.  ***
