Title       : How Women Won the Vote: The Political Successes of the State Suffrage Movements,
               1866-1920
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9631520

Award Number: 9631520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94801              (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly J. McCammon mccammhj@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen E. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the conditions under which a social movement is able to
              overcome powerful opposition to bring about significant political change.  It
              will examine the state-level women's suffrage movements in the decades before
              and after the turn of the century to understand the circumstances in which
              movements are successful.  In 1869 Wyoming was the first state (then a
              territory) to grant women suffrage.  By 1920 when the l9th amendment was
              ratified, 33 states had enacted laws giving women one or more forms of partial
              suffrage, such as the right to vote in presidential or municipal elections, and
              15 states (some of which had already enacted partial suffrage) had granted
              women full suffrage.  The primary goal in studying the state suffrage movements
              is to develop and empirically test a theoretical model of social movement
              success. Rarely have researchers examined the conditions that lead to movement
              success defined in terms of political outcomes (as opposed to mobilization or
              cultural outcomes).  For the state suffrage campaigns, political success was
              the expansion of the vote to women.     The theoretical framework combines
              theories of movement mobilization with theories of the state, hypothesizing
              that the ability of the suffragists to bring about political change was shaped
              both by the movements' abilities to mobilize resources and by the social
              structural opportunities they confronted.  Resource mobilization theory
              suggests that movement success stems from the ability of movement participants
              to mobilize key resources, including organizations and types of ideologies and
              strategies. The political process model of movement mobilization suggests that
              political opportunity structures influence movement effectiveness. 
              Researchers, however, have typically interpreted political opportunity
              structures to encompass only the effect of actual political structures and
              processes (e.g., the openness of the polity or electoral instability) on the
              decisions of state actors to grant the demands of move ments.  This research
              draws from various strands of theories of the state to expand the notion of
              opportunity structures, theorizing that gendered, economic, and racial
              opportunity structures also importantly influence the ability of movements to
              bring about political change.  It combines social movement theory and theories
              of the state to explain social movement success.     This study employs
              quantitative methods to test the empirical validity of the theoretical model. 
              Event history analysis permits comparison of the state movements and the state
              contexts in which they operated to explain why some movements failed and others
              succeeded.  Other methods, such as qualitative comparative analysis and
              recursive regressions, will also be employed to explore the complexities and
              robustness of the results.  The state movements exhibit theoretically important
              variation (e.g., in terms of organization, strategies, and ideologies), and the
              contexts in which they operated also vary (e.g., concerning party politics and
              cultural and economic opposition), thus offering the opportunity for
              comparative analysis of multiple movements working toward the same general
              goal, women's suffrage.     This historical study will contribute to our
              understanding of the development of American democracy, and thus will be of
              value to teachers and students, especially to those who are interested in
              women's history.  However, the scientific results will have much broader value,
              improving formal models of the success and failure of political movements in
              general, including modern ones.
