Title       : Future-Event Schemas and Attributional Inferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9631858

Award Number: 9631858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gifford Weary weary.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed research is to examine the possible automatic
              influence of stored knowledge structures on the initial stages of the social
              inference process.  Of particular interest is the effect of future-event
              schemata which have been shown to typify moderately and severely depressed
              perceivers and to result in pessimistic predictions of event occurrences.  The
              theoretical framework developed in this proposal argues that previous
              researchers have failed to find the depression-related differences in
              dispositional and situational inferences for others' outcomes because they have
              failed to employ more recent and sophisticated models of and more appropriate
              investigative methods for examining the inference process.  More specifically,
              it is argued that previous failures to find depressed-nondepressed differences
              actually have resulted from the (unexamined) interactive effects of  behavior
              characterization and inferential correction stages of the inference process. 
              %%%  The proposed research will examine the idea that moderately and severely
              depressed people try to compensate for their negative views when making
              judgments about other people.  At first, depressed people are thought to
              develop unfavorable explanations for other people's positive and negative
              accomplishments.  However, by engaging in additional thought, depressed people
              are sometimes able to correct for this bias.  As a result, such people often
              give the appearance of making unbiased inferences about others' actions.  If
              confirmed, this bias-correcting process could have important implications for
              the promotion of human potential.  In everyday situations, people are often
              distracted or otherwise engaged in thought, and therefore unable to engage in
              inferential correction.  As a result, their social interactions and evaluations
              may be colored by their negatively-biased characterizations of others'
              behaviors.  This, in turn, can have very large negative consequences.  For
              example, in educational and other work-related settings, numerous stressors and
              other mental health problems (notably depression) have been identified.  In
              such settings, teachers and supervisors may well be unable to correct their
              negatively-biased, automatic attributions for and evaluations of others'
              performances.  The social and economic consequences may be very significant for
              students and employees.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
