Title       : Reputation and the Market for Audit Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9631817

Award Number: 9631817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Deneckere rjdeneck@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Deneckere  9631817    Auditors serve an important function in modern market
              economies.  By independently verifying companies' financial statements they
              provide credibility to the corporate accounts.  Without this credibility,
              investor confidence would be lacking, and companies would face a much higher
              cost of raising capital.  Recently the audit profession has been rocked by a
              string of well-publicized scandals, in which large corporations unexpectedly
              failed shortly after receiving clean audit reports.  Examples include the
              Savings and Loan debacle in the US, and the collapse of BCCI, Maxwell, Polly
              Peck and the Mirror Group in the UK.  These experiences have resulted in an
              unprecedented level of legal liability costs, threatening the health of the
              audit industry (in the US, in 1993 the big six spent in excess of 20% of their
              revenues on legal defense costs, and in the UK the cost of liability insurance
              has increased 37.5-fold in 10 years).  The scandals have also undetermined the
              public's confident in the effectiveness of the service offered by auditors, and
              have resulted in a series of policy proposals designed to regulate the industry
              more tightly.  The contribution of this project consists of developing tools
              which can identify the impact of various regulatory policies on the audit
              profession.  Models of audit behavior currently do exist, but most of them are
              static in nature, and focus on the role of auditors in providing increased
              internal control.  They are therefore ill suited for analyzing policies which
              entail dynamic effects (such as mandatory rotation of auditors), and whose
              primary intent is to benefit outside parties (such as investors and creditors).
               In addition, those models do not study the determination of equilibrium
              accounting fees, a crucial element in evaluating auditors' incentives to build
              up and maintain a reputation.    More specifically, this project develops a
              game theoretic model that describes the interaction between public account
              firms, their clients and interes t third parties.  This model underlines the
              crucial role of reputation in maintain auditor independence, and is used to
              analyze the impact of limits on the tenure of auditors (mandatory rotation).
