Title       : Effects on Object Perception of Spatial Deficit Due to Brain Injury
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9631132

Award Number: 9631132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn C. Robertson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Treisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631132  ROBERTSON    Objects and scenes are normally coherent and integrated in
              visual  perception.  Yet, biological and behavioral evidence has  demonstrated
              visual modularity; different visual areas within the  mammalian brain respond
              to particular features such as color,  motion, shape, size, or location.  The
              way in which these  features get bound together in awareness to produce normal 
              coherence is not known.  One major cognitive theory has proposed  that
              attention to spatial locations provides the basis for  feature binding.  It
              follows that damage to areas of the brain  that represent spatial information
              should produce severe problems  in binding features together to produce
              perceptual wholes.    This research will explore the relationships between
              selective  attention, spatial representations, feature binding, and object 
              individuation, using evidence from the breakdown of performance  in individuals
              with damage to brain areas that disrupt spatial  perception.  The main
              hypothesis is that interactions between  neural areas that represent object
              features and those that  represent space achieve accurate visual percepts and
              produce  rapid and accurate visual search, especially when feature binding  is
              required.  Thus, the spatial problems observed in individuals  with selected
              types of neurological damage should be accompanied  by problems with specific
              types of object perception that require  integration.  Individuals with
              selected spatial deficits will be  tested in both object perception and spatial
              tasks to look for  hypothesized relationships between the two.  Other studies
              will  attempt to determine the type of spatial information that is  critical
              for feature binding and that which is not.  Behavioral  measures will include
              error data and reaction time.  Biological  measures will include lesion
              location and volume, as determined  by reconstructed 3-D structural MRI.   
              Although physiological and metabolic techniques for measuring  cortical
              function in neurologically normal individu als have  improved dramatically in
              the recent past, observing the effects  of lesions remains a major means to
              determine whether or not a  particular region of the brain is both sufficient
              and necessary  for a particular function.  Evidence derived from humans with 
              lesions to particular areas provides informative data to build  hypotheses
              about function and interactions between functions that  then might be observed
              using other techniques, such as single  unit recording in animals or functional
              imaging in normal  individuals.  The data may contribute at least a partial
              solution  to the binding problem and will certainly suggest where to look  for
              correlated neural activity that may support accurate feature  integration.   
              ***
