Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Postdoctural Program - Courant Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9631832

Award Number: 9631832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403210             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. McLaughlin dmac@knicks.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Lax  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Kohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Majda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Cheeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Caffarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivasa R. Varadhan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                       This GIG Award will provide additional NSF support for the advanced
              training of postdoctoral visitors at the Courant Institute of Mathematical
              Sciences.  It will provide funding for four new positions, bringing the program
              to a total of eight postdoctoral visitors per year.  New York  University has
              committed itself to the success of the  program by making substantial cost
              sharing contributions.   The Courant Postdoctoral Program is now in its 39th
              year and continues to be the starting point for many successful careers in the
              mathematical sciences. The postdocs who  choose to visist the Courant Institute
              benefit from the Institute's large and high quality permanent faculty with
              specialties in overlapping area throughout pure and applied mathematics, a
              tradition of interdisciplinary work and collaborative research, and our unique
              location -- New York City.  The program involves intense collaborations between
              permanent faculty and postdocs, in areas of research that span an unusually
              broad range of the mathematical sciences, ranging from pure mathematics, to
              applied mathematics, to scientific computation.   Several recent enhancements
              of the program include an advanced literature seminar, a yearly selection of
              special topics for a program of interdisciplinary seminars and workshops, a
              systematic approach to mentoring, and opportunities for interdisciplinary
              research and innovative teaching.
