Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: "Research and Training in Computational Harmonic
               Analysis"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9631359

Award Number: 9631359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Rochberg rr@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guido L. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Krantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert Baernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell H. Taibleson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mladen V. Wickerhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Rochberg et al    The analysis group in the Mathematics Department is
              currently expanding the components of its research and training program related
              to new computational tools in analysis, particularly those in harmonic analysis
              associated with wavelets.  In addition to furthering the group's advanced
              research in those areas, the support described will enable them   to develop a
              Bachelors/Masters level curriculum titled "Mathematical method in multimedia
              signal processing".  The support will also allow them, in cooperation with
              other units of the University, to create a signal processing working group
              which will serve as a training ground for undergraduates, advanced degree
              candidates, and postdoctoral researchers.     Wavelets and related techniques
              of waveform analysis were first introduced as theoretical tools in mathematics
              and mathematical physics. In addition to becoming a very active area of
              mathematical research they have also proved to be an extremely fertile source
              of new numerical techniques of broad utility.  This proposal will allow to
              develop a curriculum which will mix theoretical and computational work and
              which will enable us to bring students to state-of-the-art understanding in
              both the theory and the applications of these exciting new mathematical and
              computational tools.
