Title       : Computational Center for Macromolecular Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9631436

Award Number: 9631436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $855112             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tainer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan E. McRee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Pique  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria A. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Getzoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The challenge in biology is increasingly not the availability  of  data  or 
              even of computational power, but rather the ability  to  interpret   results 
              and  effectively  apply  computer   hardware  advances  to  critical scientific
              problems.  In  particular,  the  explosion    of   sequence   and  
              three-dimensional   structural  information  is fundamentally changing biology
              by  extending  our  understanding  of many basic biological processes to  the 
              atomic  level. The fields of biology, mathematics, physics, and chemistry  find
               common  ground  in exploring biological  structure-function  relationships. 
              To fully exploit this paradigm shift,  analytical  software  aimed  at  this
              juncture between fields  must  be  made  accessible  to  the scientific
              community. Even in  the  field  of  structural biology, where advances have
              previously paralleled the  increased  speed and affordability of computers, the
              software  to  perform  essential  tasks consistently  runs  behind  this  rapid
               hardware  development, and many aspects of high-end and  parallel  computing  
              are  dramatically  under-utilized.  Yet,   scientists  developing  new 
              computational  methods  for  use  in  their  own  specific  fields  and
              projects are hard-pressed  to  develop  and  support  generally usable software
              that takes full  advantage  of  new hardware.    The Computational Center for
              Macromolecular Structure (CCMS),  is  a  three-institution  project  that 
              unites  researchers  at  The  Scripps Research Institute, the University of
              California  at  San  Diego,  and  the  San  Diego Supercomputer Center  to 
              meet  this  challenge.  As a collaborative structural biology effort  between 
              scientists, applied mathematicians, and software engineers,  CCMS  is a
              productive way to develop and disseminate new techniques for  determining and
              analyzing- macromolecular structures and to bring  high-end  computing  power 
              to the  user's  workstation  via  the  network. This Group Proposal seeks
              continuing support for CCMS to  d evelop,   distribute,  and  support 
              innovative   software   for  advancing  research on biological macromolecules
              at the interface  of biology, applied mathematics, computer science, and
              chemistry.                                                                  .  
                    ~
