Title       : Collaborative Research: Development of Spatial Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9631680

Award Number: 9631680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora S. Newcombe newcombe@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631680  NEWCOMBE    Spatial competence is a fundamental adaptive capability for
              all  mobile organisms.  Human adults can use distance and direction 
              information to code location, both with respect to the self and  with respect
              to external landmarks.  Their spatial coding is  hierarchical, i.e., existing
              at various nested levels of  resolution.  In addition, they can use symbolic
              spatial  representations, most notably maps.    This research will advance our
              understanding of how these aspects  of spatial competence develop in human
              infancy and childhood.  Previous studies have already shown that, by 16 months,
              children  show hierarchical metric coding of spatial location, but that, at 
              about 21 months, there is an abrupt increase in the use of  external landmarks
              distant from the viewer in such coding, and  that, over middle childhood, there
              are changes in the nature of  the categories used in higher-level coding.   
              Studies with infants will determine whether metric coding is  present early in
              life, and if so, what referents are used in such  coding, and what the
              resolution of the system is.  Studies with  toddlers will define whether the
              developmental changes in the use  of distal landmarks are due to hippocampal
              maturation or to  growing control of upright walking, and whether children of
              this  age can remember the location of particular objects in particular 
              locations when more than one is hidden at a time.  Studies with  school-age
              children will determine whether developmental changes  in the nature of
              categories used in hierarchical coding underlie  real-world changes in accuracy
              of spatial localization.  Other  studies with preschool and school-aged
              children will delineate  how children use distance and direction information in
              map   representations.    Overall, this research program will develop further a
              model of  the emergence of spatial competence.  Understanding spatial 
              development is an important theoretical goal in itself, but also  has
              implications for such important societal iss ues as affording  mobility to
              visually-impaired children and furthering the  education of all children in
              spatial subjects such as geometry  and geography.    ***
