Title       : Collaborative Research: Comprehension Processes During Reading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9631040

Award Number: 9631040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. O'Brien eob@christa.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631040  O'BRIEN    In order to fully comprehend a text, the reader must be able
              to  understand continually how each currently read sentence fits with  the
              information presented earlier in the text.  This often  involves recognizing
              connections between sentences that are  currently being read and information
              that occurred much earlier  in the text.  Readers are generally able to make
              these kinds of  connections quickly and easily, even when the related ideas
              span  relatively large distances in the text.  This research will  investigate
              the processes involved in relating and connecting  each new idea to what has
              been read before.  Specifically, the  research will test a computer simulation
              model which assumes that  these processes are largely automatic, that is,
              occurring quickly  and with very little effort on the part of the reader.  The 
              research will also test the model's predictions about factors  that influence
              the kinds of connections readers are likely to  make and how those connections
              influence their understanding and  memory of the text.  Such factors include
              readers' goals and  perspectives, the organization of the text, the syntax of
              the  sentence being read, the nature of the relation between currently  read
              ideas and related information read earlier, the distance  between currently
              read ideas and related information, and the  extent to which the text
              elaborates upon various topics.   Although the primary goal of the research is
              to test a model of  how readers understand and remember text, another important
               result of the research will be a better understanding of the  factors that
              make texts easier to understand and remember.  Such  an understanding should
              prove helpful in writing textbooks and  manuals that present information
              clearly, and in a way that  improves readers' memory for the most important
              points.    ***
