Title       : Collaborative Research: (ESH) Late Paleocene and Early Eocene Nonmarine Climates
               in the Gulf of Mexico Basin, Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9631188

Award Number: 9631188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack A. Wolfe jwolfe@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 9631188  Wolfe    This  project aims to develop an initial framework for
              nonmarine climates from the mid-Paleocene (ca. 60 Ma) through the end of the
              early Eocene (ca. 49 Ma).  The early Eocene (ca. 49-53/54 Ma) was by consensus
              the warmest period during the Tertiary, except possibly for a brief period
              after the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary.  The climatic developments preceding
              the early Eocene thermal optimum need to be studied in order to understand
              whether the optimum represented an abrupt change in climate or was a
              culmination of previously established trends.  Further, unlike the marine
              records of climate change, the nonmarine record provides evidence of changes in
              seasonal temperatures and changes in precipitation regimes.  Such data are
              necessary to fully evaluate predictions based on General Circulation Models,
              especially if, as has been suggested, the early Eocene thermal optimum resulted
              from high amounts of atmospheric CO2.    Some assemblages of fossil leaves have
              been previously reported from the Wilcox Group (ca. 49-60 Ma) of the Texas part
              of the Gulf of Mexico (Mississippi) Embayment, but many more have been observed
              in the field and remain to be collected.  These leaf assemblages can be related
              strategically to the intertonguing marine planktic sequence and, as well,
              related to the generally accepted sea-level curves.  In some instances,
              palynological correlations will need to be made between nonmarine sections that
              cannot be directly traced into marine sections.    The Texas Wilcox vegetation
              was a paleolatitude of ~30oN  and will provide the first long record of
              nonmarine climate and climatic change during the Paleocene and early Eocene at
              such a low latitude.  The vegetation represented is that of a floodplain.  The
              assemblages all represent low altitude vegetation, and thus the variable of
              paleoaltitude is held constant.  Further, rain shadows, which are problematic
              in leaf assemblages from the Western Interior, would not have been a factor.   
              Traditional methods of pale obotanical/palynological analyses for
              paleoenvironmental interpretations involve determination of fossils in terms of
              their nearest living relatives and the questionable assumption of unchanging
              climatic tolerances for plants through time.  This procedure would represent a
              very time-consuming effort of many years' duration, and, even then, the
              inferences could be questioned on a theoretical basis.    In contrast,
              collection, curation, and assignment of the Wilcox leaves to individual species
              can be done in a comparatively short time.  Instead of using the nearest living
              relative method of paleoclimatic inferences, the leaf assemblages will be
              analyzed by means of CLAMP (Climate-Leaf Analysis Multivariate Program).  This
              method was first proposed in 1990 and is, in some respects, still in a
              developmental stage, to which the proposed research will contribute.  The
              method analyzes 31 rigorously defined physiognomic character states of leaves
              by means of Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA), a multivariate program
              increasingly and widely employed in ecological studies.  Analysis of modern
              samples collected proximal to stations where meteorological data have been
              recorded allows estimates derived from CLAMP to be calibrated with various
              meteorological parameters, including mean annual temperature, mean cold-month
              and warm-month temperatures, growing season length, growing season
              precipitation, relative humidity, and seasonal drought.    Preliminary analyses
              suggest that mean annual temperatures in the Texas Wilcox showed an increase
              during the mid- to late Paleocene.  The analyses also indicated that, whereas
              the mid- to late Paleocene in Texas was characterized by very abundant
              precipitation, by the end of the early Eocene thermal optimum the climatic
              regime had pronounced seasonal drought.    ??
