Title       : Structural Analysis of the Ribonuclease P Holoenzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9631039

Award Number: 9631039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329166             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Nolan jnolan@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631039 Nolan The focus of the proposed research program is a detailed
              structural analysis of the bacterial ribonuclease P (RNase P) holoenzyme. 
              Bacterial RNase P cleaves 5'-precursor sequences from tRNA transcripts.  It
              consists of a large (140 kd) RNA and a small (14 kd)  protein subunit.  In
              vitro the RNA subunit is the catalytic moiety and the protein is dispensable. 
              However, the RNase P protein is essential for viability in vivo, and the
              kinetics of the holoenzyme reaction in vitro differs dramatically from the
              RNA-alone reaction in salt requirement, substrate specificity, and reaction
              rate.  While the catalytic RNA subunit of the enzyme is well characterized,
              little is known about how the protein moiety mediates its pleiotropic effects
              on the enzymatic reaction.  Specific problems addressed are: (a) Localization
              of the protein binding site on RNase P RNA, and (b) Identification of protein
              domains required for function. These problems will be studied using chemical
              and enzymatic footprinting, crosslink analysis, mutational analysis, and
              kinetic studies.  The proposed studies will shed light on the RNase P protein
              and its function in the holoenzyme; this will enhance understanding of the RNA
              enzyme mechanism, and RNA-protein as well as RNA-RNA interactions. %%% The
              focus of the proposed research program is a detailed structural analysis of the
              bacterial ribonuclease P (RNase P) holoenzyme.  A great deal is known about the
              catalytic RNA subunit of the enzyme, but little is known about  how the protein
              moiety mediates its pleiotropic effects on the enzymatic reaction, which are
              required for function in vivo.  The proposed experiments will contribute to the
              understanding of how the protein subunit interacts with the RNA and how this
              interaction affects the reaction mechanism.  ***
