Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Sampling Designs for Spatially Distributed Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9631318

Award Number: 9631318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17372              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Christman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Many important sampling problems occur within a spatial context.  Examples
              range  from estimating the total concentration of DDT at a dumpsite to counting
              the number of polar  bears in a region of Alaska to determining the number of
              distinct species in an ecosystem.   This project involves the problem of
              designing sampling schemes for spatial data where  information about the degree
              of clustering of the elements being sampled is utilized.   Initial  research
              will consider univariate point processes with extensions to the multivariate
              case.  The  basic premise is that some extant sampling schemes can be modified
              to take advantage of  available knowledge such as that assumed about the
              population units themselves or additional  information obtained during
              sampling.       The intended research is divided into several areas.  The first
              is based on a univariate  model. Two approaches will be considered.  One is a
              "non-parametric" sequential sampling  effort where no assumptions are made
              about the population under study.  Here, information  collected during sampling
              will be used to provide an initial characterization of the spatial  aspects of
              the population.  The other approach is parametric in that it will be assumed
              that the  population is generated via a general Poisson cluster process (or the
              more specific Neyman-Scott process).  Sampling will then be used to estimate
              the parameters as a means of  estimating the population size. The latter is
              useful when it is of interest to describe a more  general situation than
              exhibited by the current population (a single realization from the cluster 
              process).  Later, the results will be extended to the multivariate case. 
              Multivariate data  models of interest include a spatial marked point process
              such as would arise from a  superposition of spatial Poisson processes.
