Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Women in Mathematics Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9631923

Award Number: 9631923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsa N. Schaefer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will study the theoretical and numerical  analysis of nonlinear
              partial differential equations (PDEs),  especially those of mixed type and
              generalized Monge-Ampere (MA)  equations.  These equations arise in several
              applications.  The  first application is that of optical system deign and
              analysis.   The second is the design of fuel-efficient axisymmetric bodies  and
              the study of axisymmetric jet flows.  Ultimately in both of  the above
              applications, one must solve a nonlinear Monge-Ampere  equation which may be of
              elliptic, hyperbolic, or mixed type.  As  with most completely nonlinear PDEs,
              one does not expect to find  existence or uniqueness results for these
              equations except in  special cases.  However, in order for work on these
              applications  to maintain interest outside the mathematics community, one must 
              demonstrate solidly how the techniques in modeling optical  systems or airplane
              wings can be use to design such objects  effectively.  Therefore, some
              questions which must be considered  are:    -What are well-posed boundary value
              problems?    -Are there cases of interest for which one can establish 
              existence or uniqueness results?    -What numerical schemes would provide the
              best solutions to the     MA equations?    -What can we say about these
              numerical solutions mathematically?    While the MA equations describing the
              two applications are  considerably different, progress in answering these
              questions for  one MA equation may lead to the answers for other equations.   
              The investigators planning activities will include several visits  to the
              University of Delaware to meet with Professors L. Pamela  Cook and Gilberto
              Schleiniger who will advise her as she seeks  answers to the questions posed
              above.
