Title       : Engineering Student Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9631744

Award Number: 9631744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary T. Yamaguchi icgxy@asuvm.inre.asu.edu                yamaguchi@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ji-Ping He  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631744  Yamaguchi  This proposal is a continuation of a program senior design 
              project program which has been successfully implemented over the  past six
              years at ASU.  The program centers on a "bottom-up"  approach to rehabilitation
              which requires the participants to  interact directly with their clients; this
              permits the students  to learn the needs of the client first-hand and to be
              open to  suggestions, resulting in a sense of pride and ownership in the  final
              products for both parties.  Another philosophy conveyed to  the students is the
              idea of developing "culturally appropriate"  solutions which can be easily
              maintained by the clients and their  caretakers.  Fifteen senior design
              projects will be solicited  each year to design prototype devices to aid
              persons with  disabilities.  A graduate student will act as a liaison to 
              establish and maintain continuous connection between the  biomedical
              engineering program at ASU and surrounding communities  serving and/or
              supporting persons with disabilities.  The ideas  and feasible projects for the
              program will be generated through  this connection.  Each senior design student
              selected to  participate will then establish contact, via the graduate 
              liaison, with coordinating clinicians and a specific person with  a disability,
              and work together with that person to generate the  design specifications of
              the device to meet the specific need of  that individual.  The student will
              design, build, deliver and  evaluate a prototype device to aid the individual
              in improving  independence.  Two undergraduate students will be supported each 
              summer to follow up with each client to make necessary  modification and
              completion to the device, which will ensure that  the device can actually be
              used by the client, and train the  students on quality control and custom
              service for biomedical  devices aiding persons with disabilities.  ***
