Title       : Nitrate Respiration of the Hyperthermophile Pyrobaculum aerophilum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9631006

Award Number: 9631006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imke Schroeder imkes@microbio.lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631006  Schroder    The objective of this project is to study the mechanism of
              denitrification under extremely thermophilic conditions. The focus of the
              research will be the enzyme of the first step of denitrification, nitrate
              reductase. The hyperthermophile archaeon which has an optimal growth
              temperature of 100  C will be Pyrobaculum aerophilum studied as the model
              system. The objectives of this project include: (1) the improvement of cell
              culture conditions for P. aerophilum.  This will be done using pressurized
              vials and/or a fed-batch fermentor to prevent the toxic accumulation of nitrite
              during nitrate respiration.  It is anticipated that the cell yields can be
              increased once the nutritional needs of the organism are better known. We will
              attempt to identify additional carbon sources, electron donors, and trace
              elements which may improve cell yields. (2) the purification and physiological
              characterization of the nitrate reductase will give insight into the
              biochemistry of a high temperature enzyme. Besides the already existing enzyme
              assay using artificial electron donor, additional enzyme assays involving
              quinones as electron donor will be developed to characterize the membrane-bound
              enzyme. The enzyme will be extracted from the membrane with detergents and
              purified using appropriate techniques. The biochemical properties of this high
              temperature enzyme will be examined: Is the high temperature nitrate reductase
              a molybdenum containing enzyme like the known mesophilic bacterial nitrate
              reductases? Alternatively, does it contain tungsten as do other metallo-enzymes
              from thermophilic archaea? What is the nature of electron transfer to the
              enzyme? (3) to gain further structural, regulatory and evolutionary
              information, the nitrate reductase genes will be cloned and sequenced. A gene
              library will be prepared and the nar genes will be cloned using reverse
              genetics or PCR probing. The DNA sequence should reveal considerable
              information as to the relatedness to mesophilic counterparts. This res earch
              project will contribute to our understanding of the energy metabolism in
              extremely thermophilic organisms and widen our knowledge as to how energy
              metabolism has evolved.  %%%  This project is concerned with understanding
              unusual bacteria known as archae that grow at very high temperatures. 
              Pyrobaculum aerophilum grows best at 100  C and can also grow in the absence of
              oxygen using nitrate instead.  In this work the enzyme nitrate reductase, a key
              enzyme for using nitrate, will be studied.  The enzyme will be purified, and
              its properties will be determined.  This will provide new and interesting
              information about life at high temperatures and may lead to biotechnology
              applications that make use of high temperature enzymes.  ***
