Title       : An Accretive Model of Land and Water use for the Ancient Maya of Northwestern
               Belize.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9631024

Award Number: 9631024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Scarborough scarbovl@ucunix.san.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas P. Dunning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Vernon Scarborough, Nicholas
              Dunning and colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological and
              ecological research at the site of La Milpa, located in Northern Belize. The
              site, which contains a number of house mounds, is relatively small and typical
              of many lowland prehistoric Mayan communities. It also was occupied for a
              considerable length of time and spans the interval from early through Classic
              periods. Therefore it has the potential to shed light on the development of the
              Mayan civilization. La Milpa includes within its boundaries two `bajos` or
              lowland swampy regions and the focus of this project is on the agricultural
              utilization of these areas and how this changed over time. Evidence to date
              indicates that Mayan peoples altered bajos by channeling water and constructing
              raised fields to create fertile agricultural surfaces with appropriate moisture
              levels. Drs Scarborough, Dunning and colleagues wish to understand how these
              field systems developed over time. To accomplish this goal they will first
              utilize SPOT satellite imagery and black and white aerial photographs to locate
              sites and identify surface features. The resultant maps will provide the basis
              for an extensive surface survey. Specific areas will be targeted, fields and
              terraces will be mapped in detail and soil core samples will be collected to
              identify field use. Soil phosphate mapping and phosphate fraction analysis will
              be employed. Excavation of both housemounds and potential field and terrace
              locations will be conducted. Radiocarbon dating of soil and sediment humates
              and midden debris as well as information derived from stylistic analysis will
              be employed to determine absolute chronological age. Finally backhoe trenches
              will be cut to permit stratigraphic correlation and interpretation. 
              Archaeologists have long recognized that a tie exists between levels of social
              complexity and techniques of agricultural production. It is obvious that a
              certain degree of productivity must be reached to permit people to live
              together in large groups and to allow a segment of the population to devote
              themselves to non-subsistence activities. However there is a second
              relationship between subsistence and social organization as well. Many
              agricultural systems, especially ones which require large public works and
              distribution of limited resources such as water, require carefully coordinated
              actions among individuals and by their very nature foster development of social
              stratification. Archaeologists wish to understand the details of this process
              and Scarborough and Dunning's work focus on this issue. They wish to learn
              whether the development of complex water management systems which characterize
              La Milpa occurred relative slowly by accretative means or whether they
              developed over very short periods of time. The social implications of these
              alternative courses of action differ.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed light on how complex state level societies develop. The
              lowland Maya flourished in tropical areas which today have very low population
              densities and this prehistoric group developed a successful agricultural system
              which was sustainable for a long period of time. This research will shed new
              light on the subsistence and social practices involved.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
