Title       : Nature's Ingenuity in Stereoselective (Phenol) Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9631980

Award Number: 9631980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman G. Lewis lewisn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631980  Lewis  One of the most important yet poorly understood biological
              events in nature is that of bimolecular phenoxy radical coupling. 
              Surprisingly, phenoxy radical coupling reactions have long been imperfectly
              characterized, and are frequently described as lacking stereoselectivity based
              on their catalytic properties in vitro. Yet even a cursory analysis of such
              reactions in nature indicates that some mechanism for conferring
              stereospecificity must exist, since the products are stereospecific.  Seeking
              to understand how this stereoselectivity is produced, the investigators
              examined the coupling of two achiral molecules of E-coniferyl alcohol to give
              (+)-pinoresinol, one of the simplest dimeric  lignan products known in nature. 
               They established that a 78kDa protein is necessary to confer both regio- &
              stereospecificity on the products.  This stereoselective coupling only occurs
              when auxiliary oxidative capacity is provided through the addition of either an
              oxidase  or a free-radical initiator, such as ammonium peroxydisulfate or FMN. 
              This investigation will seek to define the biochemical mechanism of this unique
              mode of control.  The relationships between the 78 kDa protein, the substrate
              and an auxiliary oxidase/oxidant will be studied.  That is, does the operative
              mechanism involve initial binding of two E-coniferyl alcohol molecules   to the
              78 kDa protein, or is the substrate for binding actually the free-radical
              species obtained via one electron oxidation?  A third possibility is that some
              charge-transfer mechanism is in place, although the absence of any detectable
              active site (prosthetic group) makes this unlikely.  The investigators will
              conduct a detailed kinetic anaylsis of the coupling reaction as well as
              defining the substrate specificity for binding/coupling and the effect of
              putative inhibitors.  In this way the mechanism for conferring
              stereoselectivity in phenoxy radical coupling will be determined and will serve
              as a starting point to determine the generality of this m echanism in nature. 
              %%%  One of the most important, and yet most poorly understood, biological
              events in nature is that of bimolecular phenoxy radical coupling, the joining
              of two molecules containing phenol moieties.  It is highly significant, since
              it eventually leads to the formation of woody and cork tissues, insect
              cuticles,  fungal fruiting bodies, aphid pigments, and a host of defense
              molecules, particularly in plants.  Taken together, phenolic coupling reactions
              account for roughly 35-40% of all organic plant material.   Two phenol moieties
              can often be joined in numerous ways, with the individual products being mirror
              images of each other. Before the advances by these investigators, in vitro
              reactions only yielded mixtures of various mirror image products. In vivo
              reactions, however, often yield only one product and in one mirror image form. 
              How is that specificity attained?  The investigators have isolated a protein,
              which they have called a "specifier", which confers such specificity on the
              reactions.  The goal of this project is to define the biochemical mechanism of
              this novel protein.  ***
