Title       : MPWG: Developing Gender-equitable Science Activities for Girls through
               University-based Service Learning for Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9631243

Award Number: 9631243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly Marshall-Goodell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea M. Zardetto-Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program will design, implement, evaluate, and disseminate a  unique model
              program for:  (a) presenting science activities that  will interest and
              challenge elementary school girls in  extracurricular settings while providing
              them with role models; and  (b) helping female undergraduate and graduate
              students improve  their scientific/technical expertise and self esteem by
              giving a  worthwhile outlet for their technical knowledge.  The project is 
              co-sponsored by the University of Iowa Women in Science and  Engineering (WISE)
              Program and the Association of Women in Science-  Eastern Iowa Chapter, with
              the cooperation of the Iowa City  Community School District, and the Iowa City
              Area Sciences Center,  Inc.     Three teams, each with one female faculty,
              staff, or post-doctoral  scientist or engineering, one female representative
              from the  science center,and 4-6 female undergraduate and graduate students, 
              will design science curriculum packets.  Science teachers will  serve as
              educational consultants.  Each curriculum packet will  include and integrated
              set of gender-equitable science activities  developed around a different
              multi-disciplinary theme.  The science  themes will complement, not duplicate,
              the classroom curriculum.   Activities in each curriculum packet will include: 
              (a) short,  exploratory activities that can be completed in 15 minutes or less;
               (b) longer activities that require at least 30 to 60 minutes to  complete; and
              (c) extension activities that can be completed by  students at home with or
              without parental involvement.  Activities  will use gender-free language,
              require hands-on experience in small  groups, develop research skills, relate
              to daily life, be non-  competitive, and support more than one correct outcome.
               Such  activities are appropriate for use with both girls and boys, are  more
              effective for girls than traditional science curricula.  The  science
              curriculum packets will include:  (a) edible chemistry (for  grades K-1), (b)
              brain power (for grades 2-3), and  (c) genetics  (grade 4-6).    Each team will
              present these activities to elementary school-aged  girls and boys in
              extra-curricular settings (e.g., before and after  school day care programs;
              neighborhood centers that serve low-  income families; elementary school
              science clubs; clubs such as  Girls Scouts, Campfire,and 4-H; and community
              science programs) in  Iowa City and surrounding school districts.  The design
              teams will  evaluate the effectiveness of each activity and make appropriate 
              modifications.  The program will benefit three groups:  (a)  elementary school
              girls (and boys), (b) female college students,  and (c) female professional
              scientists and engineers.  The program  will increase the awareness of parents
              and educators of gender  issues in SEM; place science education in a community
              context;  extend the scientific and technical resources of the university  into
              the community; and increase the visibility of female  scientists and engineers.
