Title       : GOALI: Measurement & Modeling of Heterogeneous Nanoscale Deformation of
               Copper-Polyimide High Density Interconnect Structures Subjected to Thermal
               Cycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9631319

Award Number: 9631319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd S. Gross todd.gross@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631319  Gross  High density interconnect (HDI) structures based on the
              Cu-polyimide system have exhibited improvements in signal propagation rate
              relative to the Al-SiO2 system.  However, the large mismatch in out-of-plane
              thermal expansion coefficients generates high interfacial stresses during
              processing that may adversely affect the reliability of the structure.  This
              problem will become more severe as the number of wiring levels increases. 
              Recent experimental evidence has shown that the elastic properties and thermal
              expansion of the polyimides are a function of structure size for 1 (m widths
              and below.  Additional experimental evidence suggests that the inelastic
              deformation of the Cu in these structures is localized on grain boundaries and
              at the interface between the Cu and the polyimide.  Furthermore, plastic
              deformation by dislocation glide has been shown to be negligible for the
              relevant temperature range.  Since the feature size is on the order of the Cu
              grain size, finite element models based on continuum models of inelastic
              deformation will not accurately describe the stresses in these HDI structures. 
                The goal of the proposed analytical and experimental program is to develop
              and evaluate strategies to model heterogeneous, inelastic deformation based on
              diffusive transport in these structures.  Specifically, inelastic deformation
              will be confined to the grain boundaries and bimaterial interfaces.  The
              interface and grain boundary constitutive models will be based on the
              mechanisms of Coble creep and grain boundary sliding.  Deformation in the grain
              interiors and in the polyimide will be modeled as linearly elastic (with
              temperature dependent elastic constants and coefficients of thermal expansion).
               A hot stage scanning probe microscope will be used to measure the amount and
              rate of interface and grain boundary sliding as a function of temperature. 
              Measurement of the buildup of material at grain boundaries and interfaces will
              be used to quantify rates of material transport for  the Coble creep mechanism.
               A second, related goal is to develop strategies to measure the extent and
              change of properties of the polyimides caused by damage from the etch used to
              define the pattern for the conductor lines.    The trend toward reducing the
              size of features in HDI structures requires the development of strategies to
              model thermomechanical deformation that take into account the heterogeneous
              nature of deformation and recognize that deformation by diffusive transport
              will be of first order significance for nanostructures.  Understanding these
              effects and documenting their magnitude will have broad significance to the
              entire microelectronics industry.  ***
