Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Subgroups of Residually Torsion- Free Nilpotent
               Metabelian Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9631554

Award Number: 9631554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ada Peluso peluso@math.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research results over the last thirty years have indicated that  finitely
              presented groups are very complex in their subgroup  structure.  For instance,
              it is known that a finitely generated  metabelian group is a subgroup of a
              finitely presented metabelian  group.  In order to examine still further the
              complexity of  finitely presented groups, it is of interest to determine
              whether  a finitely generated metabelian group with a specific property  can be
              embedded in a finitely presented metabelian group with the  same property.  The
              initial objective of the investigator had  been to prove the general statement
              that if G is a finitely  generated residually nilpotent (or residually
              torsion-free  nilpotent) metabelian group, then G is a subgroup of a finitely 
              presented metabelian group that is also residually nilpotent (or  residually
              torsion-free nilpotent).  This appears to be a  complicated problem, as
              evidenced by the machinery required to  solve it for the free metabelian case. 
                In the special case of free metabelian groups it is known that  finitely
              generated free metabelian groups are residually  nilpotent and residually
              torsion-free nilpotent.  The  investigator has proved that a finitely generated
              free metabelian  group can be embedded in a finitely presented metabelian group
               that is also residually nilpotent.  Furthermore, a finitely  generated free
              metabelian group can be embedded in a finitely  presented metabelian group that
              is also residually torsion-free  nilpotent.  One of the tools developed by the
              investigator to  obtain these results is a sufficient condition for the
              residual  nilpotence and residual torsion-free nilpotence of certain  finitely
              presented metabelian groups that arise from a matrix  representation for
              metabelian groups.  The matrix entries belong  to specified groups and
              specified modules of fractions.  To show  the sufficient condition can be
              satisfied, use is made of the  notion of S-isolator of an ideal, where S is a
              multiplicative  semigroup.  The investigat or is attempting to develop further 
              insight and additional tools with which to try to solve the  initial problem
              mentioned above.  An extension to be considered  is to let the matrix entries
              belong to certain factor groups of  modules and to determine whether the
              resulting matrix group is  residually torsion-free nilpotent.
