Title       : Research Planning Grant: Novel Surface Molecules on Oligodendrocyte Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9631764

Award Number: 9631764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise L. Gay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The development of oligodendrocytes has many of the hallmarks of other
              developmental paradigms.  Predetermined proliferating stem cells exit their
              birthplace, the embryonic subventricular zone, and migrate into the brain
              parenchyma, where, by mechanisms not understood, they cease migration and
              proliferation, and begin the process of myelination, i.e., the enwrapment of
              neuronal axons and the correlated expression of numerous myelin-associated
              genes.  Although advances have been made in this area of research, large gaps
              remain in our understanding of oligodendrocyte development, in part reflecting
              a scarcity of well-defined cell-surface differentiation markers.  To address
              this concern, Dr. Gay has made twenty-six monoclonal antibodies against
              cell-surface molecules on mouse oligodendrocyte precursors.  These monoclonal
              antibodies bind oligodendrocyte precursors but not fibroblasts, T cells, B
              cells, macrophages, or astrocytes, suggesting that most recognize molecules
              specific to oligodendrocyte precursors.  In addition, several monoclonal
              antibodies distinguish subsets of oligodendrocyte precursors, suggesting
              heterogeneity within a lineage of cells previously considered homogeneous.  The
              purpose of this study is to characterize these novel markers specifically to
              increase our understanding of oligodendrocyte development and broadly to
              develop a well-defined developmental system that may be applied to basic
              developmental questions.  Specifically, Dr. Gay will determine the expression
              profiles and functions of some of these new oligodendrocyte markers, determine
              the biochemical nature of these markers, and isolate the genes that encode
              them.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
