Title       : Molecular Beam Mass Spectrometry Studies of the Kinetics and Mechanism of the
               Thermal and Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition of Transition and Main
               Group Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9631794

Award Number: 9631794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmela Amato-Wierda ccaw@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9631794 Amato-Weirda  This Research Planning Grant addresses gas-phase
              chemistry of thermal and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition(CVD) of
              several metal nitrides.  Molecular beam mass spectrometry (MBMS) is being
              coupled to a fast-flow reactor in order to monitor in situ  and in real time
              gas-phase species and the kinetics of CVD reactions.  Various precursor systems
              will be investigated including homoleptic dialkylamido complexes of transition
              and main group metals  M(NR2)n  and ammonia, and more traditional systems such
              as metal halides(MX4) and ammonia. Thermal CVD studies will also investigate
              single-source precursors including Ti(NMe2)4 and Ti(NMe2)3(t-Bu) in the absence
              of ammonia, and  TiCl2(NHt-Bu)2(NHt-Bu)2 n. Gas-phase species and the kinetics
              of their formation will be determined as a function of reaction conditions:
              temperature, total and partial pressures of reactants, and residence time. 
              Additionally, films will be deposited simultaneously and gas-phase species
              correlated to film properties such as, growth rate, stoichiometry, and
              composition. %%% The understanding of gas-phase chemistry at the molecular
              level is crucial for future rational and significant improvement in materials
              synthesis by chemical vapor deposition(CVD). More importantly the exploration
              of CVD gas-phase chemistry and kinetics is necessary for the development of
              general reaction modeling, as well as understanding the relationships among
              precursor systems, reactivity patterns, and final film properties.  While this
              project will focus primarily on the study of kinetics and mechanisms of
              reactions, it will also contribute to a greater general understanding of
              nitrides materials synthesis and processing issues.  The planning grant will
              aid the PI in accomplishing enough preliminary work to show the promise of
              ideas or to modify them based on the data acquired.  Thus, support during the
              planning period will aid the PI in preparing a more competitive full proposal.
              ***
