Title       : Genetic Modulation of Self-recognition in Brassica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9631921

Award Number: 9631921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail E. Nasrallah men4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              June B. Nasrallah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9631921  Nasrallah  Genetic self-incompatibility, whereby the stigma of
              the flower is able to inhibit pollen germination and pollen tube development
              after self-pollination, represents one of the more promising systems for
              analyzing cell-cell communication in higher plants.  In Brassica, Dr. Nasrallah
              has demonstrated that the self-incompatibility S locus is a multifunctional
              gene complex that controls signal perception through genes that are expressed
              in cells of the stigma epidermis and that encode plasma membrane- and cell
              wall-localized receptors.  Thus, elucidation of the mechanism of
              self-incompatibility in this system is likely to provide insight into
              receptor-mediated cell-cell signaling in plants.  They will continue their
              analysis of mutations that lead to the breakdown of self-incompatibility with
              the goal of identifying genes, either at the S locus or at unlinked loci, that
              encode the various components of the recognition and signal transduction phases
              of the self-incompatibility response.  They will focus on a series of deletions
              that they have recently generated in strains carrying defined S haplotypes. 
              Two classes of lesions that perturb the self-incompatibility response in stigma
              and/or pollen have been identified.  In one class, the lesions map to the S
              locus and will be exploited to isolate novel genes required for the perception
              phase of the response.  A second class of lesions results in the
              stigma-specific breakdown of self-incompatibility; these lesions affect a locus
              unlinked to the S locus which is a condidate for a gene controlling a step in
              the self-incompatibility signaling cascade.  The study promises to influence
              our thinking on how plant cells transduce signals across their outer cell wall,
              how they utilize a precise molecular recognition system, and how a
              multi-component signal perception system has evolved and is maintained in a
              coadaped gene complex.
