Title       : Domestic Politics and International Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9631990

Award Number: 9631990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alastair M. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fiona McGillivray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631990  Smith    The research team investigates how domestic conditions affect
              international crises and how the outcome of these crises affects the domestic
              survival of political leaders.  More specifically, the researchers use a series
              of game theoretic models to answer the following question:  How does domestic
              politics affect foreign policy?  How do nations interact at the international
              level, and how do the outcomes of international events affect the domestic
              survival of political leaders?  The international relations literature has
              typically treated these relationships between internal and external politics as
              separate, independent questions.  In this study the investigators integrate
              these three questions into a single coherent model.    The investigation
              develops a formal model to explain how domestic politics interacts with
              international events.  The researchers rigorously test the predictions of the
              theory.  The research introduces the International Crisis Game:  A simple model
              that represents the conflictual incentives facing nations involved in crises. 
              Augmenting this game with a model of domestic politics generates predictions
              about the interaction of international and domestic politics.  Specifically,
              the model indicates how domestic conditions influence the outcome of
              international crises.  The model also predicts the domestic consequences of
              different international outcomes.    This investigation promises to
              substantially enhance our understanding of the topic.  ***
