Title       : The Importance of Halogen Atom Chemistry in the Arctic Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9631572

Award Number: 9631572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $663817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Shepson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wen-yih Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale W. Margerum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Francisco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1309,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631572    Shepson       Recent observations in the Arctic indicate that there
              is a poorly understood  process occurring in which ozone is rapidly destroyed
              in the lower troposphere near  the surface of the Arctic Ocean. A number of
              field measurement studies have resulted  in the hypothesis that ozone is being
              destroyed by a catalytic cycle involving Br  atoms. If this were important in
              the marine environments in general, it would have  substantial implications for
              our understanding and modeling of the global budget of  tropospheric ozone.
              However, there are several areas of the chemistry and dynamics  of the process
              that are poorly understood, for example: What is the source of bromine  atoms?
              What is the fate of the BrO radicals produced? What are the important  removal
              mechanisms for reactive bromine radicals? What is the mechanism for  recycling
              HBr? What are the spatial and temporal characteristics of ozone destruction  in
              the Arctic troposphere? Purdue University has brought together four groups of 
              researchers with complementary capabilities to enable them to uniquely pursue
              the  answers to these questions. The specific objectives, and associated
              approaches, of this  research effort are:       (1) Measurement of the kinetics
              of the operative reactions, presumably  occurring on the surface of or within
              sea salt or acidic sulfate aerosol, whereby  bromide ions are oxidized to
              molecular bromine or other photolytically active bromine  compounds, under
              conditions relevant to the Arctic. These measurements will be  conducted using
              stopped-flow and pulsed accelerated flow spectroscopic techniques.       (2) 
              Investigation of the competitive reaction paths for Br and Cl atom  reactions
              with aldehydes and ketones, the reactions between BrO and ClO radicals,  and
              the role of anions in catalyzing aqueous phase oxidation of the bromide ion.
              This  work will be conducted using ab initio computational methods.       (3) 
              Development and application of highly sensitive and selective methods for   the
              mea surement of carbonyl compounds. This instrument will be used in future
              field   projects in the Arctic. The results of the laboratory, field and
              computational studies  will be integrated into a box model of the detailed
              chemistry occurring in the Arctic  marine boundary layer.       (4)  The Purdue
              Mesoscale Model will be refined for application to the Arctic.  The modified
              and optimized model will then be tested against observational data from  the
              Arctic, followed by incorporation of the box-model chemistry.  ***
