Title       : Phosphotyrosine Protein Phosphatases in Streptomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9631155

Award Number: 9631155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Kendrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Strohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631155  Strohl  A gene (ptpA) from Streptomyces coelicolor was isolated that
              encodes a protein having  high deduced sequence similarity with mammalian
              small, acidic phosphotyrosine protein  phosphatases (PTPPs). The protein
              encoded by ptpA was purified and was found to have  strong in vitro
              phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity that is competitively inhibited by 
              dephostatin, a highly specific phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase inhibitor.
              ptpA was found to be expressed only under minimal medium growth conditions, the
              same conditions under which growth of S. coelicolor was inhibited by
              dephostatin, a potent inhibitor of PtpA in vitro. The working hypothesis is
              that PtpA and(or) other unknown PTPPs dephosphorylate target protein (or
              proteins), the action of which is (are) required for growth in minimal medium.
              These and other supportive data strongly suggest that protein tyrosine
              phosphorylation plays an important, but as yet undefined, role in the
              regulation of S. coelicolor metabolism. Very little is currently known about
              the role of protein-tyrosine phosphorylation in bacteria. Thus, the long term
              goals of this research are to elucidate the function(s) for protein tyrosine
              phosphorylation in S. coelicolor.  The problem will be approached through the
              discovery of ptpA and the finding that specific PTPP and protein tyrosine
              kinase inhibitors conditionally inhibit S. coelicolor growth.  The specific
              aims of this project are: (1) To determine precisely under what conditions ptpA
              is expressed in S. coelicolor; (2) To determine if ptpA mutation or
              overexpression result in observable, expected phenotypic changes. If not, then
              the PTPP(s) responsible for dephostatin inhibition of growth in minimal medium
              will be identified and isolated; (3) To study PtpA activity in vivo and to
              determine and isolate PtpA substrate(s); and (4) As a lead-in to future
              studies, mutants of S. coelicolor resistant to PTPP and protein-tyrosine kinase
              inhibitors will be isolated and used to initiate the isolation of other gen es
              associated with PTPP-related metabolism. This study will advance the knowledge
              of a poorly understood biochemical mechanism in bacteria, i.e.,
              protein-tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, and its role in
              regulation of bacterial metabolism.  %%%  Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
              of proteins are involved in the relay of biochemical information from one type
              of metabolism to another.  An unusual  protein tyrosine phosphatase, an enzyme
              that catalyzes the removal of a phosphate group from the tyrosyl residues of
              other proteins, was discovered in the antibiotic-producing bacterium,
              Streptomyces coelicolor.  Preliminary evidence suggests that this protein
              phosphatase may be involved in regulation of the central metabolism of this
              organism and perhaps also morphogenesis and antibiotic production.  Thus, the
              goal of this research is to determine the specific function of this protein
              phosphatase.  This research also will explore additional similar protein
              phosphatases to determine their potential roles in regulation of metabolism or
              morphogenesis in this interesting bacterium.  ***
