Title       : The Welfare State, the Labor Market, and the Stability of Family Income: A
               Comparison of the U.S. and Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9631944

Award Number: 9631944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96395              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DiPrete tdiprete@soc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the stability of family income in the United States and
              Germany.  It compares the relative importance of labor market and welfare state
              institutions in accounting for or controlling temporal instability in living
              standards.  A substantial body of research has arisen in recent years to assess
              the impact of rapid technological change and the globalization of markets on
              work careers, earnings, and the structure of inequality in society.  It is now
              clear that the impact of structural change on these outcomes depends both on
              the institutional characteristics of labor markets and on state social welfare
              policy, and scholars have addressed a number of important aspects concerning
              these linkages.  Two important issues, however, have received relatively little
              attention.  First, little research has focused on the dynamics of family income
              as opposed to individual earnings.  Second, little is known about the relative
              importance of labor market institutions, welfare state policies, and changes in
              family composition in creating or damping turbulence in the financial situation
              of families.  A comparison of the United States and Germany will be valuable
              for three reasons.  First, the institutional character of both Germany's labor
              markets and Germany's welfare state policies are quite different from those of
              the United States.  Second, family structure is more stable in Germany than in
              the United States.  Third, there exist high quality longitudinal data that
              allow comparable measures of the relevant variables for the two countries.  The
              research utilizes data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and from the
              German Socio-Economic Panel to measure the level of fluctuation in overall
              family income and in its principal components (labor income, asset income,
              private transfers, taxes, and government transfers) for the period from 1983
              until the very recent past.  Fluctuation in these components of income and in
              overall income will be decomposed using standard methods, and the decomposition
              s for the United States and Germany will be compared in order to establish the
              amount of cross national differences, and the explanation for these
              differences.     The findings will be valuable for several subdisciplines of
              sociology and economics, as well as for understanding the effect of government
              policies on families.  This research addresses key questions concerning human
              capital, especially the ways that alternative labor market and welfare state
              institutions affect family income and well-being.
