Title       : Multielectron Photoinduced Charge Transfer Chemistry in a Molecular System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1998  
File        : a9631380

Award Number: 9631380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Bocarsly bocarsly@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Andrew B. Bocarsly of the Chemistry Department, Princeton University,   is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program for research on the photochemistry and photophysics of   multielectron
              charge transfer reactions.  A multimetal cyano-bridged   Pt(IV) system has been
              shown to undergo a two-electron charge transfer   reaction after
              photoexcitation.  This system will be studied in detail in   order to gain
              better understanding of the primary controlling process.    The electronic and
              molecular structure of the primary photoproduct will   be determined using high
              speed laser spectroscopy. The degree of   delocalization associated with the
              charge transfer state will be   determined, as well as the role of solvent. 
              This information will be   used to synthesize new cyano-bridged multinuclear
              systems in order to   provide molecular control over the observed charge
              transfer chemistry.  Materials in which electrons are mobilized after being
              activated by light   are technologically important.  In this project, the
              structural details   of the effect of reaction with light on a series of
              compounds will be   determined.  Attempts will be made to extend the lifetime
              of the material   so that further photoactivation can take place.  This
              fundamental   research project will improve capability to utilize solar energy
              for the   formation of useful fuels and fine chemicals and to develop nonlinear
                optical materials.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
