Title       : Imperfect Play in Games of Incomplete Information: Theory and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9631627

Award Number: 9631627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. McKelvey rdm@hss.caltech.eedu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Palfrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McKelvey  631627    This project continues research on a class of statistical
              models of equilibrium behavior in games called Quantal Response Equilibria
              (QRE).   Besides providing new insights into behavior in games, this approach
              provides a potentially useful tool for the econometrics of game theory.  Under
              this renewal grant, the investigators: 1) further develop and extend the theory
              in a number of different directions; 2) investigate its implications for
              several applications, including bargaining, public good provision, spatial
              competition, and oligopolistic competition; and 3) continue experimental work
              in game theory, as it relates to the QRE model.    The basic idea of this
              theory is that, from the point of view of an outsider, each player's behavior
              is subject to statistical variation.  Regardless of the source of such
              variation, this variation will generally have systematic effects in
              equilibrium, even if the sources of the variation are non-systematic.  This
              induces systematic changes in the responses of the other players.  The basic
              hypothesis about the statistical process governing individual behavior is that,
              given a set of alternative choices, individuals choose probabilistically,
              choosing better alternatives more often than worse alternatives.  In a game,
              the available choices to a player are give by his or her strategy set.  The
              expect utility of each strategy for a player is determined by the probability
              distribution of the strategies of the other players of the game.  The choice
              probability function in the model is called a Quantal Response Function and is
              assumed to be continuous and positively responsive to the expected payoff of
              each strategy.  A Quantal Response Equilibrium is a fixed point of the quantal
              response function, just as a Nash Equilibrium is a fixed point of the best
              response correspondence.  The Nash equilibrium model thus corresponds to an
              extreme limiting case of this model, in which the probability of choosing an
              optimal alternative is equal to one.  To appl y this to specific games, the
              investigators use a particular class of response functions associated with the
              logit model of choice.  Each individual is assumed to have the same logit
              response parameter (which indexes how close it is to the standard best response
              model).  Under the previous grant the investigators established a number of 
              properties of the logit equilibrium correspondence, illustrate these properties
              in some special games, and analyze the data from simple experimental 2-person
              games.  The analysis of the experimental games consists of fitting the data for
              these different experiments to the logit model, by obtaining maximum-likelihood
              estimates of the logit parameters.  Under this grant, the investigators extend
              the estimation models to allow for heterogeneity and learning, and also to test
              the logit specification against alternative parametric quantal response models.
                 ??
