Title       : Visual Perception as Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1998  
File        : a9631682

Award Number: 9631682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Kersten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631682  KERSTEN    One of the great mysteries of science is how the human
              visual  system determines what and where objects are just by looking.    When
              viewing a scene, the visual system solves, in an instant,  the problems of
              recognizing objects, deciding what they are made  of, and where they are
              relative to each other and the viewer.   The seeming effortlessness of this
              achievement is all the more  remarkable because the image input to the eye is
              locally  ambiguous, i.e., in any patch of an image, there is rarely an 
              unequivocal cue to how far away it is, what it is made of, or how  it is
              illuminated.  Somehow, the brain makes its best bet as to  what is out there
              from this ambiguous image, and these decisions  are rarely wrong.  In addition,
              the image of an object is highly  variable depending on illumination and
              viewpoint.  For example,  illuminating an object from the left or right has
              relatively  little effect on our perception of the object, despite the fact 
              that the object's two images are quite different.  This research  stems from
              the hypothesis that vision solves the problem of  ambiguity by exploiting the
              constraints on how images are formed  and on the a priori statistical
              regularities inherent in object  and scene structure.  From this point of view,
              vision is a  process of statistical inference that makes good bets based on 
              available information and solves the problem of variability, in  part, by
              constraints that are determined by the task itself, such  as determining where,
              rather than what, an object is.      This research will investigate human
              perception of the spatial  layout of objects and object properties.  Vision
              determines  spatial layout from well over a dozen sources of depth 
              information, including cast shadows.  It is well-known to artists  that the
              closer the image of an object's shadow is to the object  itself, the closer the
              object is to the surface receiving the  shadow.  How visual perception makes
              this inference is not clear,  because local image informatio n does not
              uniquely specify whether  a local brightness change is a shadow or not.  This
              research will  identify constraints in the image and scene that resolve the 
              ambiguities in the perception of depth from shadows.  As for the  perception of
              spatial layout, determining object properties and  identity is also confounded
              by local ambiguity as well as by  variability in illumination.   Experiments
              comparing the  performance of human and statistically optimal observers for 
              inferences about object shape, material and identity will tease  apart the
              relative roles of prior knowledge and image cues in  removing uncertainty about
              the properties of objects.    Visual perception is a major way in which we
              acquire knowledge of  the world.  Computer scientists have yet to produce a
              machine  that can recognize objects in natural images.   Understanding how 
              human vision resolves ambiguity about object location and  identity promises to
              guide the development of artificial vision  systems and help to unravel the
              mysteries of the brain itself.  ***
