Title       : Roles of Attention in Motion Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9631573

Award Number: 9631573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeo Watanabe takeo@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9631573  WATANABE    Visual perception is often considered a passive and simple
              event.  This view derives partly from the general assumption that visual 
              information goes only from the retina to higher-level areas in  the brain, and
              not in the other direction.  However, recent  anatomical and physiological
              findings indicate that there are  massive feedback pathways in the brain along
              which information is  carried from these higher-level brain areas back to
              low-level  areas, including those processing visual information.  It is not 
              yet well known what role these feedback projections play in  visual information
              processing in the brain.    This research is concerned with the role of
              attention, one of the  most important cognitive functions originating in higher
              brain  areas.  It will examine what level of visual processing is the  lowest
              that can be influenced by attention.  Answering this  question will lead to a
              better understanding of the role of  feedback projections from high-level brain
              areas, where cognitive  functions likely originate, to lower level visual
              processing.  In  a series of experiments, people will watch a moving object on
              a  computer display and will be instructed to pay attention only to  a local
              contour of the object.  One minute after the onset of the  moving object, each
              person's sensitivity to motion in several  directions, such as upward and
              rightward, will be measured.      Motion processing is known to have at least
              two stages:  In the  first stage, the direction of motion of the whole object
              is not  detected by the visual system.   Only the many local motion  components
              perpendicular to the local contours of a moving object  are detected.  This
              stage begins in the primary visual cortex in  which very low-level visual
              processing occurs.  In the second  stage, the signals from detection of the
              directions of these  local motion components are integrated, so that the true 
              direction of motion of the entire object can be calculated.       In these
              experiments, if attention  influences the first stage of  motion processing,
              sensitivity to the originally attended local  motion should decrease.  On the
              other hand, if attention does not  influence such a low-level stage of
              processing, sensitivity to  the direction of motion should not be influenced by
              the  allocation of attention.  A preliminary experimental result using  only
              two people indicated that the former is the case.  If this  result is confirmed
              with additional people, it will indicate that  attention can influence even
              very primitive stages of visual  information processing, leading to the
              conclusion that feedback  projections play a very important role in making
              visual  perception active and influenced by high-level cognitive  functions,
              rather than entirely passive and automatic.     These results should have
              important implications for the design  of computer vision systems, a very
              difficult computer problem.  ***
