Title       : Genetic Analysis of Pokeweed Antiviral Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9631308

Award Number: 9631308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Tumer Tumer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Annette N. Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9631308  Tumer  Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), a ribosome-inactivating
              protein (RIP) isolated from pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) has ribosome
              inhibitory (cytotoxic) activity. PAP works as a nondiscriminatory antiviral
              agent on both plants and animals despite vast differences in infection
              mechanisms. Basic information about how PAP acts on cells and how it can
              inhibit viral infection is not well understood.  Recently, by using random
              mutagenesis and selection in yeast, a number of different nontoxic PAP mutants
              were isolated, some of which retain their enzymatic activity.  Sequence
              analysis of the mutants indicated that in addition to residues at the active
              site, sequences near the N-terminus and at the C-terminus of PAP are critical
              for cytotoxicity.  Thus the toxicity of PAP is not due solely to enzymatic
              activity and may involve different domains of the protein.  Analysis of virus
              resistance in transgenic plants expressing an active-site mutant demonstrated
              that enzymatic activity of PAP is required for its antiviral activity. The
              primary objective of this proposal is to use recombinant mutants of PAP to
              investigate the mechanism of selective cytotoxicity and antiviral activity. 
              The proposed studies may lead to a better understanding of nonspecific and
              targeted toxicities of PAP and ultimately to the design of more effective
              therapeutic agents. Objectives are:  1. To identify PAP sequences that are
              critical for cytotoxicity and antiviral activity.  PAP residues which
              correspond to those involved in substrate binding and catalysis in ricin will
              be mutated to determine if the toxicity and antiviral activity of these mutants
              is affected. Structural models of these mutants will be generated by
              substitution of the mutant residues in the three dimensional structure of
              wild-type PAP as rudimentary guides for understanding mutations abrogating the
              toxicity of PAP.  2. To compare the ability of PAP and PAP mutants to bind to
              healthy versus virus-infected plant cells and identify domains that are 
              critical in binding and internalization.  PAP has been shown to nonspecifically
              bind to certain cell types and enter them by pinocytosis.  Whether  PAP can
              bind to plant cells and whether PAP's selective toxicity is due to differences
              in binding and/or internalization between healthy versus virus-infected cells
              will be tested.  3. To determine if PAP acts on the viral RNA and whether
              antiviral activity results from a direct effect on the viral RNA.  Studies with
              animal viruses suggest that PAP and related RIPs can inhibit viral RNA
              translation without affecting the host cell translation, suggesting that RIP's
              cytotoxicity against virus-infected cells may be due to modification of the
              viral nucleic acid, rather than the disruption of the host ribosomal RNA. 
              Studies will test the hypothesis that PAP may use viral RNA as a substrate and
              the antiviral activity may result from depurination of the viral RNA.  4. To
              characterize chromosomal mutants of yeast resistant to PAP and clone the genes
              responsible for the mutations.  Toxicity of PAP to normal yeast cells and an
              inducible expression system has to be used to isolate yeast mutants which can
              grow in the presence of galactose.  Several plasmid-linked and chromosomal
              mutants were identified.  The plasmid and chromosomal mutants will be further
              characterized and the genes responsible for the chromosomal mutations will be
              cloned by complementation.  ***
