Title       : Cellular and Molecular Studies of Tobamovirus Movement Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9631124

Award Number: 9631124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger N. Beachy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-31124  Beachy    Most plant viruses, including tobacco mosaic virus (TMV),
              use plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic bridges between proximal cells, to spread to
              adjacent cells. Most plant viruses encode one or two proteins that are required
              for virus movement through the plasmodesmata. These proteins are termed
              movement proteins (MP). The latter apparently functions by modifying the size
              exclusion limits of plasmodesmata. The PI has constructed mutants of MP in
              which the latter is fused to the green fluorescent protein (GFP) of Aequorea
              victoria to study cellular distribution and mode of action of the MP. The
              general goals of this proposal are: to determine the time course of GFP-MP
              cellular distribution during the course of infection in protoplasts and in
              leaves; to create mutations in the MP that leads to accumulation of GFP-MP in
              specific cellular structures, but not in other; to isolate cellular structures
              that contain GFP-MP, to determine what cellular components are associated with
              GFP-MP; as well as studies that include detailed analyses of GFP-MP in cells.
              These studies will add significantly to our knowledge about the intra- and
              inter-cellular distribution of TMV, as well as our knowledge of the role of the
              cytoskeleton in the targeting and transport of proteins in plasmodesmata.  %%% 
              Most plant viruses have evolved the capacity to use components in host cells
              for viral genome replication, for translation of viral proteins, for sorting
              and packaging of viral components, for export, and for spreading to proximal
              cells. For the latter process, most viruses encode proteins that modify the
              size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata. These proteins are termed movement
              proteins (MP). Little is known about the molecular mechanism of the MP. The
              proposed studies will investigate the cellular localization and mode of action
              of the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) MP. These studies will increase significantly
              our knowledge about the cellular distribution of TMV as well as the role of the
              cytoskeleton in the t argeting and, possibly, in the transport of MP to
              plasmodesmata.  ***
