Title       : Characterization of Mechanisms Controlling Cellular Resistance to Singlet Oxygen
               Generating Photosensitizers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9631375

Award Number: 9631375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret E. Daub margaret_daub@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn Ehrenshaft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Daub  9631375  The goal of this work is to characterize genes and defense
              mechanisms responsible for cellular resistance to singlet oxygen generating
              photosensitizers.  Photosensitizers are light-activated compounds which, in the
              activated state, react with oxygen through electron or energy transfer
              reactions to produce active oxygen species.  One of the most reactive of the
              oxygen species is the activated singlet state of oxygen (singlet oxygen or
              1O2). 1O2 is highly toxic, destroying critical cellular components such as
              lipids, proteins, and DNA, and often leading to cell death.  This project
              focuses on the photosensitizer cercosporin which is produced by members of the
              fungal genus Cercospora and plays an important role in the ability of these
              organisms to parasitize plants.  Cercospora is toxic to plants, fungi,
              bacteria, mice, and cultured human tumor cells.  Cerospora species. however,
              are resistant to it.  In order to isolate genes which are responsible for
              resistance to cercosporin, two types of cercosporin-sensitive Cercospora
              mutants were isolated.  Two cercosporin resistance genes were then isolated by
              complementing the mutants with DNA from a genomic library of the wild type
              strain.  The goal of this project is to characterize these genes and to
              determine their cellular function.  First, the gene sequence and deduced amino
              acid sequence will be used to identify homology with other known genes and gene
              products.  Second, the regulation of the genes will be investigated.  Third,
              the location of the gene products in cells will be determined by immunolabeling
              and electron microscopy.  Finally, the ability of the genes to impart
              cercosporin and photosensitizer resistance in normally sensitive organisms
              (Escherichia coli and Aspergillus flavus) will be determined.  If time permits,
              a separated-surface-sensitizer system will be used to define if the genes are
              able to protect against 1O2 itself or if they function by altering the
              photosensitizer molecule.  These studies will lead to the iden tification and
              characterization of genes and defense mechanisms that control cellular
              resistance to 1O2 -generating photosensitizers.  Although oxygen is necessary
              for life on our planet, slightly modified forms of oxygen exist which are
              highly toxic to living organisms.  Toxic forms of oxygen, usually referred to
              as "active oxygen", have been implicated in aging and in diseases of plants. 
              This research focuses on characterizing genes which protect organisms against
              toxic forms of  oxygen and understanding how they work.  This work will advance
              our understanding how to protect organisms against the damaging effects of
              active oxygen and thus have the potential to lead to improvements in plant
              health.
