Title       : Knot Theory and Dynamics in Contact Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0203941

Award Number: 0203941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214096             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Etnyre etnyre@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0203941
John Etnyre

The focus of this proposal is to better understand
              the nature of contact structures in 
all (odd) dimensions, with special
              attention given to dimension three, and to apply contact 
topological
              techniques to questions in hydrodynamics. The first main theme of the
              
proposed research is Legendrian knots. Legendrian knots are knots that are
              tangent to 
a contact structure and seem to encode a great deal of information
              about the contact 
structure. For example, the famed tight vs. overtwisted
              dichotomy in dimension three 
can be understood in terms of Legendrian knots.
              These knots also give an important invariant 
of a contact structure. As part
              of this proposal the general structure of Legendrian knots 
will be studied.
              The expected outcome will be various classification result for certain
              
Legendrian knots and contact structures; and, moreover, a better
              understanding of Legendrian 
surgery (an important surgery construction of
              contact structures). Legendrian knots in 
higher dimensions will also be
              studied using contact homology. There is very little known 
about contact
              structures, or Legendrian knots, in dimensions above three. By investigating
              
Legendrian knots in these dimensions the nature of contact structures should
              be illuminated, 
just as the corresponding study revealed much about three
              dimensional contact structures. 
The final part of the proposed research
              centers on the connection between contact structures 
and hydrodynamics
              discovered a few years ago by the Principal Investigator and R. Ghrist. 
Here
              work with Ghrist will continue with the aim of understanding when, and what
              type of, 
closed flow lines occur in fluid flows. We shall also study
              hydrodynamic instability from 
the contact topological perspective. This
              naturally leads into the study of energy minimization 
for fluid flows and
              relations between contact and Riemannian geometry.

Contact structures are
              very natural objects, born over two centuries ago, in the work of Huygens,
              
Hamilton and  Jacobi on geometric optics. Through the centuries contact
              structures have touched 
on many diverse areas of mathematics and physics,
              including classical mechanics and thermodynamics. 
In everyday life one
              encounters contact geometry when ice skating, parallel parking a car,
              
navigating a submarine, using a refrigerator, or simply watching the
              beautiful play of light in a 
glass of water. Many great mathematicians have
              devoted a lot of their work to this subject  but 
only in the last decade or
              two has it moved into the foreground of mathematics. This renaissance 
is due
              to the recent remarkable breakthroughs in contact topology, resulting in a rich
              and beautiful  
theory with many applications. The most remarkable feature of
              all this recent work is the intimate 
connections between contact structures
              and topology in dimension three. Moreover, there were 
important newfound
              interactions with Hamiltonian mechanics, symplectic and sub-Riemannian
              geometry, 
foliation theory, complex geometry and analysis, topological
              hydrodynamics, and knot theory. The 
Principal Investigator will explore new
              connections between contact structures and topology in all 
(odd) dimensions
              and continue his study of idealized fluid flows (hydrodynamics) via contact
              geometry.

