Title       : Contact Geometry, Fano Orbifolds, and Einstein Metrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0203219

Award Number: 0203219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Boyer cboyer@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Galicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0203219.

Professors Boyer and Galicki propose to investigate
              several 
projects in geometry and topology. The objective of all the 
              
projects is to study fundamental questions in Riemannian 
Geometry with two
              main focal points:  Contact Geometry of
orbifold bundles over Fano varieties
              and the existence of some
special (i.e., Einstein, positive Ricci curvature)
              metrics on such spaces. 
The questions and problems proposed here are deeply
              rooted in the
principal investigators' earlier work which exploited a
              fundamental 
relationship between contact geometry of Sasakian-Einstein spaces
              and 
two kinds of Kaehler geometry, namely Q-factorial Fano varieties with
              
Kaehler-Einstein orbifold metrics with positive scalar curvature, and
              
Calabi-Yau manifolds with their Kaehler Ricci-flat metrics. 
The most recent
              work of the principal investigators has led to an 
important breakthrough in
              the study of such structures when,
using recent results of Demailly and
              Kollar, the principal investigators
were able to construct new examples of
              compact Einstein manifolds in dimension 
5 as well as many positive Einstein
              metrics on families of rational
homology 7-spheres. The techniques used by the
              principal investigators borrow from
several different fields; the algebraic
              geometry of Mori theory and intersection
theory, the analysis of the Calabi
              Conjecture, and finally the
classical differential topology of links of
              isolated hypersurface
singularities. These methods can be extended much
              further and in
various directions. An example that stands out in this respect
              is the 
question of the existence of Einstein metrics on exotic spheres, which
              is 
one of the main objectives of this proposal. More generally the principal
              investigators 
want to  address several classification problems concerning
              compact Sasakian-Einstein 
manifolds in dimensions 5 and 7. These two
              dimensions are important for two separate 
reasons. In view of earlier work
              higher dimensional examples can be constructed using 
the join construction.
              At the same time these two odd dimensions appear to play special 
role in
              Superstring Theory. In the context of recent developements in
String and
              M-Theory the principal investigators also propose to
investigate some related
              problems concerning  self-dual Einstein metrics in 
dimension 4 and
              exceptional holonomy metrics in dimension 7 and 8.

This project is intended
              to further the understanding of the mathematics
of certain important types of
              geometry. While this endeavor is not
directly motivated by advances in
              technology, the history of mathematics
adequately demonstrates that today's
              pure mathematics often becomes
tomorrow's applied mathematics. Indeed the
              mathematics being considered in
this project is currently being used in the
              field of Elementary Particle
Physics, more specifically, in the attempts at
              understanding a unified
description of the fundamental forces of the
              universe.

-

