Title       : Subdivision Rules and 3-Manifold Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0203902

Award Number: 0203902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89016              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Floyd floyd@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0203902
William J. Floyd

This project is an attempt to resolve the
              hyperbolic case of
Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture. Specifically, the
              goal is to
resolve the conjecture that a Gromov-hyperbolic group with space
              at
infinity a 2-sphere has a cocompact, properly discontinuous action
              on
hyperbolic 3-space. The investigator and his collaborators are
approaching
              the conjecture from the point of view of proving
conformality of certain
              recursive sequences of tilings on the space
at infinity of a Gromov-hyperbolic
              group. Previous work has indicated
that conformality of a recursive sequence
              of tilings might follow
from finding an invariant conformal structure for a
              branched surface
associated to the recursive structure. This possibility arose
              from a
connection between the recursive structures and rational maps,
              and
Thurston's classification theorem for critically finite branched maps
of
              the 2-sphere gives insight into how the theory might develop.
Multiple
              approaches are planned for finding an invariant conformal
structure. Further
              work is also planned on twisted face-pairing
3-manifolds. Much of the basic
              theory of twisted face pairings has
been completed, but some questions remain
              which are central to
further developments of the theory. Significant progress
              here could
help the main part of the project, since twisted face pairings are
              a
good source of test examples for the conjecture stated above.

The
              immediate focus of this proposal is on sequences of planar
tilings. Given an
              initial tiling and a combinatorial rule for
subdivision, one recursively
              obtains a sequence of subdivisions of
the initial tiling. The goal is to
              understand when these combinatorial
subdivisions can be realized geometrically
              so that the tiles stay
"almost round" at all stages of the sequence. This
              problem is
interesting in its own right, but it is being studied here as part
              of
a deeper problem. It is a key feature of a program of the
investigator and
              his collaborators to resolve the hyperbolic case of
William P. Thurston's
              Geometrization Conjecture. The Geometrization
Conjecture, which is the central
              outstanding problem in
low-dimensional topology (it includes the Poincare
              conjecture as a
special case), states that every compact 3-manifold can be
              naturally
subdivided into geometric pieces. The techniques being developed
              for
approaching this have potential applications in other disciplines.


