Title       : Reflecting Brownian Motion in Convex Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0203961

Award Number: 0203961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53367              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai N. Pascu pascu@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0203961
Pascu
	The PI will study several connected problems related to
              reflecting Brownian motion in convex domains. Motivated originally by the
              interest of the proposer in solving the hot spots conjecture, the first problem
              concerns the construction of couplings of reflecting Brownian motion in convex
              domains. The author introduced a new type of coupling of reflecting Brownian
              motions, which led him to a partial resolution of the hot spots conjecture; the
              author will try to develop these coupling arguments, with the hope of solving
              this long-standing conjecture with roots in mathematical physics. In connection
              to this problem is the more general conjecture of the diagonal monotonicity of
              the Neumann heat kernel of convex domains with one axis of symmetry (which
              implies the hot spots conjecture). A related open problem which the PI intends
              to study is Chavel's conjecture on the domain monotonicity of Neumann heat
              kernel. In the view of the PI, coupling techniques can be used here to obtain
              classes of domains for which Chavel's conjecture holds true. Finally, in
              connection to all above-mentioned problems is the more general problem of
              finding a precise dependence of the Neumann heat kernels of two convex planar
              domains. 
	Reflecting Brownian motion has been observed and studied for more
              than one century, since it was first observed by the English botanist Robert
              Brown in 1827. Its most recent spectacular application is probably the famous
              work of Black-Scholes, which changed forever the guessing game of the price of
              a stock option in a mathematical sense by tying it to the random behavior of a
              Brownian motion. This led to the award of a the Nobel prize for Economics in
              1997. Other applications of reflecting Brownian motion are in potential theory,
              partial differential equations, mathematical physics and mathematical finance.
              The present research aims to develop and study certain properties of reflecting
              Brownian motion (monotonicity properties and domain dependence of the
              transition density), which will give a deeper understanding of this fundamental
              stochastic process. In turn, this gives as applications properties of functions
              arising from real-life situations, whenever a connection to this process can be
              established (for example the extremum properties of the temperature of a
              thermally insulated body). 

