Title       : Some Problems in Curvature and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0203164

Award Number: 0203164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaochun Rong rong@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: DMS 0203164.

We have been studying problems in Riemannian geometry
              that 
concern with interplays between curvature and topology, and 
the major
              part of our work are about the controlled topology of 
collapsed manifolds
              with sectional curvature bounded in absolute value and 
applications to the
              global Riemannian geometry. 
For the past three years, we have made
              substantial progresses
in this field pioneered by Cheeger-Gromov-Fukaya: we
              
established the isomorphism finiteness result for the higher homotopy groups,
              
the diffeomorphism finiteness result for a certain class of manifolds, and
              the 
convergence of collapsing sequences in this class. We have 
made a
              progress on investigating some rigidity phenomena 
for the class of closed
              manifolds of non-positive sectional 
which are not locally symmetric spaces.
              We have made a progress 
in the homeomorphism classification of positively
              curved manifolds 
whose isometry group contains a torus of large rank, and
              extend 
this result to the larger class of manifolds which only admit
              
isometric discrete abelian group actions. We will continue our 
programs in
              these fields in the near future that 
represents a continuation of the work
              proposed three years 
ago for NSF Grant DMS 9971360. 

One of the most
              important developments in Riemannian geometry 
in the last two decades is our
              understanding of the Riemannian 
manifolds which appear to be smaller than
              
their actual dimension (i.e collapsed). For instance, the surface 
of a very
              thin donuts looks like a circle while whose curvature and diameter are
              
bounded. Our progress is amplified by the amazing fact that 
among the
              manifolds whose curvature and diameter are bounded, all 
but finitely many
              appear to be smaller than their actual dimension. 



