Title       : SPIN-UP/TYC: Strategic Programs for Innovations in Undergraduate Physics at
               Two-Year Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0203862

Award Number: 0203862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. O'Kuma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren W. Hein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Beth Monroe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc of Phys Tchrs
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403845    301/209-3300

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is investigating and analyzing the role of undergraduate physics
              instruction at two-year colleges (TYCs) in encouraging students, particularly
              women and minorities, to pursue undergraduate degrees in physics as well as in
              other areas of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The
              project is seeking to discover how some two-year colleges succeed in
              encouraging students to take introductory physics and then transfer to
              four-year institutions and become physics majors. Based on information gathered
              through a survey of TYC physics activities and site visits to ten TYCs, the
              project is publishing a series of case studies that physicists in other
              two-year colleges can use to enhance their teaching of introductory physics and
              to encourage the production of STEM majors, particularly physics majors.
              

The SPIN-UP/TYC project is investigating the basic mechanism of change in
              the two-year college physics program. The site visits and survey that this
              project is sponsoring seeks to identify the key personnel at the TYC
              responsible for implementing changes in the physics/science programs. The
              project is also investigating ways to better bridge two-year college and
              four-year college physics faculty. Better communication between these segments
              of the physics community not only encourage recruitment of physics majors and
              pre-service physics teachers in the TYCs and facilitate transfer to the
              four-year programs, it strengthens undergraduate physics as a whole.

During
              the SPIN-UP/TYC project, information concerning teacher preparation
              (particularly physics and physical science teaching preparation) at two-year
              colleges is being gathered. The teacher preparation information concerns both
              the processes and scope that selected two-year colleges use in their
              preparation of future teachers.

The SPIN-UP/TYC project is a collaboration
              between the American Association of Physics Teachers, Lee College, and
              Southwest Texas Junior College in association with the American Institute of
              Physics and the American Physical Society.

 

