Title       : Collaborative Research - Processes Controlling Depositional Signals of
               Environmental Change in the Fly River Sediment Dispersal system:Rates and
               Mechanisms of Floodplain Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0203577

Award Number: 0203577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338133             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Dietrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0203577                                                                     
                                                                                             
                William E. Dietrich                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       This project focuses on two fundamental questions: 1)
              How does flow and sediment routing through a lowland floodplain system moderate
              short and longer-term variations in sediment delivery towards offshore
              depositional environments? and 2) What controls the proportion of a river's
              sediment load that is deposited on its floodplain? It is hypothesized that net
              sediment loss to the floodplains was highest during Holocene sea-level rise
              and, after near stabilization of sea level, the proportion of the sediment load
              deposited in the     floodplain has progressively declined.

These two basic
              question are being addressed by comparing the flow and sediment routing
              processes, and the proportion of sediment lost to floodplains on the middle Fly
              and lower Strickland Rivers. Historically, the Strickland carried about 7 times
              the load of the Fly and it is hypothesize that this larger load has led to
              greater channel dynamics, steeper slopes, coarser bed, more elevated floodplain
              and possibly a lower trapping efficiency than the Fly. A numerical model is
              being developed that is sufficiently mechanistic that it can address the
              questions of damping and trapping efficiency on the event and seasonal scale,
              yet simplified enough that it can also model the co-evolving bed grain size,
              channel slope and floodplain topography, a crucial capability for understanding
              the time evolution of trapping efficiency. Though ambitious, many parts of the
              model have been assembled in previous research. The hydrodynamic model accounts
              for the effects of floodplain morphology and hydrology. The sediment routing
              includes effects of channel migration and accounts for the deposition and
              erosion of sediment by grain size.

A field program is being conducted to
              document the flood wave damping rates, the sediment trapping efficiency of the
              Strickland and Fly Rivers, and to parameterize the numerical model.
              Quantification of floodplain morphology is being done through topographic
              surveys and analysis of remote sensing imagery. Intensive surveys of the
              velocity and suspended sediment fields are used to motivate and parameterize
              the hydraulics and sediment transport model. Short and longer-term (less than
              100 years) rate of floodplain deposition is being documented from shallow
              cores. Extensive flow and sediment monitoring data are being provided by Ok
              Tedi Mining, Ltd. on the Middle Fly and by Porgera Joint Venture on the
              Strickland. Previous research on the Fly River enables the research focus to be
              on the Strickland River.
