Title       : CRCD: The Ad Hoc Classroom: Integrating Emerging Wireless Communications and
               Networking Technologies into Mainstream Computer Science and Electrical
               Engineering Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0203449

Award Number: 0203449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emin Sirer egs@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Demers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Wicker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes E. Gehrke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1709      CISE EDUCAT RES & CURRIC DEVEL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9299,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates recent search developments in ad hoc netorks into
              mainstream computer science and electrical engineering curricula.  It explores
              students to challenges posed by this emerging class of systems, improving
              studets' exposure to future infrastructures by developming real world ad hoc
              networking test-beds and deployment platforms, and permits educators at other
              U.S. institutions to do the same by sharing the system infrastructure and
              educational materils developed for this project.  Specifically, the project
              transforms several undergraduate and graduate level courses in computer systems
              to address the challenges posed by wirless, mobile and embedded networks of
              computers that form transient alliances in ad hoc networks.  This project
              transforms classes in networking, databases, operations systems, adaptive
              systems to integrate pervaive, ubiquitous, ad hoc networking and sensor
              networks.  A three-tiered approach benefits both current classsroom
              instructions as well as ongoing research on ad hoc network, and involves: 1)
              The development of software and courseware infrastructure necessary to build,
              use and evaluate system services for ad hoc networkss in a classroom setting.
              2) Deployment of the critical mass of equipment to field a large, physical
              test-bed.  This network consists of mobile computers, ranging form sensors and
              pocket-sized information appliance through hand-helds to laptops.  Equipped
              with a wireless networking card, and multi-purpose sensors such as camera,
              these machine provide a real physical test-bed on which system services are
              evaluated for ad hoc networks. 3) Collection of information from the deployed
              test-bed on application communication pattersn, mobility models, and observed
              link characteristics.  This information can be used to carry out
              better-informed simulations of ad hoc networks.  This grant impacts computer
              challenges the nation is facing, it results in innovative research on operating
              systems, database and telecommunications, and it generates course materials and
              define infrastructure that will allow the project to be repeated elsewhere in
              the country
