Title       : ALGORITHMS: Adaptive Stochastic Scheduling for Bulk Synchronous Computations and
               Its Application in Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0203592

Award Number: 0203592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chengzhong Xu czxu@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Hase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the parallel efficiency of an important class of bulk
              synchronous applications, as exemplified by computational molecular dynamics,
              in clusters of workstations. Bulk synchronous applications are often
              characteristic of non-deterministic computational requirements over time. In a
              multiprogramming environment, the nodal capacities allocated to an application
              may also change as other jobs join and leave. With respect to the dynamics of
              the computation and uncertainties of the cluster resources, this research aims
              at developing stochastic scheduling strategies in support of high performance
              computing in the clusters. It constructs a framework for modeling and analyses
              of adaptive scheduling algorithms by characterizing scheduling factors as
              random variables. It develops efficient application-level remapping policies by
              taking into account the dynamic systems of workload evolution and capacity
              change. The scheduling strategies are evaluated in the application of molecular
              dynamics computer simulations. 

The research will blend formal
              modeling/analyses, experimentation, and evaluation of stochastic scheduling
              algorithms. Success of this research will help increase the industrial
              acceptance of high performance cluster computing and advance computational
              molecular dynamics to simulations of large, multi-atom systems in a timely
              manner.   


