Title       : Free Boundary Problems and Reaction-Diffusion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0203991

Award Number: 0203991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinfu Chen Xinfu+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0203991
PI: 			Chen, Xinfu
Institution:
              		University of Pittsburgh
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: FREE BOUNDARY PROBLEMS AND REACTION-DIFFUSION
              SYSTEMS

This project addresses  interfacial phenomena that are commonplace
              in nature.  There are two goals in this project. One is to develop an
              applicable model describing motion of soluble substances in a liquid
              environment. The other is to use existing reaction--diffusion systems and  free
              boundary  models to study  certain interfacial phenomena that are important in
              industrial applications. When chemical reactions are concerned, existing models
              to be used are  reaction--diffusion systems  such as the activator--inhibitor, 
              FitzHugh--Nagumo, Belousov-Zhabotinsky, Gray--Scott, and  Gierer--Meinhardt.
              Most of the focus here will be on slow diffusion--fast reaction equations and
              their singular limits, namely, free boundary problems. A large part of the
              investigation will be to find solutions related to interfacial phenomena, such
              as traveling spots, spikes, target patterns, checkerboard patterns, rotating
              spiral waves, and self--replicating behavior. The underlying investigation for
              patterns in free boundary problems and reaction--diffusion systems  will 
              enable  people to predict and to control the seemingly complicated yet natural 
              interfacial dynamics.  It can also develop mathematical theories and ideas. As
              a particular example,  certain  evolution equations that do not possess
              uniqueness and thus classically are regarded as ill--posed, will  be  carefully
              investigated and  regarded as good models since they reflect the nature in
              which an unobservable local microscopic change may affect the whole observable
              macroscopic outcome.  Such a research will be guided by the current industrial
              needs.

In chemistry, biology, and many applied sciences, it is  common that
              chemical substances move around in a liquid environment, due to dissolution or
              chemical reaction. Quite often circular shapes are stable and circular spots
              move and interact each other like elastic objects, with their own special
              ``momentum laws". One purpose of the project is to develop, at least for
              soluble solids in a liquid medium, a model enabling one to calculate the speed
              of a traveling spot and the reflection principle---the relationship between the
              incoming and outgoing angles when a traveling spot bounces off  another  spot
              or the physical boundary of a container. The model developed for the motion of
              spots is expected to find useful industrial applications in many areas such as 
              water contamination control, chemical testing, chemical processing, etc. This
              project will involve graduate students and stimulate their interest in
              mathematical problems of practical importance.

Date: June 14, 2002

