Title       : Dynamics and Impacts of Mesoscale Gravity Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0203238

Award Number: 0203238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fuqing Zhang fzhang@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gravity waves have been shown to be very important to weather.  They can
              transfer significant amounts of energy and momentum, initiate and organize
              convection, and generate atmospheric turbulence.  Observational studies have
              repeatedly demonstrated that mesoscale gravity waves with horizontal wavelength
              of 50-500-km are prevalent in the vicinity of the upper-tropospheric jet
              streaks.  The exact generation mechanism of these waves, however, remains
              unknown. 

The ultimate goal of this research is to understand the dynamics
              and impacts of the gravity waves initiated by the upper-tropospheric jet-front
              systems and baroclinic instability.  A high-resolution mesoscale model with
              nesting capability will first be used to reproduce the life cycle of the
              baroclinic waves and to simulate the gravity wave emission from jet streaks. 
              The characteristics, distribution and variability of the gravity waves and
              their relationship to the parent baroclinic jet-front system in these idealized
              simulations will be examined in great details.  Next, the interaction between
              balanced and unbalanced dynamics in the initiation of the simulated gravity
              waves will be investigated through applications of the various
              balance/imbalance diagnostics including Rossby number, omega equations,
              nonlinear balance and potential vorticity inversion and also through an
              extension/implementation of the QG+ theory.  QG+ is a systematic asymptotic
              framework from which the balanced, next-order corrections of quasi-geostrophy
              in Rossby number are obtained.  The final phase of this research will compare
              the characteristics and dynamics of the gravity waves in the idealized
              baroclinic-wave simulations with observations and apply the findings from the
              idealized study to understand the dynamics of the observed gravity
              waves.

Successful completion of this research may lead to better
              understanding and prediction of the timing and location of local and regional
              weather events.
