Title       : Pelagic Communities of the Tropical Atlantic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0203622

Award Number: 0203622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Piontkovski spiontkovski@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In terms of marine ecosystems and climate change issues, tropical regions of the
              Atlantic Ocean are among the most poorly represented in the World Ocean
              Database (National Oceanographic Data Center, Washington D.C.).  However, the
              Institute of Biology of the Southern Seas (Ukraine) holds extensive data
              archives on the region from numerous former Soviet Union expeditions carried
              out from 1959 to 1989.  These archives include over 4,000 biological samples
              collected on 19 major expeditions, the vast majority of which are enumerated to
              the species level for phytoplankton, zooplankton, and mesopelagic fish. Those
              samples are accompanied by detailed physical and chemical measurements.
 
The
              project will allow a team of US, Ukrainian, and Russian scientists to produce,
              for broad dissemination, an inventory and database on the above expeditions. 
              The database will enable full accessibility, viewing, sorting, and exporting of
              information by oceanographic station, location, or taxa.  The project
              participants will further explore the spatial-temporal variability of tropical
              pelagic communities using the compiled database as a primary source for guiding
              ongoing field research.  Resulting data products, including abundance, biomass,
              and species diversity indices will be used to elucidate general patterns
              linking community structure in the tropical Atlantic and atmospheric/physical
              influences.  The present study will substantially advance understanding of
              species diversity in the tropical ocean by providing a large, detailed database
              for poorly studied regions.  Future research on biodiversity and potential
              climate-change influences in the Atlantic Ocean will benefit greatly from the
              detailed taxonomic analyses of phytoplankton, zooplankton, and fish species
              that will comprise a major portion of the database.

