Title       : Reliability Analysis and Robust Synthesis of HIgh-Performance Clock Networks.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0203362

Award Number: 0203362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng-Kok Koh chengkok@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Venkataramanan Balakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research component of the proposal is to explore a new methodology for clock
              networks that explicitly accounts for the interplay between the various design
              factors.  The educational component will provide graduate student researchers
              with an interdisciplinary training in VLSI, optimization, and numerical
              computing.  Furthermore, the research results will be integrated in graduate
              courses at Purdue University.
The design of clock networks is a fundamental
              problem in synchronous circuit synthesis, and requires trading off between
              design effort, physical resource costs and performance.  Most existing clock
              design methodologies do not explicitly perform this trade-off.  Instead, a
              design is first proposed, and then evaluated in terms of physical resource
              costs and performance, and the design repeated if necessary. As a large number
              of such iterations may be required, the design effort is minimized with some
              simplifying assumptions.  One of these artificially imposed constraints is that
              of ``zero-skew'', where it is required that all elements are clocked (i.e.,
              switch) at the same time-instant.  This requirement constrains the physical
              layout of clock distribution networks, as the variation in the arrival of the
              clock signal at the various switching elements must be held small. Perhaps more
              important, as all circuit elements switch together, the demand from the power
              supply is not uniform over time but peaks sharply once every clock cycle.  This
              uneven demand on the power supply leads to what is commonly referred to as
              power-supply noise: As the demands on the power supply peak sharply, its
              ability to deliver power degrades, leading to possibly degraded performance of
              the circuits.
With these observations serving as the backdrop, we propose to
              develop a design methodology for clock networks that employs nonzero clock
              skews, and directly addresses the interplay between various factors that
              determine the trade-off between the design effort, physical resource costs and
              performance.  We present preliminary results that show that our approach holds
              much promise. Specifically, we propose to perform together scheduling and
              synthesis of clock networks such that both power supply noise and physical
              resource costs are reduced.  Essential to our objectives is the efficient
              analysis of power supply noise.  We propose a framework and techniques for
              power-supply noise analysis that draw upon our past successes with model
              reduction techniques for interconnect modeling both in the time and frequency
              domain.



