Title       : ALGORITHMS: Parallel Algorithms and Software for EST Clustering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0203782

Award Number: 0203782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Aluru aluru@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suraj C. Kothari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Volker Brendel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this project is to develop parallel algorithms and a parallel
              software system for clustering Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs). ESTs are derived
              from fragments of reverse transcribed mRNA isolated experimentally and thus
              directly correspond to protein coding genes. The proposed project is aimed at
              overcoming the computational limitations of current software  systems such as
              inability to handle large data sets within  reasonable time and memory
              resources. This project will provide a strong context for fundamental research
              in practical parallel  string algorithms, including the development of parallel
              algorithms for constructing suffix trees and suffix arrays, applications 
              involving suffix trees and arrays such as containment and  overlap detection.
              Particular emphasis will be placed on the design of space-efficient algorithms
              because space-complexity  often determines whether the use of an algorithm is
              feasible for large data sets. The software will be validated using large EST 
              data sets from organisms with small and known genomes, which  will be exploited
              to derive correct clustering though alternate  methods. The algorithms
              developed will provide the basis for other similar projects including protein
              repertoire comparisons and testing of biological hypotheses such as exon
              shuffling and gene duplication. The human EST collection at the National
              Institute of Health currently has over 3.8 million ESTs and parallel processing
              is essential for discovering biologically useful information from such large
              EST collections.

Throughout the project, emphasis will be placed on design
              of parallel algorithms using realistic models of parallel computation, rigorous
              proofs of optimality with respect to best known sequential algorithms, careful
              evaluation of the communication complexity and the constants involved in
              asymptotic run-time estimates, and development of user-friendly software.
              Experimental evaluation of the algorithms will be carried out both on
              conventional tightly-coupled parallel computers and clusters. The project will
              be carried out by an interdisciplinary team of researchers having the required
              expertise in parallel algorithm design, building large parallel software
              systems, bioinformatics and life sciences. To further ensure the success of
              this project, collaborations have been established with researchers from the
              University of Bielefeld and the National Institute of Health. 



