Title       : Finite and Infinite-Dimensional Stochastic Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0203368

Award Number: 0203368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Salah-Eldin A. Mohammed salah@sfde.math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research in this project focuses on several dynamical and numerical aspects
              of stochastic differential equations. Stochastic ordinary differential
              equations (sodes) on finite-dimensional manifolds generate stochastic flows on
              the manifold. One objective of the research is to construct invariant manifolds
              for such flows near stationary solutions, under suitable regularity and growth
              conditions on the driving vector fields. In particular, the investigator will
              prove the existence of stable, unstable and center manifolds near each
              stationary point on the manifold. In order for sodes to constitute viable
              physical models, the investigator conjectures that a Kupka-Smale type theorem
              must hold. An important class of infinite-dimensional semiflows on Hilbert
              space is generated by dissipative semilinear stochastic partial differential
              equations (spdes) on smooth compact manifolds. For these semiflows, the
              investigator intends to prove the existence of finite-dimensional invariant
              manifolds near stationary points. Important examples of spdes covered by this
              analysis are Burger's equation, affine linear stochastic evolution equations
              and stochastic reaction-diffusion equations. The results of the research will
              reveal new features of the stochastic dynamics of these well-studied models.
              One encounters models of stochastic systems with memory (sfdes) in many
              engineering and physical applications. Deterministic smooth constraints on the
              solutions of such models lead naturally to sfdes on (compact) Riemannian
              manifolds. The investigator will study the path-space-valued Markov process
              generated by trajectories of sfdes on the manifold. The investigator will
              establish an Ito formula for the infinite-dimensional segment process and will
              attempt to obtain its infinitesimal generator in terms of geometric invariants
              of the ambient Riemannian manifold. From the pathwise dynamical point of view,
              the investigator will construct perfect semiflows on the path space which are
              induced by solutions of sfdes on a compact Riemannian manifold. The existence
              of invariant manifolds will also be examined.

The project focuses on
              qualitative and long-term behavior of a large class of probabilistic models
              known as stochastic differential equations. These equations are widely used by
              scientists and engineers. Of special interest is a class of models that are
              used in physics, engineering and biology in order to analyze dynamical systems
              whose evolution is influenced by random fluctuations and past history. These
              models are very important in a variety of diverse areas such as signal
              processing, stock market fluctuations, economic and labor models, aircraft
              dynamics, materials with memory, population dynamics and fluid flow. The
              investigator will use the most current probabilistic techniques in order to
              develop a deeper understanding of these models. The outcome of the research in
              this project will yield precise information on the long-term behavior of
              solutions of the underlying stochastic equations on states that are near
              statistical equilibria. Numerical algorithms will be developed whereby real
              market data will be used to test option-pricing models where the stock price is
              governed by its past history. In a different direction, the research will
              solidify important connections with other areas of modern mathematical
              research, in particular the theory of dynamical systems and geometry. The
              results of the project will be compiled in a research monograph targeting
              graduate students majoring in mathematics, engineering, and finance. 

