Title       : U.S.- Mexico Cooperative Research: Quantum and Fluctuating Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0203760

Award Number: 0203760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. P. Balachandran   (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen B. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rafael D. Sorkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1287,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0203760
Balachandran

This U.S.-Mexico award will support Dr. A.P.
              Balachandran and Dr. R.D. Sorkin of Syracuse University together with Dr. A.B.
              Stern of the University of Alabama in a research collaboration with Dr. D.
              O'Connor and Dr. R. Capovilla of the Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios
              Avanzados del IPN (CINVESTAV) in Mexico City, Mexico.  The researchers intend
              to work on various ideas in the general area of non-commutative geometry with
              important applications to quantum physics, string theory, and relativity
              theory.  The Office of International Science and Engineering and the Physics
              Division of NSF will contribute funds for the research.

This project has two
              components.  The first is to develop an alternative to lattice field theory
              using emerging ideas from non-commutative geometry.  The approach uses matrix
              algebras that approximate the algebra of functions of a space with the
              approximation becoming finer as the matrices become larger. The method has the
              advantage of preserving the underlying symmetries including chiral and
              supersymmetry and easily capturing topological data.  This component also
              incorporates the more complete study of field theories on non-commutative
              spaces, with particular emphasis on the noncommutative Chern-Simons theory. 
              The second component involves the causal set approach to quantum gravity where
              the quantum spacetime emerges from a discrete causal structure. The principal
              goal of this aspect of the project is to find a suitable quantum sequential
              growth dynamics for causal sets. Both components of the project have a
              significant numerical component with Monte Carlo simulations for the first
              component currently in the calibration stage. The numerical work is being
              carried out by the Mexican group, who are experts in the statistical physics
              involved, while the US counterparts are experts in the algebraic and
              topological aspects of the project. 

