Title       : Fractal Geometry: Summer Workshops and Other Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0203203

Award Number: 0203203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1612204            (Estimated)
Investigator: Benoit Mandelbrot fractal@watson.ibm.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Frame  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For each of the next four years, the investigators will continue and expand an
              ongoing and successful series of 
two successive summer workshops on Fractal
              Geometry at Yale University, and develop related outreach efforts.  

The
              intended workshop participants are high school, community college, and college
              teachers interested in 
offering fractal geometry courses for non-science
              students.  Such a course has been run very successfully at Yale since 1993. 
              Fractal geometry presents these students with a branch of mathematics that is
              recent, is visual, is computer-based, has real mathematical content (in contact
              with the works of eminent living mathematicians), and encourages student
              exploration and discovery.  In addition, the tremendous range of applications
              of fractal geometry extends beyond science and engineering to arts and
              humanities.  The applications outside science make the course most attractive
              to liberal arts students.  Generally, students 
come out of this course with a
              feeling that mathematics is something they can approach, is alive and well, and
              is relevant to their own interests.  

Yet teaching this course is quite
              challenging.  The very applications that make it so appealing are outside the
              
training of most mathematicians.  The purpose of the workshops is to survey
              fractal geometry and some applications in detail sufficient to enable other
              teachers to incorporate this material in their own courses.  This lesson
              planning will be aided by a support infrastructure.  These ideas will be spread
              to a wider area through other outreach activites, including establishing
              similar workshops at satellite sites and producing a videotape illustrating
              these courses.  

In addition, the proposers have prepared a
              webpage

http://classes.yale.edu/math190a/Fractals/Welcome.html

to support
              the workshops and to be a resource for the participants in their
              courses.

The proposers' main goal is to  build on what has already been
              achieved.  Specifically,  

(i) to refine these workshops, draw participants
              from a larger area, and establish a support infrastructure,

(ii) to expand
              and elaborate the above-mentioned website for use as the basis for Distance
              Learning courses on fractal geometry,

(iii) to develop and grow another
              website that emphasizes the uses of fractals and extends the brief "Panorama"
              chapter of the forthcoming book "Fractals, Graphics, and Mathematics
              Education," MAA 2002.  A preliminary version of this site  already is online
              at

http://classes.yale.edu/math190a/Fractals/Panorama/Welcome.html

(iv)
              to prepare a lab manual of simple experiments and classroom activities,
              illustrating basic concepts of fractal geometry, and

(v) to develop an
              outreach network for growing these workshops at other locations and
              disseminating these ideas through other media, including a videotape.

