Title       : Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0203175

Award Number: 0203175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210398             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Burke burke@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0203175
Burke 

In this research we develop theoretical and numerical tools
              for 
understanding and exploiting the variational behavior of spectral
              
functions. Briefly, spectral functions are mappings of the spectrum 
of real
              or complex valued matrices to the real numbers. Two 
examples are the spectral
              abscissa (the maximum real part of the 
spectrum) and the spectral radius (the
              maximum modulus of the 
spectrum). The spectral abscissa and the spectral
              radius play an 
important role in understanding the asymptotic behavior of
              
continuous and discrete dynamical systems, respectively. For this 
reason,
              understanding their variational behavior will greatly impact 
a number of
              application areas. In general, spectral functions have a 
number of features
              that make them difficult to analyze. Foremost 
among these is that they are
              typically nondifferentiable, indeed 
non-Lipschitzian. These functions can be
              very poorly behaved 
especially in regions of interest for optimization. Thus,
              even 
though these functions have a classical history in mathematics,
              
science, and engineering, intimate knowledge of their variational 
behavior
              has proven elusive. For this reason, new tools of analysis 
in conjunction
              with classical techniques are required. In this 
research we bring together
              the modern techniques of variational 
analysis and classical methods of
              Puiseux-Newton series, semi-
algebraic sets, conformal mappings, and the
              geometry of 
polynomials. These tools have proven to be phenomenally
              
successful in shedding new light on this very important class of
              
functions.

In optimization theory and practice one tries to either
              minimize or 
maximize a performance measure subject to limitations on how the
              
performance measure can be adjusted. Optimization is a 
fundamentally
              interdisciplinary area of research having a 
significant impact on a wide
              range of academic, industrial, and 
government research activities. Research
              in optimization requires 
theoretical advances, the development of numerical
              solution 
methods, and a firm grounding in applications. The particular
              
research outlined in this proposal focuses on optimization 
problems that
              are closely related to the stability properties of 
systems that evolve with
              time. In particular, it impacts the design 
of structures such as buildings
              and aircraft that are subject to 
temporal deformations from environmental
              factors such as an 
earthquake or a wind-shear. The underlying optimization
              problem 
in this context is to make the structure as stable as possible in a
              
potentially hostile environment while satisfying certain design 
limitations
              on such things as weight, size, and cost. The great 
difficulty in this
              research is that the performance measures under 
consideration, such as
              stability, do not vary in a smooth manner as 
the underlying parameters vary.
              Consequently fundamentally new 
methods of analysis are required to understand
              the variational 
behavior of these performance measures. Indeed, the
              mathematical 
tools necessary for this kind of analysis have only very
              recently 
been developed. In this research we intend to make significant
              
inroads into the analysis of these kinds of problems and to develop 
a range
              of numerical methods that can be used to solve them.

