Title       : RUI: First-passage Percolation and Other Disordered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0203943

Award Number: 0203943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82269              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Douglas Howard dhoward@baruch.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two models of disordered systems, first-passage percolation (FPP) and stochastic
              Ising dynamics with random initial state, are the main focus of this proposal.
              Rigorous unconditional results about the geometric features of lattice-based
              FPP models are hard to come by, largely due to technical difficulties
              associated with the anisotropy of the underlying lattice. Models of Euclidean
              FPP take place on graphs constructed from a homogeneous Poisson process and
              enjoy complete statistical invariance under all rigid motions. In this sense,
              Euclidean FPP is a natural setting in which to study geometric properties of
              FPP. One objective of this proposal is to refine, for Euclidean FPP, existing
              estimates of key fluctuation exponents associated with these models with the
              ultimate goal of proving interesting qualitative results. Another goal is to
              exploit a certain re-scaling relation that holds for Euclidean FPP to obtain
              results about the stochastic monotonicity of passage time viewed as a function
              of distance. Other closely related open questions under investigation concern
              issues such as how massively a local perturbation of the Poisson particle
              configuration affects minimizing paths and how far "parallel" geodesics
              typically travel before coalescence. In Stochastic Ising models, rules of
              dynamics interact with a random initial state to produce a system that evolves
              with time. The state at any particular time is a configuration of +/-1 spins
              associated with the sites of some regular lattice; the configuration at time 0
              makes the spins i.i.d. random variables. For the homogeneous ferromagnetic
              models of this proposal, the dynamics tend to produce increasing agreement of
              spins for neighboring sites as time elapses. Key matters of investigation
              concern how quickly and in what sense the system evolves to a limiting state as
              well as various percolation properties of the configuration as a function of
              time. 
	Disordered systems are a large class of probabilistic models generally
              motivated by problems arising in condensed matter physics and materials
              science. First-passage percolation and other closely related models have served
              as a mathematical model for phenomena as seemingly diverse as properties of
              randomly porous media (such as aquifers), the growth of cancerous tumors, and
              the propagation of cracks through brittle material. Ising models capture the
              basic features of magnetized materials. The proposed work aims at a rigorous
              understanding of some of the many fundamental mathematical properties of these
              models.

