Title       : Problems in Ill-posed Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0203942

Award Number: 0203942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frits H. Ruymgaart ruymg@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0203942
PI: Frits H. Ruymgaart
Title: Problems in ill-posed
              statistical inference

Abstract

There is a renewed interest from the part
              of statisticians in solving noisy integral equations.  This kind of problem is
              ill-posed because the integral operator involved typically has an unbounded
              inverse and such models boil down to a generalization of traditional curve
              estimation.  The purpose of this proposal is to pursue the general theory that
              is being developed into three directions.  The first question is whether
              asymptotically efficient estimators of sufficiently smooth functionals of the
              input signal can be constructed despite the presence of the possibly unknown
              error density as an infinite dimensional nuisance parameter.  The second
              question to be dealt with is the asymptotic distribution of the integrated
              squared error centered at its mean.  Such precise asymptotic behavior of a
              global measure of accuracy has important applications to model checks.  Finally
              a new method expedient for convolution equations with mathematical
              irregularities will be developed.  The method is based on expansion in a
              wavelet basis coupled with inversion of the convolution operator in the time
              domain.

Experimenters are often faced with the problem of recovering the
              input of a system when only the output is observable.  Typically the
              observations will be blurred by measurement error and statistical procedures
              become pertinent.  Examples include computer tomography employed in medical
              imaging, and Wicksell's problem in stereology where a transform of the particle
              size distribution is observed.  Inverse heat conduction requires the recovery
              of the initial heat distribution (input) when the present one (output) is
              given.  There are many more examples and related questions.  For instance, can
              one estimate the total weight of a cable suspended at its endpoints, when only
              data regarding its shape are available?  The construction of efficient
              estimators of such functionals of the input is one purpose of this research.  A
              second question considered is precise information about the frequency
              distribution of the discrepancy between the estimated input and its
              expectation.  Results can be useful in checking the validity of certain prior
              assumptions and could, for instance, be applied in recovering the luminosity
              distribution of the Milky Way.  Finally a new method of input reconstruction in
              irregular cases will be developed using wavelets with potential application to
              image reconstruction.


