Title       : Lax Pairs and the Riemann-Hilbert Method for Solving Diffraction and Scattering
               Problems in Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0203104

Award Number: 0203104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth N. Its   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research project is focused on application of the Lax Pair
and the
              Riemann-Hilbert Method to the solution of scattering 
problems in
              inhomogeneous geomaterials. This approach  is based on 
a new version of the
              Inverse Scattering Transform suggested recently by 
A. Fokas for studying
              boundary problems for linear and integrable
nonlinear PDEs. Topics of
              investigation include: (i) analysis of
the Riemann-Hilbert problem on the
              elliptic curve related to the 
vector Lax pair of the elastodynamic equation;
              (ii) explicit evaluation 
of scattering coefficients of Raylegh wave in a
              quarter-space and 
a corner; (iii) the Riemann-Hilbert approach to scattering
              of elastic
surface wave at a vertical interface of two homogeneous
              quarter-spaces.

The analysis of seismic waves is the major source of
              information
about the Earth internal structure and its sesmicity. The
              elastodynamic 
equation serves as a basic mathematical model for studing
              diffraction and 
scattering of seismic waves on deep fault zone areas and 
              other inhomogeneities
in the Earth Crust and Upper Mantle. The research
              program indicated above
would allow to make a considerable progress in solving
              some of the longstanding 
problems related to realistic geometry of seismic
              zones. Moreover, the
important nature of the method developed in the project
              is that it can  be also applied
to various nonlinear versions of the
              elastodynamic  equation. During the
last decades it has been discovered that
              nonlinearity of the Earth materials
may be responsible for some peculiar
              characteristics of the  wavefield, hence
the research project would provide an
              analytic tool for studing
these completely new kind of seismic phenemena as
              well.
