Title       : Mathematical Aspects of Classical Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0203485

Award Number: 0203485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jalal Shatah shatah@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is concerned with questions related to the behavior of
solutions
              to nonlinear wave equations under perturbation. In particular we
are concerned
              with geometric PDEs such as wave maps and Schrodinger maps.
These equations
              can be viewed as constrained motion in space where the
constraint  forces the
              solution to lie on a subspace such as a manifold or
a metric space.  This
              leads to  singularly perturbed  wave and Schrodinger
equations.  We propose to
              study the relationship between the wave map
equations  and the constrained
              motion in terms of convergence and in terms
of the dynamics of solutions.
              Specifically we propose to study: 1)
Convergence of the constrained motion
              when the data are  not "well prepared"
leading to  rapid oscillations;  2) the
              persistence of periodic,
quasi-periodic, and homoclinic orbits  that asymptote
              to quasi-periodic
orbits;  3) wave maps into the Heisenberg Group, as a metric
              space; and
finally 4) the relationship between Schrodinger maps and wave maps,
              where
the wave map is considered as a constrained motion on a
              Lagrangian
submanifold of the Schrodinger map into a Kahler
              manifold.




The dynamics of many physical systems can be described by
              geometric
evolution equations.  For example dynamics of the magnetization
              field  in a
ferromagnetic material is described by the Landau-Lifshitz
              equation;  the
study of a vibrating membrane in a crystalline structure  where
              there is a
uniform distribution of  dislocations,  is described by wave
              equations into
the Heisenberg Group (which also arises in other physical
              applications such
as control theory, and the motion of robot arms).  These
              geometric evolution
models need not be exact, but should be considered as a
              limit of a
singularly perturbed system.  The general questions that we propose
              to study
are: What relationships exist between solutions of the geometric
              equations
and the singularly perturbed equations?  How much of the rich
              dynamical
structure (periodic, quasi-periodic, and breather type solutions)
              that the
geometric equations have  will persist under this type of
              singular
perturbation? One of the major goals of our work is to develop
              analytical
methods to deal with convergence questions related to this type
              of
perturbations.  Another important goal is to develop and use
              infinite
dimensional dynamical systems techniques in conjunction with
              analytical
methods to answer the persistence question and  ultimately to
              bridge the gap
between finite dimensional  dynamical systems and  PDEs.

