Title       : Dissertation Research: Household Ritual, Ceramic Figurines, and Gender in the
               Hohokam Regional System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0203218

Award Number: 0203218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9374               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Mills, Ms. Susan Stinson will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation on the Hohokam archaeological region of the
              Greater Southwest USA.  Her research addresses ritual within prehistoric
              households by determining the function and subsequent discard practices for
              ceramic figurines.  These small figurines were used in Hohokam houses from 300
              BC to AD 700 and they often were placed in household trash when discarded. 
              Approximately 1300 figurines in museum collections will be analyzed as part of
              this project, and most of these were recovered from the two large sites of
              Snaketown and Grewe in southern Arizona.  Hohokam researchers have previously
              assumed that these figurines were used in community-wide ceremonial activities
              associated with ballcourts that are similar to those in Mesoamerica.  Ms.
              Stinson will determine whether the figurines were instead part of domestic
              ritual by testing three different hypotheses for their use: (1) they were used
              in healing and curing ritual, (2) they were used in ritual designed to promote
              a connection to deceased relatives (ancestors), or (3) they were used as
              children's toys.  In order to determine figurine function, patterns of
              construction material, form, wear or damage, and the location and manner of
              disposal will be analyzed. 

In addition to these analyses, Ms. Stinson will
              determine who the producers of these figurines were by examining fingerprint
              impressions left on the wet clay surface of the figures before they were fired.
               These fingerprint analyses provide a direct link between the manufacture of
              figurines and gendered roles within the household.  Ridge counting will be used
              to distinguish between children and adults, and males and females.  A ridge
              count is an objective, quantitative measure of the size of the fingerprint
              pattern, and it is recorded by counting the number of friction ridges within a
              certain specified area.  Ms. Stinson has already tested this technique on both
              archaeological ceramics and a set of modern prints from an extended family in
              the Philippines.  This fingerprint technique is new to archaeological research
              and has the potential to revolutionize how gender roles are assigned in
              prehistory.  This project also contributes to research on households,
              figurines, and ritual and gender in the household.  It tests hypotheses about
              figurine function in an archaeological region of the American Southwest that
              have been assumed, but never scientifically tested.  The project also assists
              in training a promising young scientist.

