Title       : Research in Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0203417

Award Number: 0203417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Aschbacher asch@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Aschbacher and S. Smith recently completed the classification of the
              finite
simple quasithin groups.  This work fills a significant gap in the

              classification of the finite simple groups.  Aschbacher and Smith are
 editing
              their manuscript to make it ready for publication.  Aschbacher
 is continuing
              his project to produce a unified, accessible, and
complete treatment of the
              existence, uniqueness, and structure of the
sporadic groups.  He is writing up
              his work on recognition theorems
 for small groups with one class of
              involutions.  He is working with
 R. Guralnick and K. Magaard on lower bounds
              on the genus of coverings
 with a classical monodromy group.  He is
              investigating the p-radical
subgroups of the sporadic groups.

Groups are
              algebraic objects of crucial importance in mathematics; for
example they are
              the basis for the study of symmetry. Finite groups can
 be decomposed into
              building blocks know as ``simple groups";  the
 classification theorem lists
              the simple groups explicitly.
 Together with descriptions of the structure and
              representations of the
simple groups, the classification theorem forms the
              foundation for the modern
theory of finite groups.  Several years ago it was
              discovered that an
 important case in the classification had not been
              completely treated.
 Aschbacher and his collaborator S. Smith have now dealt
              with this case and
are readying their manuscript for publication, in order to
              place the
classification theorem on solid ground.  The completion of this
              work,
 together with efforts to answer certain questions about the structure

              and representations of the simple groups, make up the project.

