Title       : Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Nitrenium Ions and Related Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0203142

Award Number: 0203142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Falvey df37@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award Professor Falvey will continue his work on the chemical and
              spectroscopic studies of nitrenium ions and related electron deficient nitrogen
              species.  A variety of experimental techniques will be used to elucidate the
              chemical and physical properties of nitrenium ions.  The chemistry of aryl
              nitrenium ions will be studied in detail in the course of this work.  Aryl
              nitrenium ions are generated in biological systems through enzyme catalyzed
              metabolism of aromatic amines.  These nitrenium ions are electrophilic and
              hence very reactive so the production of these species in living organisms is
              believed to be mutagenic and/or carcinogenic.  Aryl nitrenium ions are also
              implicated as intermediates in the synthesis of polyanilines, a conducting
              polymer.  Aniline oxidation will be used to generate nitrenium ions and their
              reactions with a variety of electron rich arenes will be studied.  Professor
              Falvey and his group will also work to prepare and study ground state triplet
              nitrenium ions since theory predicts they will have different chemical
              reactivities than the ground state singlet nitrenium ions outlined in the first
              part of this proposal.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Daniel E. Falvey of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Maryland, College Park.  Dr.
              Falvey will work on the generation and study of a family of reactive molecules
              known as nitrenium ions.  These molecules contain an electron deficient and
              hence chemically reactive nitrogen atom as part of their molecular structure. 
              Nitrenium ions are generated in biological systems through enzyme catalyzed
              metabolism of aromatic amines.  The production of these species in living
              organisms is believed to be mutagenic and/or carcinogenic.  Nitrenium ions are
              also implicated as intermediates in the synthesis of polyanilines, a conducting
              polymer.  A thorough understanding of how these species are generated and how
              they react should contribute to a better understanding of the fundamental
              chemistry involved in both of the processes outlined above.  Students trained
              during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the speciality
              chemicals industry and the pharmaceutical industry. 


