Title       : Lie Group Actions in Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0203697

Award Number: 0203697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Ziller wziller@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS - 0203697 PI: Wolfgang Ziller  ABSTRACT

The principal investigator plans
              to continue his work on various
ways in which Lie groups arise in geometry.
              Special emphasis will be put on
geometry and topology of cohomogeneity one
              manifolds, i.e. manifolds on which a
Lie group acts with one dimensional
              quotient. In our previous proposal we 
conjectured  that every cohomogeneity
              one manifold has a metric with 
non-negative sectional curvature. A
              particularly interesting case are the 
Kervaire spheres which are exotic in
              many dimensions. We will try to construct
metrics with nonnegative curvature
              on these Kervaire spheres. A further goal is 
to classify all cohomogeneity
              one manifolds with positive sectional curvature
in the hope of finding some
              new examples, with good candidates available in 
dimension 7 and 9. 
We will
              also study variational properties of homogeneous Einstein metrics. In 
our
              previous proposal we showed that a partial Palais Smale condition is
              
satisfied which enables one do carry out Morse theory and Lusternik
              Schnirelmann 
theory.

A subject of major interest in global  Riemannian
              geometry is studying manifolds 
whose curvature have special properties, in
              particular those whose curvature has 
a fixed sign. Manifolds with positive
              curvature or nonnegative curvature have 
been studied since the beginning of
              global Riemannian geometry. Very few 
examples of this type are known and new
              ones seem to be difficult to construct. 
A main objective of our proposal is
              to construct such knew examples. Of 
particular interest are exotic spheres,
              which are manifolds that look
like spheres but on which ordinary calculus is
              quite different. These objects
were discovered 40 years ago by Milnor and ever
              since then geometers were
interested in finding a geometric description of
              them where the natural local
invariants look like spheres, i.e. where the
              curvature is positive or 
non-negative. Whether they have metrics of positive
              curvature is in fact one of 
the major open problems in the subject.
Another
              subject of major interest in global Riemannian geometry is the existence 
of
              Einstein metrics, which have many applications in physics in particular to
              
building new models of Kaluza Klein theory. In this context homogeneous
              Einstein 
metrics have been studied a lot by various physicists. We develop a
              general 
variational theory for homogeneous Einstein metrics which enable one
              to find 
many new examples without having to solve the algebraic equations
              which the 
Einstein equations reduce to in the homogenous case and which can
              be quite 
difficult or impossible to solve explicitly.

