Title       : Photoinitiated Reactions in Ultracold Helium Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0203978

Award Number: 0203978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt Wittig wittig@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Wittig will investigate photoinitiated processes that
              involve polyatomic molecules embedded in helium droplets, He(n). This work
              stands at the forefront of contemporary physical chemistry and its goal is to
              obtain quantitative understanding of relaxation and reactive processes that
              take place in an exceptionally well-characterized bath of liquid helium. Broad
              knowledge developed for gas phase photochemistry will be used in the modeling
              of processes in the condensed medium. New chemical systems, almost unperturbed
              by surroundings, but difficult in being formed and studied in jet expansions,
              will be investigated.

This research deals with the properties of molecules
              trapped in and on the surfaces of ultracold droplets of liquid helium. Such
              embedded, or attached, molecules can rotate freely, but with a rotational
              parameter that is different from the one that characterizes the rotation of
              molecules in a dilute gas. Molecular systems that are very difficult to prepare
              by conventional methods due to their high reactivity can thereby be made
              accessible to study. Such highly reactive species play an important role in
              chemical reactions and the proposed research will provide information not
              otherwise available or very difficult to obtain. The research will be conducted
              with the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral
              research associates. These collaborators will acquire skills and knowledge in a
              forefront area of physical chemistry that prepares them for advanced studies or
              employment in industry, government research laboratories, or academia. 

