Title       : Propagation of Waves and Fronts in Complex Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0203537

Award Number: 0203537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76482              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Ryzhik ryzhik@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0203537
PI: 			Ryzhik, Leonid
Institution:
              		University of Chicago
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Propagation of Waves and Fronts in Complex
              Media

This work  is concerned with the mathematical study of propagation of
              waves and fronts in heterogeneous media.  Ryzhik plans to concentrate on two
              areas of research: refocusing of time-reversed pulses in random media and the
              effect of flow motion on combustion and chemical reaction processes. Time
              reversal of acoustic waves is a recent experimental technique that refocuses a
              signal that arrived from a localized source at its original location even if it
              has been recorded at a very long distance from the source.  This method has
              been successfully applied in a number of applications, that range from
              medicine, where it was used for destruction of kidney stones, to long distance
              propagation of acoustic waves in the ocean, cellular communications, and
              imaging in noisy environments. Remarkably, refocusing of the time-reversed and
              re-propagated signal is very robust, and is greatly improved in a highly
              heterogeneous random medium as compared to a uniform domain. Ryzhik intends to
              build on his previous work on wave propagation in random and other complex
              media to advance the mathematical understanding of this important
              phenomenon.

The second major component of the proposed research is the
              mathematical analysis of the combustion processes in fluids, and the effect of
              fluid motion on combustion. It is well known that stirring by a fluid flow may
              both speed up chemical reactions and stop them, depending on the nature of a
              particular problem. These phenomena have been intensively studied by
              physicists, engineers and mathematicians alike. Nevertheless, there are few
              quantitative rigorous mathematical results in the area. Ryzhik intends to
              continue his work in this field, concentrating on mathematical studies of
              models that take into account both the affect of the flow on the chemical
              reaction via improved mixing, and the effect of combustion on the fluid,
              through changes in temperature and density of the fluid. The potential impact
              of this research is development of our understanding of combustion processes in
              turbulent flows in various settings. The mathematical tools that are necessary
              to address the above problems include homogenization, averaging of equations
              with random coefficients, maximum principles and estimates on solutions of
              partial differential equations.


Date: April 25, 2002

