Title       : Polynomial Manipulation using Dixon Resultant Formulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0203051

Award Number: 0203051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepak Kapur kapur@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0203051
Dr. Deepak Kapur
U of New Mexico

The problems of
              (i)determining whether a given polynomial equation system has a common
              solution, (ii)deriving conditions on parameters appearing n polynomial
              equations,such that they have a common solution,as well as (iii)developing an e
              .cient representation of common solutions are of fundamental significance. 
              These problems arise in numerous applications:engineering and design, robotics,
              universe kinematics, manufacturing, design and analysis of nano devices in
              nanotechnology, image understanding, graphics,solid
              modeling,implicitization,CAD-CAM design,geometric construction,design,and
              control theory.  Multivariate resultants and related elimination methods have
              been found useful for addressing these problems. The resultant of a polynomial
              equation system gives the necessary and su .cient condition on its
parameters
              for a common solution to exist. When there are parameters in a polynomial
              system,numerical techniques often do not apply.  Investigations of efficient
              elimination methods are also of considerable importance in algebraic
              geometry,polynomial ideal theory and other related aspects of computational
              algebra and symbolic computation.
Experimental and theoretical analysis
              indicates that the generalized Dixon formulation developed by Kapur,Saxena and
              Yang,based on Bezout-Cayley-Dixon methods and	 efficient elimination/resultant
              method. A particularly attractive feature of the generalized Dixon formulation
              is that t s problem-adaptive since timplicitly exploits the sparse structure of
              the associated polynomial system as well as its non-genericity.

