Title       : Mixed Model Selection: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0203676

Award Number: 0203676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiming Jiang jiang@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0203676 & 0203724

PIs: Jiang/Rao

This research involves
              development of model selection procedures for linear and generalized linear
              mixed models. The focus of this research will be on studying asymptotic
              properties and finite sample performance of the procedures, which will include
              comparisons to commonly used ad hoc methods. The research will also develop
              applications of the selection methodology to selecting factors in longitudinal
              data, genetic screening of genes related to quantitative traits of interest,
              and to model selection in small area estimation problems from surveys. In
              addition, the methods developed will be made accessible through the development
              of freely available software. The research will also improve work recently
              completed by the investigators where the conditions for consistent factor
              selection in linear mixed models were established. These improvements will
              include developing a more efficient method for linear mixed model selection,
              and studying some adaptive procedures. 

Linear and generalized linear mixed
              models are important classes of models which allow relaxation of standard
              assumptions like independence or homogeneity of variances of observations, and
              take into account more complicated data structures in quite general ways.
              Typical applications include repeated measurements made on a patient over time
              or screening of candidate genes that might be related to a quantitative trait
              of interest. Selecting which factors should or should not be in the model can
              be of importance for model inference and predictions, yet little if anything
              has been developed to formally study this problem. This research attempts to
              fill this important gap in the field of developing new procedures for correct
              factor selection from a theoretical perspective, and evaluating real-world
              performance via extensive simulations. Another important component of this
              research is to apply it in a variety of real-world settings including
              longitudinal data, genetic screening, and small area estimation in survey
              sampling. 

