Title       : Proximal Adsorption in Colloidal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0203987

Award Number: 0203987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Ducker wducker@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. William A. Ducker of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is
              funded for his research on proximal adsorption in colloidal systems by a grant
              in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division. He will measure
              the adsorption of surfactants as a function of the separation between particles
              (the proximal adsorption) in a model system consisting of silica particles and
              quaternary ammonium surfactants.  In the analysis of particle forces and
              stability, it is common to assume that surfactants do not adsorb or desorb when
              particles collide.  This can lead to serious errors.  His results of
              force-distance-adsorption measurements will be used to determine the effect of
              proximal adsorption on colloidal forces.  The results will also be compared to
              the thermodynamic theory developed by Hall and by Ash et al., and the
              microscopic mechanism behind proximal adsorption will be explored using
              self-consistent field calculations.  He will use the concept of
              interaction-driven adsorption as a route for improved understanding of
              colloidal stability in surfactant and polymer systems.  The advantages of this
              approach over conventional electrostatic and statistical mechanical
              calculations are that the approach is simple, and the force is directly linked
              to the most easily controlled experimental parameter: the concentration of
              additive in solution. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
              both theoretical and experimental approaches to surface chemistry, and will
              join in the development of a new apparatus for measuring proximal
              adsorption.

Many of the objects that we encounter in everyday life actually
              consist of very fine particles.  For example, bricks, paper, clothing, china,
              soil, most foods, cosmetics, and even humans are composed of small particles. 
              The physical properties (e.g. stiffness, flow, and workability) of these
              objects depends on the forces between the particles.  Part of the process of
              creating new and improved products is the manipulation of the forces between
              particles to obtain desirable material properties.  In practice these new
              properties are obtained through the addition of surfactants and polymers, which
              adsorb to the surface of the particles.  We know that this adsorption is
              modified by collisions between the particles, but this effect is not taken into
              account in most theories, and therefore the reasoning commonly employed in
              formulating products is missing a key step.  The aim of this research is to
              measure, model, and understand the change in adsorption during a collision. 
              This should provide new guidelines for predicting the physical properties of
              materials. 

