Title       : Probabilistic Analysis of Random Geometric Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0203720

Award Number: 0203720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Yukich Joseph.Yukich@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0203720
Yukich
	This proposal focuses on the rigorous probabilistic analysis
              of random structures in Euclidean space. Building on previous research, we
              focus on the stochastic analysis of (i) random packing, random growing
              interfaces, and loose sphere packing, all in two or more dimensions, and (ii)
              functionals of Boolean models and random Euclidean point sets in computational
              geometry and combinatorial optimization. The aim in (i) is to establish
              thermodynamic limits, Gaussian fluctuations, and functional central limit
              theorems for functionals associated with packing models, interface models, as
              well as for random Euclidean point sets in general. All of these models exhibit
              finite range interactions and long-range dependence. Part (ii) focuses on the
              probabilistic analysis of functionals of random point sets in Euclidean space.
              The proposed work in (ii) will further our understanding of solutions to
              Euclidean optimization problems, random graphs in computational geometry, and
              the statistical analysis of random data. 
	One of the central problems in
              physical, chemical, and biological processes involves understanding the growth
              of random interfaces. Such interfaces arise naturally in understanding chemical
              deposition, the morphology of vascular networks, growth patterns in fracture
              analysis, and the porosity of media. Dynamic random interfaces, ones which
              change with time, are useful in understanding and modeling crystal growth as
              well as understanding patterns in nature which change with time. This includes
              diverse phenomena such as the spread of disease in a population, the growth
              patterns in a forest fire, as well as the fracture analysis of metals such as
              those found in aircraft. Much of our understanding of random interfaces is only
              experimental. This proposal seeks to put our understanding of random interfaces
              on a solid theoretical foundation. Understanding the behavior of random
              interfaces currently forms a central part of the principal investigator's
              collaboration with scientists from the Lehigh University engineering school as
              well as with scientists from Lucent Technologies. 

