Title       : Spline Smoothing and Nonparametric Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0203243

Award Number: 0203243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall Eubank eubank@stat.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0203243
PI: Eubank
Title: Spline smoothing and nonparametric
              regression

ABSTRACT 

A number of nonparametric regression type problems
              are investigated. These problems are connected through the use of spline
              smoothing in their solution methodology. Specific problems that are studied
              include: 1) testing the lack-of-fit of a parametric regression model using a
              spline smoother in a setting where standard smoothing parameter consistency
              asymptotics do not hold under the null hypothesis, 2) estimation using spline
              smoothers in varying coefficient models, 3) variance estimation and testing for
              heteroscedasticity for partially linear models, 4) computational methods for
              nonlinear spline smoothing problems with both linear and nonlinear parameters,
              5) adaptive selection of regularization parameters for spline smoothing of data
              from ill-posed integral equations and 6) computation and large sample
              properties of equality constrained local polynomial smoothers with applications
              to copula density estimation.

The problems that are investigated in this
              research project concern regression analysis which represents the standard
              statistical approach to studying relationships between variables. The classical
              approach to regression analysis assumes that the form of the relationship
              between a collection of variables is known apart from a few unknown parameters
              that must be estimated from the data. This project uses more modern techniques
              that employ flexible or nonparametric curve fitting methods to produce
              estimators as well as to assess the validity of parametric models. New
              estimation methodologies are developed for several settings which include time
              varying coefficient models and partially linear models. Time varying
              coefficient models provide a generalization of parametric models where the
              parameters in the regression relationship are allowed to evolve as a function
              of some other variable such as time. This type of model is useful in a number
              of settings such as for analyzing data from longitudinal case studies and for
              prediction of lottery sales as a function of jackpot level. Partially linear
              models provide a mix of parametric and nonparametric methods where the
              regression relationships for some of the variables can be modeled
              parametrically while others must be handled using flexible nonparametric
              techniques. This latter type of model has been found useful, for example, in
              modeling yield from agricultural field trials as a function of field fertility
              and for examining the utility of particular blood enzymes in pregnant women for
              prediction of future incidences of cancer. 

