Title       : Topics in Statistics with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0203798

Award Number: 0203798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiliang Ying zying@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: 0203798
PI: Zhiliang Ying
Title: Topics in statistics with
              applications

Abstract

This project addresses issues related to
              semiparametric regression models with censored data as well as testing and
              estimation of item differential functioning arising from IRT-based standardized
              tests. The investigator and his collaborators develop new algorithms for
              obtaining parameter estimators for the accelerated failure time regression.
              These algorithms are based on linear programming which is easy to implement.
              The estimators are shown to be asymptotically normal, with the limiting
              variance estimated via a simple resampling method. The approach is extended to
              censored quantile regression models, which are common in econometrics
              literature. They study the class of semiparametric transformation models via
              estimating equations, resulting in a general method for parameter estimation
              and inference, justified by a large sample theory. They develop a new approach
              for adaptive standardized tests to detect possible item differential
              functioning via a generalized logistic regression model with measurement
              errors. 

The statistical problems dealt with here are motivated by
              applications in biomedical sciences, sociology, economics, marketing,
              psychology and education. The project develops appropriate statistical models,
              computer algorithms and mathematical theory. The results can be used to
              facilitate design of clinical trials and epidemiological studies, particularly
              in studies of cancer, cardiovascular diseases and AIDS, to analyze unemployment
              duration data, to quantify consumer responses to marketing strategies and to
              screen out items for use in large-scale standardized tests that are tilted
              against certain group or groups to ensure fairness

