Title       : Theoretical Spectroscopy and Quantum Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0203101

Award Number: 0203101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455700             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Light j-light@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Light of the University of Chicago is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop theoretical methods for the accurate
              description of quantum dynamics in molecular systems. These new methods will be
              incorporated into general computer codes to treat classes of larger and
              "difficult" molecules.  The novel quantum methods to be developed are based on
              two principles: localization (divide and solve-by-parts) and efficient phase
              space representations.  The former permits large problems to be broken into
              smaller problems; the latter includes two new approaches to highly efficient
              representations.  Applications will be made to clusters such as water trimers,
              and the quantum dynamics of high-energy, heavy, and/or floppy molecules.  Since
              this research involves the fundamentals of quantum descriptions at the
              molecular level, the results are expected to be widely useful in reaction
              dynamics as well as spectroscopy. 

Theoretical chemistry attempts to
              understand and predict the behavior of real systems, both microscopic and
              macroscopic, based on knowledge of the fundamental interactions at the atomic
              and molecular level. The fundamental processes of interest include reactions in
              the gas phase, catalytic reactions at surfaces, absorption and emission of
              radiation, photodissociation, solvation and reactions in condensed phase,
              electron transfer, and diffusion. Theoretical and algorithmic advances are
              required in order to assess quantum effects of these larger systems.
              Quantitative understanding of such processes can lead, for example, to control
              of combustion processes, synthesis of novel materials, and biological
              processes.
