Title       : Contact Geometry, Complex Analysis and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0203705

Award Number: 0203705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Epstein cle@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for "Contact geometry, complex analysis and imaging"
DMS-
              0203705

Dr. Epstein's research proposal contains projects in four distinct
              areas: (1)
Invariants of contact structures, (2) Problems in CR-geometry,
              (3)
Multi-parameter perturbation theory, (4) Magnetic resonance imaging.
              The
proposed work in (1) will likely be done in collaboration with Richard
              Melrose.
They intend to use their prior work on the Heisenberg calculus to
              find
invariants of contact manifolds. A problem of particular interest is to
              use
spectral flow invariants of Toeplitz operators to distinguish
              contact
structures with homotopic hyperplane fields. The work in (2) is part
              of
Dr. Epstein's ongoing project on embeddability of CR-manifolds, he proposes
              to
consider CR-structures in dimensions greater than 3 to understand why
              some
CR-functions are unstable and why some are stable under deformation of
              the
underlying CR-structure.  The project described in (3) concerns the
              problem of
analytically parameterizing the eigenvalues and eigenspaces of a
              "self adjoint"
analytic family of matrices.  In broad terms Dr. Epstein would
              like to see what
the modern theory of functions of several complex variables
              has to say about
multi-parameter perturbation problems. Preliminary
              investigations show that
real progress is now possible in this field. His main
              goal is to find
reasonably simple and explicit analytic spaces on which the
              eigenvalues and
eigenspaces of a self adjoint family are analytically
              parametrized.  Finally
(4) is an entirely new direction for Dr. Epstein's
              research.  He plans to study
the feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging
              using inhomogeneous background
fields.

Dr. Epstein's work is in the
              application of analysis and algebra to problems in
geometry. A principal focus
              of his research is the geometry and analysis of
contact manifolds. These arise
              is many contexts from several complex variables
to differential geometry to
              topology to partial differential equations. Using
the tools developed in
              collaboration with Richard Melrose, Dr. Epstein hopes to
elucidate the
              analysis and geometry of these ubiquitous spaces. Dr. Epstein
also plans to
              investigate the feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging using
inhomogeneous
              background fields. This is largely beyond the capabilities of
present day
              technology. If it proves feasible it would allow many new
applications of MR
              imaging and should also lead to less expensive equipment.
This is a
              multifaceted problem with significant mathematical and
engineering aspects.

