Title       : The Mousterian fauna from Grotte XVI, Dordogne, France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0203278

Award Number: 0203278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Grotte XVI archaeological site, located in the Dordogne region of
              southwestern France, contains a sequence of human occupations that began prior
              to 70,000 years ago and that continued until the end of the Ice Age, about
              10,000 years ago.  The cave was first occupied by Neandertals, but the later
              occupants were modern in all ways, with the transition between the two presumed
              to have occurred around 30,000 years ago.  Not only does the archaeological
              sequence at Grotte XVI span at least 60,000 years, but the preservation of the
              bones and teeth of large mammals is excellent, and the archaeological
              assemblages assumed to represent the latest Neandertals-the
              "Chatelperronian"-and the earliest modern peoples-the "Aurignacian"-are
              well-represented.  The site is rich in the remains of such large ungulates as
              reindeer, red deer, ibex, and horse, all of which provide information on the
              diets of the residents of the site, and on the mammal history of this part of
              southwestern France.  Previous work on these faunal assemblages, supported by
              the National Science Foundation, has shown that the diet of the Chtelperronian
              residents of the site (presumably Neandertals) did not differ in significant
              ways from that of the people (presumably modern in biology and behavior) who
              used the site immediately after them.  This demonstration joins work from other
              parts of Europe in suggesting that if modern peoples truly replaced
              Neandertals, the differential use of animal resources may not have played a
              major role in allowing this to occur.  In fact, the only important difference
              between the ChAtelperronian and Aurignacian large mammal assemblages involves
              cave bears.  These huge carnivores were common in the ChAtelperronian level (as
              well as in earlier ones), but disappear soon thereafter, and it appears that
              increasingly intense use of caves in post-Neandertal times may have hastened
              the extinction of these remarkable animals.  In addition, analysis of the
              history of the large mammals that occur at Grotte XVI between about 36,000 and
              12,000 years ago has shown that the abundances of reindeer (known in North
              America as caribou) rose and fell in concert with summer temperatures: reindeer
              were far less abundant when summers were warmer. Ultimately, at the end of the
              Ice Age, summer temperatures became so warm that reindeer became extinct here. 
              This long-term view of reindeer history suggests that current caribou
              populations in northern North America may be particularly vulnerable to global
              climate warming.  Although the detailed picture that we have of human diet and
              large mammal history currently goes back to about 36,000 years ago, the Grotte
              XVI sequence includes a rich Mousterian assemblage, clearly reflecting
              Neandertal use of the site, that dates to about 65,000 years ago (less detailed
              records from the site are older yet).  Support from the National Science
              Foundation will allow this earlier material to be studied as well.  This
              analysis will let us know whether earlier Neandertal diets differed from those
              represented in later deposits, and will also tell us whether the relationship
              between summer temperatures and reindeer abundances existed this deeply into
              the Ice Age.
