Title       : Collaborative Research: Absolute and essential instabilities in spatially
               extended systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0203301

Award Number: 0203301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnd Scheel scheel@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0203301
Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research:
              Absolute and essential instabilities in spatially extended
              systems

Abstract

0203301 Scheel


This project explores several
              instability mechanisms of coherent states, such as fronts, pulses and spiral
              waves, that occur in spatially extended systems far from equilibrium. The
              common theme of these mechanisms is that they involve transport phenomena
              caused by diffusion and nonlinearities. Examples of such transitions are
              backfiring instabilities of fronts, period-doubling bifurcations of spiral
              waves, and the effect of inhomogeneities on the dynamics of spiral waves. While
              transport is most conveniently modeled and described using an idealized
              unbounded domain, boundaries may well enhance or inhibit the instability
              through partial reflection or generation of waves. It is the aim of this
              project to develop techniques that can help to investigate instability
              mechanisms simultaneously on bounded and unbounded domains. One of the expected
              outcomes will be a description of instability mechanisms that is robust with
              respect to typical boundary conditions in large reactors. Technically, our
              approach is based on methods from spatial dynamics that allow us to derive
              sharp pointwise estimates which capture explicitly the effects of
              boundaries.

Complicated spatio-temporal patterns that arise due to the
              interplay of chemical reactions and diffusion have been observed experimentally
              in a number of specific reactions (among them the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction
              and the chlorite-iodide-malonic acid reaction). Similar phenomena have been
              observed during fibrillation of cardiac tissue where spiral waves act as
              organizing centers for the complex spatio-temporal dynamics. Other examples
              where irregular patterns occur are the interaction of pulses in oscillatory
              media, backfiring of excitation pulses in catalytic reactions, and optical
              bistability in nonlinear photonic gratings. The focus of this project is to
              analyze some of these instability mechanisms by analytical means. This will not
              only further our understanding of pattern formation in chemical and biological
              systems, but will eventually allow for a systematic control of patterns, for
              instance, in the catalytic oxidation of carbon-monoxide and in the propagation
              of calcium waves in intracellular tissue. 


