Title       : Sequential Importance Sampling with Resampling and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0203762

Award Number: 0203762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuguo Chen yuguo@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: 0203762
PI: Yuguo Chen
Title: Sequential importance sampling with
              resampling and its applications

Abstract:

The Monte Carlo method of
              sequential importance sampling (SIS) provides a versatile and powerful tool for
              solving complex statistical inference problems. A number of basic issues
              concerning the method remain to be resolved for it to be more widely
              applicable:  How should the proposal distribution be chosen to strike a proper
              balance between computational complexity and statistical efficiency?  What is
              the role of resampling and what is a good choice for the resampling schedule? 
              An objective of this proposal is to address these questions through the
              detailed study of SIS in three important applications. The first area is time
              series and stochastic dynamic systems.  Research will develop resampling
              schedules and proposal distributions for SIS to solve some long-standing
              filtering and smoothing problems in continuous-state hidden Markov
              models.
Change-point problems, which can be seen as a special case of hidden
              Markov models, will serve as a test ground for the new methodology. The second
              area is statistical inference in molecular population genetics.  Research in
              this area will enhance currently available SIS methodology by developing a new
              resampling approach, and by combining such resampling strategy with suitably
              chosen proposal distributions.  The final area of research is conditional
              inference on contingency and zero-one tables.  New theories arising from these
              applications will be of interest across a broad range of areas.

The Monte
              Carlo method of sequential importance sampling has been fruitfully applied to a
              wide range of scientific problems including simulating molecules, filtering and
              smoothing time series arising in engineering and economics, and making Bayesian
              statistical inferences. However, a number of basic issues need to be resolved
              to make the method more widely applicable and effective.  For example, how
              should a proper balance be struck between computational complexity and
              statistical efficiency in implementing the method and what is the role of
              various enhancements to the method.  This research will address these issues
              through the development of more efficient sequential importance sampling
              techniques for three important areas of application.  The first area is
              filtering and smoothing problems in continuous-state hidden Markov models,
              which have important applications in communications signal processing.  The
              second area is statistical inference on genealogical trees.  Recent advances in
              biotechnology have provided an abundance of data on the genetic variation of
              DNA within a population.  This data, which often poses computationally
              challenging statistical inference problems, can shed light on the evolutionary
              process of a population and yield important information for locating genes that
              are responsible for genetic diseases.  The third area of application is
              conditional inference on contingency and zero-one tables, which is motivated by
              the interest in psychology in testing the Rasch model and in ecology in testing
              theories about the relationship between evolution and the competition among
              species.  This research will improve the sequential importance sampling methods
              used in these three applications and strive to develop a systematic theory that
              provides insight into general strategies for applying sequential importance
              samplin

