Title       : Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0203735

Award Number: 0203735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Spatzier spatzier@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0203735.

The research proposed lies at the interface of
              dynamical systems and differential 
geometry.  Its principal goal is the
              investigation of the dynamical and geometric 
structures of "higher rank"
              systems.  Such systems naturally appear both in dynamical 
systems and
              geometry.  In particular, the principal investigator will study 
rigidity
              properties of actions of higher rank abelian and semisimple Lie groups 
and
              their lattices with the ultimate goal of classifying such systems under
              
suitable geometric or dynamical hypotheses.  In particular, he will study
              higher
rank hyperbolic abelian actions, and actions by semisimple groups and
              their 
lattices preserving affine and geometric structures. He will also
              investigate 
invariant measures of algebraic higher rank abelian actions.  The
              investigator 
will also investigate Riemannian manifolds (especially higher
              rank ones)
and their geodesic flows.  Geometric, dynamical and group theoretic
              
tools will be used in this research.



Dynamical systems and ergodic
              theory are relatively new fields that investigate 
the evolution of a physical
              or mathematical system over time (e.g. turbulence in 
a fluid flow).  New
              ideas and concepts from dynamics (e.g. chaos, fractals) have 
changed our
              perception of the world fundamentally.  Dynamics and ergodic theory 
provide
              the mathematical tools and analysis for these investigations. Dynamical
              
systems have had a major impact on the sciences and engineering.  Symbolic
              
dynamics for instance has been instrumental in developing efficient and safe
              
codes for computer science.  Tools and ideas from smooth dynamics are used as
              
far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry is one of the oldest
              fields 
in mathematics, and generally studies curves, surfaces and their
              higher 
dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest paths, and maps between
              such 
spaces.  Differential geometry had its roots in cartography, and is now
              studied 
for its close ties with physics and other sciences and applied areas
              (computer 
vision e.g.)as well as internal aesthetic reasons.  Geometry and
              dynamics are 
closely related as some important dynamical systems originate
              from geometry, and 
geometry also provides tools to study dynamical systems. 
              One main goal of this 
project studies when two dynamical systems commute,
              i.e. when one system is 
unaffected by the changes brought on by the other.
              Important examples of such 
systems arise from geometry. 

