Title       : Large Finite Random Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0203062

Award Number: 0203062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560876             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Aldous aldous@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project studies, using probabilistic methods, the behavior of finite random
              structures as their size grows larger and larger, focusing on five specific
              topics. Two are from theoretical combinatorics: non-uniform random mappings;
              and largest common substructures in settings such as partial orders or
              leaf-labeled trees. One is from statistical physics: mean-field models of
              disordered systems, in particular of first-passage percolation and its
              associated percolation function. Another is from biology: models of purely
              random macroevolution which can handle simultaneously phylogenetic trees on
              extant species and time series of extinct species. The final topic is random
              affinity graphs, which seek to abstract one aspect of the structure of real
              world graphs such as those for human social networks (``small worlds") or WWW
              links.

Conceptually, the project is intended as a bridge between abstract
              mathematical theory of random structures, which focuses on difficult properties
              of unrealistically simple models, and the engineering type of examples of
              complex networks (the physical and hypertext links of the Internet;
              transportation networks) whose models exploit the details of the particular
              structure. It is hoped that study of these five particular models will lead to
              novel mathematical methodology useful in these more applied areas. 

