Title       : Algebraic Geometry, Commutative Algebra, and Algorithmic Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0203092

Award Number: 0203092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437233             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Eisenbud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Eisenbud will work on three groups of problems from commutative
algebra
              and algebraic geometry: The use of exterior algebra methods
in projective
              geometry and their extension to toric geometry; the study
of infinite free
              resolutions; and the study of codimensions of determinantal
(and related)
              ideals. This last includes the circle of problems around the 
existence of
              vector bundles of low rank on projective spaces. His activity
will also
              include the development of fundamental algorithms in computational
algebraic
              geometry and their implementation in the Macaulay2 package 
written by Grayson
              and Stilllman. By far the largest portion of the project
budget is devoted to
              the support of graduate students. This and the computational
tools produced by
              the project will broaden its impact.

Algebraic geometry deals with geometric
              forms defined by
simple equations (polynomials). The subject is central in
              mathematics
because these forms include the fundamental examples in most
              disciplines
of mathhematics; and it is important in the applications of
              mathematics
because these forms provide the models most often used in
              representing
nature in equations or in the computer. Over the last 150 years
              the group of
techniques called commutative algebra has been developed to study
              and unify this
and problems arising in number theory. Much more recently it
              was realized that
an extension of commutative algebra into the noncommutative
              domain of
exterior algebras gives a fruitful new approach to some old problems
              in this
field. Independently, computers and algorithms became powerful enough
              to 
help research in algebraic geometry. Eisenbud's proposed work has to
              do
with some of the most classical problems in algebraic geometry as well
as
              with new uses of exterior algebra and computation in this domain, and
he will
              also continue his work developing computational tools for others
to use. The
              largest part of his grant will be devoted to the support
of graduate students,
              whom he will train in these techniques and methods.



