Title       : Some Problems Related to Model Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0203884

Award Number: 0203884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerda Claeskens gerda@stat.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI: Gerda Claeskens

Proposal ID: DMS-0203884


Title: Some
              problems related to model selection

The first major contribution of this
              project is a study of nonparametric tests of function fit in the context of
              both density estimation and regression, hereby generalizing existing results in
              several directions. The proposed apparatus can be applied to test the adequacy
              of any parametric family, subject to the usual conditions of regularity, and is
              also suitable for use in higher dimensions. The second research topic focuses
              specifically on estimation after model selection and introduces a general
              approach to frequentist model averaging. A third line of research addresses the
              problem of generalizing the methods mentioned above to the setting of missing
              data. This will require the development of new model selection criteria.
              

The goal of nonparametric testing is to construct an omnibus test,
              consistent against essentially any alternative model. Proposed tests are
              applicable to almost any parametric family of functions. There are several
              reasons why model selection criteria and their asymptotic properties merit
              further study, one of the most important ones being that only a minority of the
              past research provides a full integration of model selection into statistical
              inference. The traditional use of model selection methods in practice is to
              proceed as if the final selected model had been chosen a priori, without
              acknowledging the additional uncertainty introduced by model selection. A
              general framework is developed, in which several modeling and estimation
              strategies can be included and compared. Aspects of these problems are
              addressed first in the setting of complete data, and then in the general
              situation of missing data.   


