Title       : Approximate Reasoning in Stochastic Concurrency: Applications to Secure
               Substitution and Stochastic Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0203716

Award Number: 0203716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Radhakrishnan Jagadeesan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Stochastic programs involve time, probability and concurrency. The classical
              research into reasoning about probabilistic models of concurrency provides
              methods to establish when two processes can be considered the same and be
              inter-substituted for each other.  Such equivalences are too exact since they
              are usually not robust under even slight perturbation of probabilities. This is
              particularly unfortunate since practice dictates that probability numbers are
              to be viewed as numbers with some error estimate. The focus of this proposal is
              approximations and approximate reasoning for stochastic concurrent systems. The
              PI proposes to use metric based frameworks to formalize approximation schemes
              and develop compositional reasoning methods to study robust notions of
              ''approximately inter-substitutable'' programs. 

The  first  intended
              application is the exploration of ''secure substitution'' in mobile code
              applications, where programs (such as tax software) are downloaded as needed,
              executed on a trusted host (the home computer), require access to sensitive
              local data (such as financial information) and yet should not be permitted to
              leak information. Probabilistic modeling is used in such applications to
              quantify the amount of information flow between systems. A permissible secure
              substitution of one component for another in a program context has to preserve
              such information flow properties in addition to the usual observations.  The
              goal of this project is to define a robust notion of secure substitution, and
              develop compositional proof rules and algorithms to determine if a component
              can be securely substituted for another.

The second intended application is
              the design and implementation of StochCC, an executable specification language
              for stochastic hybrid systems.   This research will build on the PI's prior
              work into HybridCC, a declarative language for specifying and simulating hybrid
              systems. Users of HybridCC(in biological systems modeling) have already found
              it useful to add limited forms of discrete probabilistic specification to
              HybridCC.  StochCC will perform a full and general integration of probabilities
              into HybridCC. In order to come to computational grips with such systems, one
              needs a notion of discrete approximation. Such discrete approximants play a
              role in both simulation (executing the system within some error bound) and
              approximate reasoning (calculating the observations of the system within some
              error bound).
