Title       : Bayesian Nonlinear Regression with Multivariate Linear Splines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0203215

Award Number: 0203215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bani K. Mallick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0203215
PI: Bani Mallick
Title: Bayesian nonlinear regression
              with multivariate linear splines

The investigator and his colleagues
              consider novel, nonparametric modeling of univariate and multivariate
              non-Gaussian response data. The usual generalized linear models are extended to
              generalized nonlinear models by modeling the mean function in a flexible way.
              Data adaptive multivariate smoothing splines are employed to do this, where the
              number and location of the knot points are treated as random. The posterior
              model space is explored using a reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
              sampler. Computational difficulties are partly alleviated by introducing a
              residual effect in the model that leaves many of the posterior distributions of
              the model parameters in standard form. The use of the latent residual effect
              provides a convenient vehicle for modeling correlation in multivariate response
              data and as such the method can be seen to generalize the seemingly unrelated
              regression model to non-Gaussian data. In the next part of the project the
              investigator and his colleagues develop semiparametric Bayesian methods for
              generalized non-linear models where a predictor is measured with either
              classical or Berkson error. In the presence of covariate measurement error,
              estimating usual regression function nonparametrically is extremely difficult,
              the problem being related to
deconvolution. In the case of generalized linear
              model it is more difficult. Again combinations of spline regression and MCMC
              techniques are used to handle the problem.

Function estimation is an
              important statistical tool that tries to understand accurately the functional
              relationships between variables based on data and it has applications in many
              disciplines for successfully addressing scientific questions. Most of the
              flexible, nonlinear regression problems are developed when the response is a
              continuous variable. In important applied problems the response may be count or
              indicator variable and flexible function estimation is much more harder in
              these situations. In this proposal the investigator intend to develop the
              methods that adaptively estimate the functional relationships in these more
              complicated situations. The area of biotechnology is an especially application
              for these methods. Scientists now have techniques for measuring gene expression
              levels for thousands of genes at the same time, allowing the exciting
              possibility of determining which human genes are involved in a disease such as
              cancer and heart disease. These methods will be useful to explore nonlinear
              relationship between gene expression levels and the chance of the disease.
              Other possible applications are to model correlated multivariate disease or
              accident counts data where the methods being developed here will improve
              modeling disease or accidents maps (with uncertainties) which will be useful
              for disease or transportation risk assessments.

