Title       : Spectral Theory of Riemannian Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0203070

Award Number: 0203070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Donnelly hgd@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0203070.

The principal investigator plans to study three
              separate topics:
i) Eigenvalue estimates for the Laplacian on Hermitian
              holomorphic line bundles, 
ii) Quantum Unique Ergodicity, and iii) Behavior of
              eigenfunctions near the ideal 
boundary of hyperbolic space. Consider the
              tensor powers of a Hermitian holomorphic 
line bundle, over a compact complex
              manifold. If the curvature form of the line bundle 
is strictly positive, then
              the first non--zero eigenvalue, of the Laplacian, acting on 
sections of the
              $k$th power, is bounded below uniformly in $k$. The proposal is to prove 
that
              the first non--zero eigenvalue is uniformly bounded below when the curvature is
              
semipositive everywhere and positive for at least one point. The problem can
              be reformulated
in terms of CR geometry. Microlocal analysis will be applied
              to the reformulated problem.
The problem of quantum unique ergodicity concerns
              concentration of eigenfunctions on 
manifolds with ergodic geodesic flow. We
              propose to construct examples where sequences of 
eigenfunctions concentrate
              along isolated closed geodesics or on one parameter families of 
closed
              geodesics. The first step is to find quasimodes (approximate eigenfunctions).
              
Next one must show that these quasimodes correspond to individual
              eigenfunctions rather 
than sums of several eigenfunctions. The hyperbolic
              space has essential spectrum which is 
a proper subset of the positive real
              line. There do exist eigenfunctions, defined on the 
complements of compact
              sets, whose eigenvalue lies below the start of the essential spectrum.
The
              behavior of these eigenfunctions will be studied near the ideal boundary at
              infinity.
The goal is to understand the nodal set by means of a perturbation
              expansion. It appears 
that the case of surfaces is much more tractable than
              the higher dimensional cases.


To develop our understanding of the quantum
              phenomena, mathematicians are often inspired by 
the analogy with classical
              mechanics. The passage from the classical to the quantum level 
is called the
              semiclassical limit. If the classical motion is chaotic, one expects the
              
probability distribution of the quantum particle to be dispersed. Exceptions
              to this pattern, 
where the particle concentrates, are of particular interest.
              Similarly, if an energy 
estimate holds under strict positivity conditions of
              a classical curvature form, one 
naturally investigates the borderline case
              where the curvature form is non--negative.
One hopes that regularity
              properties will persevere in the more general situation.
This type of question
              is interesting because non--negative objects often occur as the limits
of
              positive objects. The nodal set of a quantum particle is the stationary set for
              the 
associated wave motion. Its distribution and shape are of fundamental
              interest, 
but poorly understood, especially in dimensions larger than
              two.



