Title       : Enhancing the Performance of Hp-adaptive Methods for Parabolic and Elliptic
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0203154

Award Number: 0203154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Moore pmoore@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigator will develop tools that will enhance the adaptive solution of
              parabolic and elliptic systems in three space dimensions.  A new a posteriori
              error estimation strategy, interpolation-error based error estimation,
              developed in one dimension will be extended to three dimensions. This strategy
              provides asymptotically exact estimates of the error not only for the current
              grid, but for a grid whose elements are one degree higher than the current one.
               The estimates involve obtaining approximations of appropriate solution
              derivatives from the finite element solution and are thus, easy to compute. 
              They will enhance the reliability of hp-refinement codes.  The investigator
              will also improve efficiency through the development of new assembly and
              solution algorithms for large linear systems.  A new incomplete assembly
              algorithm that appears promising in a nonadaptive setting will be extended to
              an hp-adaptive code.  Incomplete assembly is analogous to incomplete
              factorization in that only a fixed number of nonzero entries are stored per row
              and a drop tolerance is used to discard small values.  A variable
              order-variable step implicit/explicit solver will be built.  A method for
              selecting a good initial guess for an approximate inverse preconditioner for
              time-dependent problems based on past history will be investigated. These
              strategies will be embedded in an hp-refinement code developed previously by
              the investigator and tested on a set of reaction-diffusion systems.

  Many
              important physical and biological processes can be modeled by elliptic and
              parabolic partial differential equations, especially those of the
              reaction-diffusion type.  Some examples include pattern formation in chemical
              and biological systems, combustion and voltage propagation in the heart. 
              Solving such problems often involves significant computational resources, both
              time and storage, especially when the problems must be solved in three space
              dimensions. Adaptive methods have proven effective by automatically targeting
              these resources to areas where the solution must be enhanced while reducing the
              effort in areas where the solution is changing little. They also increase the
              reliability of the solution by basing resource allocation on appropriate
              estimation of the error.  The aim of this proposal is to significantly improve
              adaptive methods in two ways. First a new error estimation strategy will be
              developed that is cheaper and provides more information on which to base
              resource allocation, thereby increasing reliability.  The second involves the
              creation of several new methods to solve large systems of equations thus
              improving both time and storage efficiency.  This in turn, means that
              scientists and engineers will be able to explore more realistic models rather
              than deliberate over the finer details of numerical analysis.

