Title       : Applications of Analysis to Differential Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0203637

Award Number: 0203637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederico Xavier xavier.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS- 0203637

The object of this proposal is to continue our research
              on the topics below using 
techniques such as complex analysis, spectral
              theory, non-linear analysis and 
ergodic theory: i) Spectral theory of the
              Laplacian on functions and forms - connections 
with ergodic theory. ii)
              Global injectivity theorems. iii) Topology of umbilics. 
iv) The generalized
              Hilbert theorem. Topic i) is a collection of problems coming from 
(and
              relating to) spectral and ergodic theory, dynamics, vanishing theorems and the
              
topology of manifolds of non-positive curvature. Topic ii) is an outgrowth of
              our efforts 
to understand embeddedness of minimal surfaces. It centers on the
              problem of 
finding conditions for a local diffeomorphism between non-compact
              manifolds to be injective.
This type of question arises in areas of
              mathematics as diverse as algebraic geometry and 
mathematical economics. Our
              methods here come from geometry, topology and global analysis. 
Topic iii) is
              a classical problem in differential geometry namely, understanding the
              
topology of umbilical singularities. The plan is to continue studying this
              problem as a 
question about the blow-up of certain hyperbolic partial
              differential equations. 
Topic iv) is also a classical problem, dealing with
              isometric immersions of hyperbolic 
spaces. As in iii), we plan to approach
              this question as a blow-up problem.


In our approach to research, starting
              with the earlier work on minimal surface theory, 
we have always sought to
              achieve a balance between technique and creative mathematics. 
This proposal
              is full of problems and ideas coming from diverse areas, such as spectral
              
theory, dynamical systems, hyperbolic equations, algebraic and Riemannian
              geometry. 
We have already contributed to all these questions. Given the
              variety of topics, we would 
like to believe that this proposal advances the
              "internal" conversation of mathematics. 
On the other hand, the work on Global
              Inversion is potentially of interest to applied 
disciplines, since it
              addresses the question of solvability of systems of non-linear 
equations.
