Title       : The Topology and Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0203698

Award Number: 0203698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Canary canary@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0203698
Richard Canary

The topology and geometry of hyperbolic
              3-manifolds

Professor Canary will study the space AH(M) of marked hyperbolic
              
3-manifolds homotopy equivalent to a fixed compact 3-manifold M. 
The
              interior of this space is well-understood due to work of 
Ahlfors, Bers, Kra,
              Marden, Maskit, Sullivan and Thurston. 
Roughly, the components of the
              interior  are enumerated by 
topological data and each component is
              parameterized by analytical 
data. Thurston's Ending Lamination Conjecture
              predicts that points 
in  the entire space AH(M) can be classified by
              topological data 
(coming from the marked homeomorphism type of the hyperbolic
              
3-manifold) and geometric data (which encodes the asymptotic 
geometry of
              the ends.) Yair Minsky has made substantial progress 
towards the resolution
              of Thurston's Ending Lamination Conjecture 
in the case that M has
              incompressible boundary. Prof. Canary will 
collaborate with Jeff Brock and
              Yair Minsky on a program to 
complete the proof of this conjecture and a
              number of related 
conjectures. Recent work, by Anderson, Brock, Bromberg,
              Canary, 
Holt, McCullough and McMullen, has revealed surprising new
              
phenomena concerning the global topology of AH(M). Components of 
the
              interior may bump (i.e. have intersecting closures) and 
individual components
              may bump themselves. Prof. Canary proposes 
to further study the global
              topology of AH(M). In particular, the 
techniques used in the attack on the
              Ending Lamination Conjecture 
will be used to study the continuity of the
              ending invariants.

The study of 3-dimensional manifolds employs tools from
              geometry, 
topology, dynamics and complex analysis. It is the interplay of
              
these tools which gives the subject its rich flavor. A
              2-dimensional
manifold or surface is a space which looks locally like
              2-dimensional
Euclidean space; examples are given by the surfaces of familiar
              
3-dimensional objects such as doughnuts. Similarly, a 3-manifold 
is a space
              that looks locally like 3-dimensional Euclidean space.  
A Riemannian metric
              is a way of measuring distances and angles in 
a manifold.  For example, the
              universe we live in is a 3-manifold 
with a Riemannian metric.  Surfaces were
              classified in the 19th 
century, and it was shown that all surfaces admit a
              beautiful 
Riemannian metric of one of three types: Euclidean, spherical or
              
hyperbolic. The study of all possible such metrics on a fixed 
surface was
              begun in the 19th century and has played a key role
in topology, complex
              analysis, Riemannian geometry and algebraic 
geometry. Thurston revolutionized
              the study of 3-manifolds by 
conjecturing, and proving in many cases, that
              every 3-manifold
may be canonically decomposed into pieces which admit metrics
              of
one of 8 geometric types.  Hyperbolic metrics are the most common 
and
              least understood class of such metrics.  Prof. Canary will 
study the space of
              all hyperbolic metrics on a fixed 3-manifold.

