Title       : Capacity Building for Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0203288

Award Number: 0203288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2039000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland J. Fuchs rfuchs@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Frederick Spilhaus, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 1679      INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Global Change SysTem for Analysis, Research and Training (START), as the
              major international outreach program of three of the major international global
              change research programs - the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the
              International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), and the International Human
              Dimensions (of Global Environmental Change) Program (IHDP) - will undertake
              efforts to develop scientific capabilities in global change research in
              developing countries of Asia, the Pacific, and Africa.  START will also promote
              collaboration in global change research and related scientific activities among
              scientists from the countries of these regions and between scientists from
              these countries and scientists from the United States and other countries with
              advanced capabilities in global change research.

START will focus on six
              scientific areas of high priority for the international programs and for U.S.
              research on global change.  These areas are: (1) regional climate variability
              and change; (2) changes in the composition of the atmosphere and its effects;
              (3) land use/land cover change, especially its biophysical and biogeochemical
              aspects; (4) interaction between global change and terrestrial ecosystems and
              their biodiversity; (5) interaction between global change and oceans, coastal
              zones, and inland waters and their biodiversity; and (6) scientific problems
              that cut across these areas, e.g., interactions between global change and food
              systems and between global change and water resources.

These activities are
              expected to lead to improved understanding of global change and its particular
              characteristics and consequences in Asia, the Pacific, and Africa; improved and
              expanded input from the scientists of these regions to global efforts,
              especially to global modeling; and improved scientific capabilities in these
              regions to contribute to and participate in global change research at local,
              regional and global levels.  In Asia and the Pacific, START will collaborate
              closely with the Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research (APN).
              

START will extend the monitoring system for extreme events it has developed
              in northern Africa to other parts of the continent and will convene a workshop
              on the relationship of global change to freshwater resources, with a special
              focus on the arid and semi-arid regions of Africa.  START will work closely
              with the Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) to assure full and active
              participation by African scientists in these activities.  Two other areas of
              emphasis in Africa will be (1) the interactions between global change and food
              systems and (2) land use/land change/ecosystem variability, both areas of
              exceptionally high priority for African countries.  START will also extend
              efforts to assess the impacts of and adaptation to climate change in southern
              Africa, particularly by promoting development of a network for this process and
              development of analytical tools for such an assessment. 

START will also
              address polar coastal zones and change in these zones by convening a "synthesis
              and futures meeting" to bring together scientists active in the Russian Arctic
              to review past research on changes in coastal zones in the Arctic and their
              relationship to global change and then to consider how best to plan future
              research in this area.


