Title       : Statisical Methods in Fast Functional MRI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0203086

Award Number: 0203086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Shepp shepp@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cun-Hui Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Statistical methods will be developed to sharply improve time-resolution for the
              recently proposed technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
              The objective of the project is to improve the time-resolution of fMRI by
              sampling only a small fraction of the Fourier transform of the spin density,
              and using a prolate wavelet filter to approximately obtain an integral
              representing the total activity of the difference in susceptibility between
              task and pre-task, over various regions of interest in the brain at successive
              time -points. The cost for this is a decrease in spatial resolution. This
              space/time trade-off allows us to obtain, at high-time resolution, the total
              activity in specified regions of the brain, believed to process the specific
              stimulus/task, to learn or verify where the brain function takes place.
              Furthermore, the proposed methodologies is believed to be applicable to other
              types of MRI studies, especially magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

The
              proposal focuses on developing statistical methods and related theory for fast
              functional magnetic resonance (fMRI), to sharply improve the time resolution of
              present techniques via 3-dimensional sampling. The principal investigators and
              their collaborators have conducted a fMRI imaging experiment to answer the
              feasibility question. The results based on this small experiment are quite
              encouraging. Further experiments will conducted to confirm the preliminary
              results and improve upon technology. Fast fMRI is expected to have profound and
              far-reaching consequences in the understanding of brain function, a problem of
              central scientific interest at the present time

