Title       : Graduate Research Traineeship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1998  
File        : a9256332

Award Number: 9256332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Hanushek hanushek@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall L. Calvert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
              While politics and economics were contained in a single                        
              discipline over much aof the period of modern scholarship, these               
              fields were split during the 20th century.  It is now apparent                 
              that this split, while advantageous for certain scientific                     
              developments, places artificial constraints on the study of many               
              important social issues.  The separate development of the                      
              disciplines has worked to make communication and joint training                
              across disciplinary boundaries generally difficult.  The                       
              rejoining of political science and economics into political                    
              economy has been underway for a couple of decades now.  The                    
              fruits of this research are numerous, and its promise is greater               
              than ever.  The political scientist's emphasis on institutions                 
              affects economic performance, while the economist's individual                 
              choice viewpoint has made political scientists examine more                    
              critically their theories about the formation, evolution and                   
              maintenance of institutions.  The improved understanding that                  
              results from such interdisciplinary exchange improves the way we               
              address important policy problems ranging from the management of               
              firms to the design of constitutions.  This grant provides funds               
              to develop the associated graduate training which accompanies the              
              on-going research activities at the University of Rochester in                 
              political economy.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The University of Rochester has made a major commitment toward                 
              developing the perspective of political economy, the study of how              
              individual behavior is affected by and in turn determines                      
              institutional and political structures.  During the Spring of                  
              1991 the University created the Wallis Institute of Political                  
              Economy, provided it with a $3.5 million endowment for base                    
              support, and moved to develop both research and ultimately,                    
              training in the area, a project made possible by the current,                  
              broad based research of the faculties of the underlying                        
              Departments and by their historically close working and                        
              intellectual relationships.  Graduate Research Traineeships allow              
              the development of a Ph.D. Program in Political Economy,                       
              something that is not possible with the current Institute                      
              funding.  The other activities of the Wallis Institute will                    
              provide a rich environment for the new training program.  The                  
              program also develops innovative instructional methods having                  
              spillovers for other activities of the Department.
