Title       : Graduate Traineeships in Quantitative Contaminant Hydrogeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9256836

Award Number: 9256836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet S. Herman jherman@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron L. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roseanne M. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Hornberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Fundamental and applied problems associated with the                      
              contamination of the subsurface environment are receiving attention            
              at local, national, and international levels.  Groundwater                     
              contamination is clearly an urgent technical issue in our society.             
              The University of Virginia has taken an interdisciplinary approach             
              to the study of quantitative contaminant hydrogeology that places              
              it in a unique position of national prominence in the field.  With             
              additional support for graduate students, the ongoing research and             
              teaching program should allow them to craft a cohesive program that            
              will provide the basis for understanding the fundamental technical             
              issues of groundwater contamination and produce competent                      
              professionals who can address the details of this complex                      
              interdisciplinary problem from a variety of perspectives.                      
              Collaboration across departments is generating new research funds,             
              additional faculty members, and new space; the University of                   
              Virginia is primed to expand its role in the training of critically            
              needed technical professionals.  This interdisciplinary academic               
              program, encompassing hydrogeology, geochemistry, microbial                    
              ecology, chemical engineering, and civil engineering, shall evolve             
              into a national resource by producing outstanding graduates to fill            
              positions at other universities, national research facilities,                 
              federal agencies, and industry, and to train them to contribute to             
              solving our Nation's problems in contaminant hydrogeology.
