Title       : Graduate Research Traineeship Program in The Economics of Education, Training,
               and Human Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9256368

Award Number: 9256368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben S. Bernanke bernanke@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Goldfeld  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
              Recent economic and social changes have accentuated the role of                
              education in determining earnings, family structure, health                    
              status and other outcomes.  There is also growing concern that                 
              the US workforce is lagging behind other countries in both the                 
              quantity and quality of education.  In response to these                       
              challenges, state, local, and Federal authorities have                         
              implemented a variety of education reforms, including school                   
              choice programs, magnet schools, bilingual education, and teacher              
              certification.  This proliferation of programs offers a unique                 
              opportunity to study what works and to influence the course of                 
              education policy.                                                              
                                                                                             
              To exploit this opportunity and guide policy-makers in the design              
              of future reforms, the nation requires a highly-trained force of               
              Ph.D. professionals with knowledge of education-related issues                 
              and expertise in program evaluation.  This grant adds a total of               
              5 Graduate Traineeships to the Princeton graduate economics                    
              program, concentrating in the economics of education, training,                
              and human resource development.  The trainees will enter the                   
              existing Ph.D. program and receive rigorous training in                        
              microeconomic theory, econometrics, and labor economics.  In                   
              addition, through a series of new and existing programs, the                   
              trainees will receive intensive training and hands-on experience               
              in primary data collection, econometric modelling, and program                 
              evaluation.  The trainees will be uniquely qualified to evaluate               
              the education programs of the past decade and address the                      
              education issues of the next century.
