Title       : NSF Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9357951

Award Number: 9357951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Swain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9357951  SWAIN  This award provides support to Dr. Carol Swain under the
              National  Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program.  The 
              objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty  in science
              and engineering, to enhance the academic career of  recent PhD recipients by
              providing flexible support for research  and educational activities, and to
              foster contact and cooperation  between academia, industry, and institutions
              that support research  and education.  Dr. Swain has already made significant
              research  contributions to the field of political science, and she has the 
              potential to become a leader in academic research and education.    This award
              will allow the investigator to build on her existing  research and conduct an
              extensive study of legislative races where  black candidates have run against
              white opponents in majority-  white districts.  She will examine personal
              traits, resources,  campaign styles and strategies, and compare and contrast
              the  results with existing knowledge.  Data sources and methods include 
              historical analysis, interviews, field research, statistical  analysis, and
              experiments using computer assisted interviewing of  a representative sample.  
               Although it continues to be the case that the majority of blacks  win public
              offices in heavily black districts, the past decade has  seen a conspicuous
              trend in the elections of black public officials  in predominately white
              constituencies.  The electoral psychology  that sometimes leads voters to
              ignore racial differences and other  times to vote along racial lines remains
              unclear.  This research  promises to significantly advance knowledge in this
              area.  The  results should have implications for both theory and practice.  ***
