Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Gas-Phase Host-Guest Chemistry and Detection of
               Antibiotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9357422

Award Number: 9357422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer S. Brodbelt jbrodbelt@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,9297,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two areas of research will be pursued: (1) Host-guest                          
              chemistry in the gas-phase and (2) Laser                                       
              desorption/selective ion-molecule reactions of antibiotics.                    
              In the first topic, a variety of aspects of solvent-free                       
              host-guest chemistry of model systems will be investigated                     
              by application of mass spectrometric techniques. The model                     
              systems include an array of size-selective hosts (i.e.,                        
              crown ethers and related macrocycles and acyclic analogs)                      
              and guests (i.e., various metal ions, halide ions, or                          
              ammonium ions). The macrocyclic host-guest complexes will be                   
              formed via bimolecular reactions in the gas-phase, then                        
              their structures and binding energies will be evaluated by                     
              collision-induced dissociation techniques. In the second                       
              topic, laser desorption/selective ion-molecule reaction                        
              methodology in a quadrapole ion trap will be developed for                     
              antibiotics, especially those whose activities are                             
              controlled by metal ion binding. Through the use of                            
              selective bimolecular reactions that chemically modify the                     
              biological molecules of interest, structural details will be                   
              obtained based on how the modified molecules dissociate and                    
              if the molecules undergo structurally-specific reactions.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              research of Professor Jennifer S. Brodbelt at the University                   
              of Texas, Austin. Complexation between a host molecule and a                   
              guest molecule or ion, which is important to understanding                     
              many biological processes, will be studied in the gas-phase.                   
              This will allow for an evaluation of the binding forces                        
              between the host and guest without solvent contributions. By                   
              this means, the primary forces in this molecular recognition                   
              will be deduced. In another project, techniques will be                        
              developed to characterized antibiotic molecules, especially                    
              those whose activities are determined by binding of metal                      
              ions. The characterization will be done in the gas-phase                       
              with the use of a mass spectrometer and special techniques.
