Title       : NYI: Designing Multimedia Services in Future Integrated Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9357685

Award Number: 9357685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Rangan venkat@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9297,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9357685  Rangan  Technological advances in hardware are revolutionizing
              computers  and networks so as to support digital multimedia.  By effectively 
              combining the programmability of computers with the pervasiveness  of
              mass-market information networks, these advances promise to  herald a new epoch
              in media communication.  In this research, we  focus on the following areas
              arising out of the synergies between  computing and media communication:  (1)
              Multimedia on-demand  information servers that can support a wide variety of
              services,  ranging from video on-demand for home entertainment to distance 
              learning and digital libraries for education; (2) Media  synchronization
              techniques, communication architectures and  admission control strategies for
              supporting high-performance  multimedia applications efficiently over future
              integrated  networks; and (3) Emerging paradigms and software architectures 
              for structured multimedia tele-collaborations.  For designing  interactive
              multimedia on-demand information services, we are  developing a constrained
              block allocation model that guarantees  continuous media retrieval, and
              algorithms to service an optimal  number of user simultaneously without
              violating the real-time  retrieval, rates of any of the users.  Multimedia
              services  generally involve playback of multiple media strands  (continuously
              recorded video frames of audio samples) over high-  speed networks onto user
              display sites (e.g., HDTVs).  We propose  to develop adaptive, rate-based
              techniques for synchronous  playback of multimedia strands at display sites
              over networks.   In high-performance multimedia applications (e.g., Tele- 
              orchestra), media data form all the user must be continuously  mixed together
              and displayed synchronously.  We are proposing  optimal hierarchical mixing
              architectures for supporting scalable  tele-collaborations and conferences with
              minimum real time end-  to-end delays and are developing a Packet train
              protocol in which  routing nodes themselves of a network can b e used as
              mixers,  thereby integrating mixing with routing in networks such as the 
              Internet.  We expect to experimentally demonstrate these ideas at  the
              Multimedia Laboratory at UCSD.  Our experience will prove  valuable in
              designing multimedia services for future integrated  networks in this rapidly
              approaching age of tele-personal  interaction.
