Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9357246

Award Number: 9357246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Hardin jdhardin@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,9297,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9357246  Hardin  Understanding how single cells and sheets of cells move,
              and what  controls their movements, is fundamental for understanding early 
              embryonic development.  A particularly striking series of  morphogenetic
              movements occurs during gastrulation, when massive  tissue movements and cell
              migrations transform the early embryo  from a hollow ball or disc to a
              three-layered embryo possessing all  of the basic structures of the emerging
              organism.  Because the  movements of gastrulation are so complex and dramatic,
              we have  turned to a seemingly simple system, the sea urchin embryo, in  order
              to discover general rules that all embryos use during  gastrulation.  In
              particular, we want to answer the following  questions: (1) What motile
              behavior(s) underlie epithelial cell  rearrangement during gastrulation, and
              how are such behaviors  coordinated to produce invaginations? (2) How do such 
              rearrangements rely on attachments of epithelial cells to the  apical
              extracellular matrix, or apical lamina, and to the basal  lamina?  In order to
              answer these questions, our laboratory is  seeking to use novel approaches to
              unite classical techniques,  computer-enhanced imaging, and molecular biology. 
              In particular,  we will use computer-assisted videomicroscopy and low-level 
              fluorescence imaging to study the motility of cells as they  rearrange during
              gastrulation.  Using the imaging techniques as an  analysis tool, we will use
              blocking antibodies and competitive  peptides, either expressed from cDNA
              clones or synthesized  directly, to examine the effects of perturbing the
              attachment of  cells to the extracellular matrix on motility in rearranging 
              epithelia.  In addition, we will use the technique of chromophore-  assisted
              laser inactivation of protein function (CALI) to perturb  these attachments at
              a highly local level to examine very specific  regions of interest during
              gastrulation.    As an embryo develops, the fairly featureless fertilized egg
              must  be transformed into an animal with a  recognizable body plan and  many
              highly organized structures.  This NSF Young Investigator  Award supports
              studies on the forces that shape embryos.  In  particular, we are interested in
              gastrulation, when cells move in  dramatic ways to reshape the embryo,
              producing the basic body plan  of the animal.  We are studying a simple system,
              the sea urchin  embryo, with the hope that by understanding this simple
              organism,  we will eventually understand much more complex one.   ***
