Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9357328

Award Number: 9357328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cory T. Abate   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9357328  Abate  This NSF Young Investigator (NYI) Award investigates the
              molecular  mechanisms that control gene expression in the developing murine 
              embryo using the hox gene family as a model system.  The hox genes  are
              expressed in overlapping spatial and temporal patterns  throughout murine
              embryogenesis and play a fundamental role in  controlling developmental
              processes.  These encode putative  transcriptional regulators; however, their
              function as such has not  been well characterized.  In particular, target genes
              that are  regulated by Hox proteins during embryogenesis have not been 
              identified.  Moreover, it is not well understood how these related 
              polypeptides, which share similar binding specificities in vitro,  interact
              selectively with DNA regulatory elements in the control  regions of target
              genes.  The focus of my research is to identify  such target genes and, in the
              course of this analysis, to  investigate the molecular processes that promote
              target gene  selection.  The specific plan is to isolate genomic DNA fragments 
              that contain binding sites for the Hox proteins and are potential  regulatory
              sites in vivo.  These studies will provide fundamental  information concerning
              the function of these transcriptional  regulatory proteins, as well as general
              insight into the mechanisms  that control gene expression during embryogenesis.
                   The goal of this research is to understand the processes that are 
              required to direct the development of the mammalian nervous system.   The
              assemblage of a system as complex as the nervous system  requires many signals
              that are active in prcisely the right cell  populations and at precisely the
              right times during development.   A family of proteins, termed the Hox family,
              directs the  appropriate expression of these signals (or genes) during 
              development.  These proteins are essential for normal development  and any loss
              of function of these results in gross developmental  abnormalities.  Hox
              proteins function by interacting with DNA  regul atory elements within the
              genes and thereby activating (or  repressing) the expression of these genes. 
              These studies will  provide a basis for understanding how appropriate gene
              expression  contributes to the development of the mammalian nervous system. 
              ***
