Title       : NSF Young Investigator: New Directions in Computational Learning Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9357707

Award Number: 9357707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Goldman sg@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9227,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Building machines that learn from experience is an important  research goal of
              artificial intelligence.  Recently,  considerable research  attention has been
              devoted to the theoretical study of machine learning.    This project focuses
              on several new directions designed to enhance the  current  learning models to
              more accurately model real-life  learning situations.  Most  work in the area
              of concept  learning assumes there is a well-defined border  that divides  all
              objects into those that are instances of the concept and  those that are not. 
              In reality, though, categorization of  objects is often not  so clear cut:  an
              algorithm designed to  read handwritten cheques will likely  encounter many 
              handwritten characters that look somewhat like a `4,` and  somewhat like a `9.`
               In these situations, one possible goal  for the learner is  to determine which
              objects are  unclassifiable (i.e., the classification is not  clear cut)  as
              well as determining the classifications of objects which  are  classifiable. 
              Another possibility is to require only  that the learner  determine a
              categorization so that no  object is incorrectly categorized.  Thus,  for this
              second  goal, the learner can arbitrarily categorize those objects  that can go
              either way. This project defines and studies learning models for  both
              possibilities.  Also this  project continues the PI's work  initiated on
              developing and studying formal models of teaching to  understand how a teacher
              with knowledge of the target concept and the learner  can reduce the training
              time needed by the learner.  As well as being of  theoretical interest,  there
              are potential applications of the research to  improving automated
              manufacturing environments.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
