Title       : Regulation of Calcium Entry in Cerebral Arteries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9019563

Award Number: 9019563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Nelson nelson@med.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Small arteries control blood flow to various organs.  These                    
              arteries are normally contracted from which they dilate or                     
              constrict depending on the need for blood.  The arteries in the                
              brain have a special requirement for blood flow; they must maintain            
              blood flow even when the blood pressure changes.  Calcium (Ca2+)               
              ions play a critical role in the narrowing and opening of arteries.            
              Ca2+ ions inside the muscle cells in the wall of the arteries cause            
              the muscle cells to contract and consequently cause blood vessels              
              to narrow.  We study the mechanism by which Ca2+ enters these                  
              muscle cells.  Ca2+ enters the smooth muscle through specialized               
              proteins that form pores through membrane that separate the outside            
              of the cell from the inside.  These pores are called "calcium                  
              channels" and are the targets of a major class of cardiovascular               
              drugs called "calcium channel blockers" that are used to treat                 
              hypertension, angina, and stroke.  The proposed project will                   
              examine the properties of "calcium channels" in arteries that                  
              regulate blood flow in the brain.  This should be the first study              
              of its kind and should provide vital information to the                        
              understanding of how the diameter of some of the most important                
              arteries is regulated.  This study has been made possible by new               
              techniques to isolate small arteries and single smooth muscle of               
              genetic strain of rats called WKY.  The rats are anesthetized and              
              rapidly killed.  The arteries are then rapidly removed.  All                   
              experiments are done on the isolated arteries or single smooth                 
              muscle cells isolated from these arteries.  These studies should               
              be the first of their kind and should provide a foundation                     
              essential for understanding the regulation of Ca entry in tonic,               
              autoregulating arteries. //
