Title       : Genetics of Maize Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9019249

Award Number: 9019249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Newton NewtonK@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The analysis of mitochondrial mutations has been informative in                
              several organisms, including yeast, fungi and humans.  The genetic             
              analysis of plant mitochondrial genomes has been limited due to the            
              fact that only a few mutations with known progenitors have been                
              described.  We have focused on a set of lethal maize mutations                 
              (Nonchromosomal stripe; NCS) that survive in heteroplasmic plants.             
              Different NCS mutants are associated with distinct phenotypes and              
              the mutations have been shown to be deletions affecting the                    
              expression of a least three different mitochondrial genes (cox2,               
              nad4 and the co-transcribed S3 and L16 ribosomal protein genes.)               
              The major goal of this proposal is to elucidate the mechanisms by              
              which the NCS lesions cause altered gene expression.  We will                  
              analyze the mutant and normal transcripts in NCS2 and NCS3 plants              
              and generate antibodies to determine whether the transcripts                   
              affected by NCS mutations are translated within nonmutant plant                
              mitochondria.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The long-term objective of this project is to understand the                   
              effects of individual plant mitochondrial genes on organelle                   
              biogenesis and overall cellular function.  The proposed studies                
              should clarify aspects of transcriptional and post-transcriptional             
              regulation in plant mitochondria.  A second goal of this proposal              
              is to attempt to develop a system for demonstrating maize                      
              mitochondrial transformation using the NCS6 mutant, which carries              
              a partial deletion of the well-characterized cox2 gene.  The                   
              availability of a transformation system should facilitate studies              
              of putative regulatory sequences in plant mitochondria.***                     
                   //
