Title       : Sensitivity, Distribution, Characterization and Production of Ultramicrobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1993   
File        : a9019625

Award Number: 9019625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Heterotrophic bacteria recycle carbon, regulate dissolve                       
              organics, and comprise much of the biomass of the oceans. Typical              
              organisms are culture resistant, and a factor of 20 smaller with               
              one-tenth the DNA  of commonly studied bacteria. To study these                
              oligotrophic ultramicrobacteria, Dr. Button has developed                      
              several new techniques. One is high resolution flow cytometry                  
              which gives a rapid accurate analysis of populations in seawater               
              and cultures derived from them, including measurements of                      
              population, cell size and DNA content per cell. Another is                     
              janusian kinetics which bases nutrient transport rates on                      
              molecular composition and allows improved descriptions of the                  
              ability of whole cells to collect nutrients. Third is a dilution-              
              culture procedure which greatly expands the number of                          
              oligotrophic bacterial species that can be cultured.                           
              Representatives of what appear to be typical marine bacteria are               
              now on hand. Preliminary data indicate peculiar sensitivity                    
              exhibited as a growth-dependency of individual organisms on the                
              presence of others. Dr. Button will to explore these peculiar                  
              population dependencies, bacteria and the distributions of                     
              organisms that have them, their nutritional requirements, kinetic              
              characteristics, and ability to attain high population densities,              
              in an effort to understand the dynamics and ecology of marine                  
              microorganisms in the context of kinetic control of dissolved                  
              organics.
