Title       : Characterization of the Cyanide-resistant Oxidase in Plant Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9019735

Award Number: 9019735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Siedow jsiedow@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The research outlined in this proposal is designed to continue            
              the purification and characterization of the cyanide-resistant,                
              "alternative" oxidase associated with the electron transfer chain              
              of mitochondria in most plants, many fungi and some protozoa.  The             
              role of this energetically wasteful oxidase in plant energy                    
              metabolism is not known and only recently has progress been made               
              identifying protein species associated with the oxidase.  The PI               
              has successfully carried out a partial purification of the                     
              alternative oxidase from the highly cyanide-resistant spadices of              
              flowering skunk cabbage.  This preparation will be further purified            
              and the cofactors associated with the oxygen reduction reaction                
              catalyzed by the enzyme will be identified.  More specifically, the            
              nature and amount of an auto-oxidizable quinone found to be                    
              associated with the enzyme will be determined as will the nature               
              of any metals bound to the purified enzyme.  Studies will also be              
              carried out to determine the relative contributions of steric                  
              factors, redox potentials and quinone lipophilicity to the ability             
              of a given quinone species to serve as an electron donor to the                
              alternative oxidase.  These studies will lead to a better under                
              understanding of this unusual oxidase and the nature of its                    
              interaction with the mitochondrial electron transfer chain.                    
                                                                                             
                   Unlike animals, such as humans, plants have two respiratory               
              pathways in their mitochondria.  One is similar to that found in               
              animals and is sensitive to (poisoned by) cyanide.  The second                 
              pathway, which shares the initial steps of the first pathway, does             
              not occur in animals and is cyanide resistant.  This second,                   
              alternative pathway is less efficient than the first in energy                 
              production.  Interest in the two pathways is heightened by the fact            
              that plants can regulate the flow of electrons between the two                 
              pathways.  Hence there are environmental and biological conditions             
              that favor the use of one pathway or the other.  The fact that the             
              alternative pathway is less efficient energetically raises the                 
              question of why the second pathway exists and is preferred under               
              certain conditions.  The experiments outlined in this proposal to              
              study the alternative oxidase will help to characterize the                    
              alternative oxidase and how it functions.
