Title       : An Experimental Study into the Effect of Multiprocessor Interconnection Networks
               on System Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9019393

Award Number: 9019393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174053             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Robert Jump  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Sinclair   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this project is to investigate the relationship          
              between the structure of parallel algorithms and the structure of              
              parallel computing systems.  It seems clear that it will be necessary          
              to match the structure of an algorithm to the structure of the                 
              parallel computer on which it executes in order to realize the                 
              computing power of the parallel system.  Whether this matching is done         
              by the applications programmer or a compiler, a basic understanding of         
              the structural relationship between parallel algorithms and parallel           
              computer organization will be needed.  This investigation proposed             
              here will provide needed insight into this process.                            
                                                                                             
              During the phase of the project covered in this proposal, the                  
              investigation will concentrate on the basic question of how the                
              structure and design of a parallel computing system's interconnection          
              network affects the overall performance of the system.  The                    
              interconnection network provides communication paths between the               
              modules of a parallel system and is a major source of system overhead.         
              For Parallel systems composed of a large number of processors, this            
              overhead can significantly reduce the system's performance relative to         
              its theoretical maximum.  This project will evaluate the effect of             
              this overhead using the Rice Parallel Processing Testbed, a                    
              sophisticated simulation system developed for predicting the                   
              performance of real parallel programs executing on parallel                    
              processors.
