Title       : Multicultural Awareness in Multinational Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1992    
File        : a9019636

Award Number: 9019636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernando M. Ferdman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 9135      MINORITY RESEARCH INITIATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9136,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The proposed project is designed to investigate the range                      
              of approaches used by multinational organizations to                           
              handle cultural diversity and their relationship to                            
              employee productivity, job satisfaction, and intergroup                        
              attitudes. Foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies, U.S.                        
              subsidiaries of Japanese companies, and similarly sized                        
              domestic units of U.S. corporations will be assessed in terms                  
              of their approaches to cultural diversity at the organizational                
              level.  Using methods derived from organizational diagnosis and                
              organizational culture perspectives, as well as newly developed                
              questionnaires for key organization members, data will be                      
              gathered about programs, procedures and policies related to                    
              organizational awareness of multicultural issues and                           
              organizational handling of cultural differences.  To                           
              investigate the implications of different organizational                       
              policies and practices regarding cultural diversity on                         
              individual employees, a subset of organizations representing                   
              the range of approaches will be studied in greater depth.  At                  
              these sites, additional surveys of approaches will be studied                  
              in greater depth.  At these sites, additional surveys of                       
              employees at different levels will assess variables such as job                
              satisfaction, work related behavior, and individual                            
              perspectives on cultural diversity.  Comparisons of                            
              these variables among organizations will permit making                         
              inferences about the relationships between organizational and                  
              individual level variables.
