Title       : The D2 Protein in Photosystem II: Its Involvement in PS II Structure and
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1993    
File        : a9019248

Award Number: 9019248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem F. Vermaas WIM@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project has several objectives, all related to the function               
              of D2, one of the photosystem II reaction center proteins in                   
              thylakoid membranes.  Using site-directed mutagenesis and gene                 
              replacement in the D2-encoding pbsD1 gene from the cyanobacterium              
              Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, the first objective is to determine the            
              role of residues near the C-terminus of D2 in the water-splitting              
              process and in proper folding of D2.  In addition, three-                      
              dimensional proximities of D2 residues involved in water splitting             
              will be probed by analysis of spontaneous photoautotrophic mutants             
              generated from obligate photoheterotrophic site-directed D2 mutants            
              impaired in water splitting.  Moreover, site-directed mutagenesis              
              studies on electron transfer events at the acceptor side of                    
              photosystem II will emphasize experiments related to binding of                
              additional chlorophyll(s) in the photosystem II reaction center                
              complex as well as the role of the non-heme iron in photosystem II.            
              Another objective, to be achieved in collaboration with Dr.                    
              Shestakov and his group in Moscow (USSR), is to identify other                 
              regions of the D2 protein that are important towards photosystem               
              II function by random mutagenesis of psbD1.  A successful                      
              completion of this project is anticipated to markedly increase the             
              base of knowledge regarding the role of individual amino acid                  
              residues in function, folding and stable assembly of membrane                  
              proteins such as D2.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Energy from the sun is captured for biological use by the process              
              of photosynthesis.  The process of light harvesting is carried out             
              by two pigment-protein complexes, photosystems I and II.  Light                
              energy absorbed by photosystem I is used by the cell for carbon                
              fixation and chemical energy production.  Light energy absorbed by             
              photosystem II is essential for regenerating photosystem I which               
              loses electrons to cellular constituents.  Photosystem II, in turn,            
              is regenerated by the splitting of water, a process that liberates             
              dioxygen and accounts for the presence of oxygen in the earth's                
              atmosphere.  This proposal describes molecular studies of a                    
              protein, D2, that is an essential part of photosystem II.  These               
              studies will help to elucidate how the process of water splitting              
              occurs at the molecular level.//
