Title       : Comparative Analysis of Structure in RNAs of Related RNA Coliphages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9019123

Award Number: 9019123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann B. Jacobson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The studies proposed here come from early work by the principal                
              investigator showing that large reproducible structural                        
              features could be seen by electron microscopy in RNA obtained                  
              from the RNA coliphages M12 and MS2.  These studies suggested                  
              that the structures that were seen by electron microscopy in                   
              the RNA might represent base pared regions that were unusually                 
              stable.  The location of these structures within the viral                     
              genetic map further suggested that they might play a role in                   
              regulating viral gene expression in infected cells.  Recently                  
              the PI has been examining the structure of related coliphage                   
              RNAs by electron microscopy in order to identify conserved                     
              structural features; conserved features are expected to have                   
              functional significance in infected cells.  The conformation                   
              of genomic RNAs from the bacteriophages MS2, GA, Qbeta and SP                  
              were examined.  These bacteriophages represent 4 major viral                   
              groups.  A large central loop is conserved in all four RNAs and                
              a model was developed at the nucleotide level for 780                          
              nucleotides of this loop in Qbeta.  The structure of the loop                  
              has been confirmed using biochemical methods.  The loop is one                 
              of the most stable features (resistant to denaturation) seen                   
              by electron microscopy in all of the phage RNAs.  The structure                
              and function of this loop will be studied in more detail by                    
              genetic analysis.  In addition, the PI proposes to develop full                
              models at the nucleotide level for the RNAs of the related                     
              coliphages SP, Qbeta and MX1 using electron microscopy,                        
              comparative sequence analysis, biochemical probing, and                        
              computer modeling.  The genetic studies are being done in                      
              collaboration with Don Mills, Department of Microbiology and                   
              Immunology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center.  The Mills lab has                  
              developed a genetic system for isolating and growing  mutants                  
              of Qbeta carrying large deletions by supplying the wild type                   
              viral protein in trans.  The have shown that deletions in some                 
              regions of the viral replicase gene cannot be complemented with                
              viral replicase that is supplied in trans and have called these                
              regions cis-acting RNA elements.  The PI believes that these                   
              mutants define regions in the genome where the structure of the                
              RNA is important.  The conformation of the mutant RNAs will be                 
              examined both by electron microscopy and with biochemical                      
              methods.  In addition, this type of analysis will be extended                  
              to the conserved central loop region that is described above.                  
              It is hoped that the information obtained by our analysis will                 
              prove useful not only in understanding the                                     
              functional significance of structure in coliphage RNAs, but                    
              will also help in understanding the role of RNA structure in                   
              other genomic viral RNAs and in cellular messenger RNAs.
