Title       : Basin and Range Geoscientific Experiment (BARGE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1995      
File        : a9019357

Award Number: 9019357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1047012            (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mutter   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Caress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur L. Lerner-Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  This project involves an integrated, multi-disciplinary                   
              investigation to quantify how the deep continental crust and                   
              uppermost mantle respond to extension, and to thus establish how               
              large horizontal strains of the lithosphere relate to vertical                 
              motions controlled by isostasy.  The principal investigators plan              
              to use the "natural experiment" of a large strain gradient in the              
              uppermost part of the lithosphere associated with the abrupt                   
              boundary between highly extended terrain and a tectonically stable             
              block.  They have chosen the western margin of the Colorado Plateau            
              to study.  It is ideally suited for accomplishing their research               
              objectives for several reasons:  (1) the transition is particularly            
              abrupt here; (2) the geologic setting indicates a simple pre-                  
              extensional crustal structure; (3) it has a well-understood large-             
              scale extensional kinematic history; (4) the large inland waterway             
              of Lake Mead provides a unique environment in which to perform deep            
              geophysical studies that transect the boundary in precisely the                
              location where geological studies place bounds on crustal uplift               
              during extension.  They propose to integrate geological and                    
              geochronologic studies, "marine" multi-channel seismic reflection              
              profiling in the lake itself, integrated with land-based recordings            
              on an array on three-component seismometers to provide control on              
              seismic velocity structure and to develop tomographic images of the            
              region which, together with gravity modeling will allow them to                
              unravel the kinematics and dynamics of the lithosphere's response              
              to severe extensional strain.
