Title       : Plant Density Effects on Competitive Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1991      
File        : a9019657

Award Number: 9019657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Miller miller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice A. Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   Competition among plants for resources such as water and                  
              light generally results in a size distribution in which there are              
              some large plants and many small, suppressed plants.  It is well               
              known that growing plants at higher densities increases the                    
              magnitude of competition.  From this, one would expect that                    
              traits that confer competitive ability would be increasingly                   
              favored as density increases.  The principal investigators                     
              suggest that this may not be true at very high densities.  Under               
              extreme competition, growth of all plants is very suppressed,                  
              resulting in smaller differences between large and small plants.               
              Consequently, traits that confer competitive ability may not be                
              increasingly favored beyond some intermediate to high density.                 
              The investigators propose to determine the relationship between                
              plant density and the favorability of traits that increase                     
              competitive ability by growing plants across a wide range of                   
              densities and comparing the performance of individuals with                    
              different traits.  They will also measure the same relationship                
              in a field population to determine if natural densities reach the              
              threshold necessary for decoupling density and the favorability                
              of traits that confer competitive ability.                                     
                   Competition is recognized as a widespread, important                      
              ecological force.  Almost all agricultural plants, as well as                  
              those grown in natural environments, are strongly suppressed by                
              competition.  This work will permit an assessment of the role of               
              density as a force shaping the evolution of traits that affect                 
              competitive ability in a natural environment.  Results will also               
              be of use to agriculturalists, particularly in determining the                 
              correct density at which to breed plants for enhanced competitive              
              ability.
