Title       : Cytochrome c Oxidase: Electron Microscopy of 2-Dimensional Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9019785

Award Number: 9019785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence G. Frey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The specific aims of this project center on the structure study                
              of cytochrome c oxidase by digital image processing of electron                
              micrographs of 2-dimensional crystals.  Cytochrome oxidase is                  
              the terminal component of mitochondrial electron transport                     
              which is responsible for generating energy in the form of ATP                  
              for use by all cells undergoing aerobic respiration.                           
              Cytochrome oxidase can be purified in detergent solubilized                    
              form as both a monomer and a dimer which are equally active in                 
              electron transfer.  Likewise, 2-dimensional crystals of                        
              monomers and of dimers have been isolated and preliminary                      
              structural studies completed.  Dr. Frey has recently obtained                  
              images of both crystal forms at a resolution of approximately                  
              10A by cryo-electron microscopy, and the principal goal of this                
              project is to determine the 3-dimensional structures of both                   
              monomers and dimers at this resolution.  Specific sites on the                 
              enzyme will be identified by labeling with molecules visible                   
              by electron microscopy.  Cytochrome c, binds with high affinity                
              to monomer crystals, and the site of binding has been                          
              identified in 2-dimensional projection.  A maleimide derivative                
              of a water soluble undecagold cluster compound selectively                     
              labels Cys-115 of subunit III, and preliminary results show the                
              location of this compound in 2-dimensional projections of dimer                
              crystals.  The binding sites of both molecules will be                         
              determined in 3-dimensions.  The results will be interpreted                   
              to provide not only the position of both binding sites but also                
              the orientation of cytochrome c bound to cytochrome oxidase.                   
              finally, the form of cytochrome oxidase most active in proton                  
              pumping will be determined by electron microscopy of vesicles                  
              reconstituted from purified cytochrome oxidase and                             
              phospholipids.  The proportion of monomers and dimers observed                 
              in these vesicles will be compared with their efficiency of                    
              proton pumping to determine whether there is a correlation                     
              between the two properties.
