Title       : Phylogeny of Anseriformes and Galliformes Using mtDNAs: The Role of Rate
               Heterogeneity and Alignment Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9019669

Award Number: 9019669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Mindell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The primary challenge facing systematists working with DNA                
              sequence characters is to distinguish plylogenetically                         
              informative change from the larger set of character change                     
              determined.  Sequence informativeness varies due to variable                   
              rates of evolutionary change within and among nucleotide                       
              sequences.  Meeting the challenge stated above, thus, requires                 
              systematists to learn about the variable nature and rate of                    
              change for DNA sequence characters.                                            
                   The early history of extant avian lineages remains poorly                 
              known, with conflicting hypotheses denoting a shortage of                      
              informative characters.  Resolution of relationships among avian               
              orders is central to a larger debate concerning the reliability                
              and merits of alternative phylogenetic methods.                                
                   In seeking to address issues of molecular systematics                     
              methods and avian phylogeny together, the objectives of the                    
              proposed research are:  1) to determine phylogenetic                           
              relationships for the avian orders Anseriformes and Galliformes,               
              and their placement relative to Paleognathae (ratites and                      
              tinamous) and Neognathae (all other extant birds); 2) to                       
              determine relative rates of change for DNA sequence characters,                
              and assess their application to phylogenetic analyses; and 3) to               
              assess effects of different alignment strategies in phylogenetic               
              analyses.                                                                      
                   Mitochondrial DNA will be extracted from tissues, and 12S                 
              ribosomal RNA and cytochrome oxidase I genes will be amplified                 
              via the polymerase chain reaction and sequenced using standard                 
              dideoxy chain termination techniques.                                          
                   The proposed research is expected to improve significantly                
              our knowledge of phylogenetic relationships among early diverging              
              avian lineages, and to provide fundamental information regarding               
              phylogenetic methods broadly applicable within the field of                    
              systematics.
