Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Glass Surface Cleaning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1990 
File        : a9019581

Award Number: 9019581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grant grant@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 9135      MINORITY RESEARCH INITIATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9136,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The goal of the proposed research is to develop a                              
              continuous non-invasive technique to evaluate the kinetics                     
              of film removal in the cleaning process.  A study of the                       
              parameters influencing the removal of a film from a smooth                     
              surface (e.g., film thickness, viscosity and density) in                       
              conjunction with the solvent properties will provide                           
              insights into the mechanisms of contaminant removal.  The                      
              results of this research will be used to test the validity                     
              of earlier kinetic cleaning studies.  The extension of the                     
              proposed experimental methods to other cleaning geometries                     
              will aid in a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms                      
              of contaminant film removal from smooth surfaces.  Total                       
              internal reflection fluorescent spectroscopy will be                           
              implemented to continuously monitor the removal of a                           
              contaminant film from the inner surface of a cleaning                          
              cell.  Indirect measurement of rate of decontamination                         
              through continuously monitor the removal of a contaminant                      
              film from the inner surface of a cleaning cell.  Indirect                      
              measurement of rate of decontamination through                                 
              continuously monitor the removal of a contaminant film                         
              from the inner surface of a cleaning cell.  Indirect                           
              measurement of rate of decontamination through                                 
              continuously monitor the removal of a contaminant film                         
              from the inner surface of a cleaning cell.  Indirect                           
              measurement of rate of decontamination through continuous                      
              measurement of contaminant species in the effluent from                        
              the cell during cleaning process and shear stress                              
              measurements will provide additional information about the                     
              kinetics of the cleaning process.
