Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9019320

Award Number: 9019320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7225               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most explanations of the attitudes and behavior of impoverished                
              segments of the public in third world nations emphasize the                    
              influence of economic considerations on levels of political                    
              support.  There is increasing evidence, however, that the core                 
              values and beliefs of even the poorest segments of society are                 
              critical determinants of political attitudes and behavior.  This               
              award supports doctoral dissertation research that seeks to explore            
              the relative effects of economic conditions and basic values on the            
              political attitudes and behavior of the poor in developing nations.            
                                                                                             
              Specifically, this project surveys the political attitudes of six              
              carefully selected economic groups in Nicaragua.  These groups                 
              differ in their economic status and vulnerability as well as in                
              their basic values and beliefs.  Thus by comparing their levels of             
              political support the relative effects of economic conditions and              
              personal values can be measured.  Nicaragua is chosen as the site              
              for the study because its recent transition from an authoritarian              
              to democratic regime allows respondents to be asked about their                
              attitudes toward these very different political systems.                       
                                                                                             
              When completed this dissertation research should expand our                    
              understanding of the values and behavior of those large segments               
              of the public in many third world nations that live in or on the               
              edge of poverty.  If the thesis is correct, the research should                
              point the way to new approaches to dealing with problems of                    
              political instability in these nations.
