Title       : USSR Cooperative Research on Heat and Mass Transfer During Directional
               Solidification in a Centrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9019536

Award Number: 9019536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19882              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Wilcox wilcox@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick M. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a joint research project between Clarkson University                   
              and the Laboratory of Materials Science in Space at the Space                  
              Research Institute (IKI) of the USSR Academy of Sciences to                    
              elucidate the transport phenomena that occur during                            
              directional solidification in a large centrifuge.  Clarkson                    
              University and the Space Research Institute (IKI) are uniquely                 
              configured to accomplish this goal.  Prior research on                         
              transport phenomena in large centrifuges has shown unexpected                  
              results that have not yet been fully explained.  For example,                  
              a critical rotation rate was found for the onset of                            
              temperature oscillations, with a higher critical rotation rate                 
              for cessation of temperature fluctuations.  Several                            
              directional solidification experiments exhibited a "magic g"                   
              at which impurity segregation and microstructure became what                   
              one would expect from a complete lack of convection in the                     
              melt during solidification.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Theoretical models will be developed at Clarkson University to                 
              predict convection and mass transfer in the melt, temperature                  
              distribution in the solid, solid-liquid interface shape, and                   
              freezing rate during solidification in the centrifuge.                         
              Predictions of these models will be compared with experiments                  
              carried out on the Soviet apparatus.  Clarkson and IKI                         
              scientists will work together to modify the Soviet apparatus                   
              to permit temperatures to be measured inside the material                      
              during solidification, and to determine the heat transfer                      
              coefficient between the material and the steel cartridge.  We                  
              will add either current interface demarcation or vibration                     
              interface demarcation to allow us to determine the interface                   
              shape and freezing rate versus time.  We will also cooperate                   
              in development and execution of flow visualization experiments                 
              in the centrifuge.
