Title       : Molecular Organization in Mutable Collagenous Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1993  
File        : a9019284

Award Number: 9019284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Trotter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Koob  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Mexico Sch of Med
	      Bandelier West, Room 223
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Collagen fibrils are the principal components that give tensile                
              strength and stiffness to animal tissues.  The fibrils are always              
              found together with other macromolecule - combinations of specific             
              carbohydrates and proteins: the association of collagen fibrils                
              with these other constituents creates tissues with diverse                     
              structural and functional properties. Collagenous tissues are thus             
              properly thought of as biological fiber-reinforced composites.  In             
              most instances, the tensile properties of collagenous tissue are               
              constant over short periods of time, because the collagenous and               
              noncollagenous components are stable, as are their associations                
              with one another.  In these stable tissues the interfibrillar                  
              molecules can only be guessed at.  No reliable measurements have               
              been made.  Echnioderms, in contrast, developed at an early stage              
              of their properties.  under the control of the nervous system,                 
              these tissues can be rapidly switched from a strong and stiff state            
              to a state in which they easily flow.  In the extreme, this ability            
              allows echnioderms to escape predation, as in the autotomy of a                
              portion of the arm of a brittle star, or of the viscera of a sea               
              cucumber.  Sea urchin spines are held against the body wall by a               
              conical ligament.  When the spine moves, this ligament easily                  
              changes length.  At other times (for instance when the animal is               
              resisting being forcibly removed from an underwater crevice), the              
              ligaments become stiff and the spines are nearly immovable.  The               
              body walls of sea cucumbers can flow, permitting the animals to                
              move into and through narrow openings, but can also become stiff,              
              preventing a predator from dislodging the animal from a protected              
              niche.  The collagen fibrils in these and other echnioderm                     
              connective tissues are as stable as those of other animals.  But               
              they are able to slide past one another when the tissues are  int              
              heir compliant state, and are prevented from sliding when the                  
              tissues are stiff.  The surfaces of the fibrils and the material               
              between the fibrils must sometimes permit the fibrils to slide,                
              while at other times they lock them in position.  The experiments              
              described in this proposal are designed to tell us what molecules              
              are present on the surfaces and between the collagen fibrils in                
              selected echinoderm tissues, how they are organized, and how they              
              are altered to change the tissue properties between stiff and                  
              flowing states.  Besides contributing to an understanding of these             
              inherently interesting tissues, the results of the planned research            
              h may lead to a better understanding of the composite structure of             
              collagenous tissues in general, including those of vertebrates.//
