Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Holliday Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9019250

Award Number: 9019250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Chazin   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Millar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred L. Heffron  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A specific DNA structure, the Holliday junction, is an                         
              intermediate in all recombination and may repair processes in                  
              the cell.  Experimental evidence has been accumulating which                   
              indicates that the structure of the Holliday junction is                       
              sensitive to the DNA sequence at the branch points and that                    
              this has important biological consequences.  In this project                   
              Dr. Chazin proposes to examine the physical structure and                      
              biological properties of synthetic immobile Holliday junctions                 
              by using an integrated, multi-disciplinary approach involving                  
              molecular biology, time resolved fluorescence and NMR                          
              spectroscopy, and molecular modeling/computer graphics.  Time                  
              resolved fluorescence will be used to gain information on the                  
              global structure of the junctions, using fluorescence energy                   
              transfer experiments to determine the relative distances                       
              between the four arms of the junctions.  NMR spectroscopy will                 
              provide detailed information on the local structure.  A                        
              comparative analysis of the internal dynamics of these                         
              junctions will be made by fluorescence depolarization and NMR                  
              measurements.  These data taken together will be used to solve                 
              the three-dimensional structures in solution of a series of                    
              related Holliday junctions and thereby determine how the                       
              sequence determines the geometry of the junction.  These                       
              systematic studies will provide critical insights into                         
              formation of Holliday junctions, their propagation along the                   
              DNA duplexes, and the subsequent steps of junction recognition                 
              and resolution.
