Title       : The Role of DNA Methylation in PIli Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1991     
File        : a9019992

Award Number: 9019992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Low   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on the role(s) of DNA methylation in the                 
              regulation of pyelonephritis-associated pili (pap) gene                        
              expression. Pap pili expression is subject to a phase variation                
              regulatory mechanism which involves DNA methylation and specific               
              methylation blocking at two GATC sites within the pap regulatory               
              region.  This mechanism appears to be distinct from other phase                
              variation systems previously studied.  The overall objective of                
              this proposal is to determine the mechanism by which the                       
              methylation of two "GATC" DNA sequences within pap is blocked by               
              the papI and methylation blocking factor (mbf) gene products and               
              how these two genes products regulate pap pilin transcription.                 
              To accomplish this overall objective I propose to first modify                 
              DNA sequences both nearby and within the GATC deoxyadenosine                   
              methylase recognition sequences which are located adjacent to the              
              pilin promoter.  The effects of these mutations on pilin                       
              transcription will be determined using both pap-lac gene fusion                
              constructs and quantitative analysis of pap mRNA.  A second                    
              objective will be a combined genetic and biochemical approach to               
              overexpress and purify the PapI and MBF protein (s) which are                  
              required for pap transcription as well as GATC methylation                     
              blocking.  Both in vitro and in vivo protein-DNA interaction                   
              analyses will be carried out to determine how MBF and PapI                     
              interact with pap DNA sequences to                                             
              block methylation and facilitate pap pilin transcription.  The                 
              role(s) of Dam methylase in this process will be examined by                   
              determining the effect(s) of in vitro methylation on protein-DNA               
              interactions. The experiments proposed are important and                       
              significant because they explore a new area in bacterial gene                  
              regulation; the epigenetic modulation of gene expression by DNA                
              methylation.
