Title       : A New Strategy for Mild, Continuous Solution and Solid PhasePeptide Synthesis
               (U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Science; Science in Developing Countries)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9019461

Award Number: 9019461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Carpino cjhorton@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal supports the collaboration of                      
              Dr. Louis A. Carpino, University of Massachusetts, and two                     
              faculty members (Drs. El-Sayed Mansour and Ahmed Kassem)                       
              and one graduate student (Mr. El-Faham) from the University                    
              of Alexandria, Egypt.  Project funding will allow the team                     
              from the University of Alexandria to work for various                          
              periods of time in Dr. Carpino's laboratory and also allow                     
              Dr. Carpino a research visit to the University of                              
              Alexandria.  Dr. Mansour, the senior member of the Egyptian                    
              team, will supervise research activities at the University                     
              of Alexandria and also spend three months at the University                    
              of Massachusetts conducting laboratory studies.  Dr. Kassem                    
              will initiate work on the synthesis of FM ethers and Mr.                       
              El-Faham will work on N-FM peptide bond protection.  Dr.                       
              Carpino, as Principal Investigator, will provide overall                       
              project supervision.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This proposal brings together research scientists                      
              from two countries working in the area of peptide synthesis                    
              and coupling.  It is anticipated that this collaborative                       
              research will result in novel techniques for the synthesis                     
              of insect hormone peptide segments.  The Egyptian                              
              scientists will have the opportunity to become familiar                        
              with research techniques and equipment at the University of                    
              Massachusetts as well as contribute to the overall success                     
              of the project.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the                         
              objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program                      
              in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge                           
              through an international collaboration.
