Title       : Regional Migration of Hypersaline Brines in Sedimentary Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9019342

Award Number: 9019342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Nunn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Hanor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The most widely accepted driving mechanisms for regional                       
              migration of pore fluids in sedimentary basins are sediment                    
              compaction and topography.  Previous analyses indicate that both               
              mechanisms have potential difficulties explaining some of the                  
              above geologic observations unless the fluid flow is spatially or              
              temporally restricted.  Specifically, heat content of pore fluids              
              or flow rates or both are not sufficient for compaction driven                 
              flow to produce migration of warm pore fluids on a regional                    
              scale.  Topographically-driven flow may produce warm pore fluids               
              on a regional scale, but would result in depletion of saline                   
              components of fluids.  We propose to carry out a two year study                
              on the following aspects of regional migration of hypersaline                  
              brines: (1) develop suitable PTX equations of state for                        
              hypersaline brines under basinal conditions and examine the                    
              effects of salinity in controlling pore water flow in sedimentary              
              basins; (2) examine various mechanism for focusing or                          
              concentrating flow of warm, saline brines, including: episodic                 
              expulsion of pore fluids, fluid flow along aquifers or faults,                 
              deflection or focusing of fluid flow by basement or surface                    
              structures and three-dimensional flow; and (3) apply these                     
              results to the regional migration of pore fluids in the Colville               
              Basin, Alaska and the Northern Gulf Coast.  The regional                       
              migration of hypersaline brines over hundreds of kilometers                    
              through sedimentary basins has been suggested as a mechanism to                
              explain a number of important geologic observations.  These                    
              include: remagnetizations found in Paleozoic carbonates of North               
              America, clay mineral diagenesis, inclusions of high pressure,                 
              high temperature fluids, and distribution of oil, gas and                      
              Mississippi Valley-type lead-zinc deposits.
