Title       : Role of Subunit IV in Prokaryotic Cytochrome bc1 Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9019570

Award Number: 9019570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Niederman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase (cytochrome bc1                      
              complex) is among the most highly conserved constituents of                    
              energy transducing membranes.  Although complexes from                         
              phylogenetically diverse species are functionally                              
              interchangeable and their cytochrome c1 cytochrome b and                       
              iron-sulfur protein components are homologous, isolated                        
              oxidoreductases differ markedly with respect to additional                     
              polypeptide constituents.  Mitochondrial complexes contain as                  
              many as eight additional subunits which are required in the                    
              enhancement of electron transport and in the assembly                          
              process.  The cytochrome bc1 complex of Rhodobacter                            
              sphaeroides contains a tightly bound forth subunit which                       
              provides sa unique opportunity to elucidate the role of a                      
              single noncatalytic component.  Partial sequence data will be                  
              used to construct hybridization probes to facilitate the                       
              isolation of the subunit IV structural gene for sequence                       
              comparisons.  Topological analyses in which either the                         
              cytoplasmic or the periplasmic side of the membrane is                         
              digested with proteinase K will determine the location of                      
              subunit IV to assist in elucidating its functional role.                       
              Electron transfer activity and changes in the EPR signals of                   
              the iron-sulfur and Qc components will be assessed in the                      
              purified cytochrome bc1 complex following limited proteolytic                  
              digestion and after exposure to anti-subunit IV antibodies.                    
              Mutants in which the structural gene for subunit IV has been                   
              interrupted by interposon mutagenesis will be constructed and                  
              the composition and functional properties of the altered                       
              complex will be examined.  These integrated approaches should                  
              prove valuable in elucidating important structure-function                     
              and assembly relationships in the bc1 complex.
