Title       : The Use of Fractal and Chaos Theory to Verify, Simplify, and Extend Forest
               Ecosystem Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1991   
File        : a9019054

Award Number: 9019054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yosef Cohen yc@turtle.fw.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Pastor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Cohen and Pastor propose to study output from the model                   
              LINKAGES for the purpose of identifying a strange attractor. The               
              LINKAGES model simulates feedback responses of a forested                      
              ecosystem to atmospheric and soil changes.  It also simulates                  
              births, growth, and deaths of individual trees and the decay and               
              N dynamics of annual cohorts in litter of a 1/2 ha plot.  The                  
              model is one of the most widely used and verified models of its                
              kind.  Preliminary results indicate that the model produces a                  
              low-dimensional strange attractor and therefore reflects a                     
              chaotic dynamical system.  Cohen and Pastor found that some                    
              essential properties of the model as a dynamical system are lost               
              when outputs are averaged over several plots.  These preliminary               
              findings have profound implications for the use and further                    
              development of the LINKAGES model: 1) because of sensitivity to                
              initial conditions, long-term model predictions cannot be                      
              trusted, 2) the investigators contend that extending the model to              
              include spatial considerations is essential, and 3) the fact that              
              the model produces a low-dimensional strange attractor means that              
              there are few basic mechanisms that control the macroscopic                    
              behavior of the model.                                                         
                                                                                             
              By extending the model to include spatial mechanisms, Cohen and                
              Pastor will investigate the fractal dimension of plant species                 
              distributions over the landscape as they are produced by the                   
              model.  The investigators will then used data on spatial                       
              distributions of plant species in a relevant area, and compare                 
              the fractal dimension of the real distribution to that produced                
              by the model.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Drs. Cohen and Pastor are innovative and productive scientists                 
              who are experienced with the problems of the development and                   
              validation of large, complex ecosystem models. These models are                
              used for predicting the effects of climate change on the                       
              biosphere and may be essential tools for managing resources in                 
              the future.  This research is an essential test of the behavior                
              of these models.  The institutional support for this research is               
              outstanding.
