Title       : Immunochemical Investigation of Predation on Marine Microzooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1993  
File        : a9019639

Award Number: 9019639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Ohman mohman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Quantitative understanding of the link between microbial loop                  
              organisms and suspension-feeding macrozooplankton is one of the                
              central issues in zooplankton ecology today. This research                     
              project will utilize a newly developed immunochemical probe to                 
              ciliate protozoa to investigate this link in laboratory and field              
              studies. The probe overcomes the difficulties with conventional                
              methodologies. It permits predation on microzooplankton to be                  
              studied without artifacts of collection, concentration,                        
              incubation, or preservation.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The following hypotheses will be tested:                                       
                                                                                             
              1. H0: A cross-shore gradient exists in the ciliate link to                    
              suspension-feeding copepods, from an inshore upwelling domain to               
              an offshore, stably stratified domain.                                         
                                                                                             
              2. H0: Temporal variations occur in the ciliate link to                        
              suspension-feeding copepods, with increased significance during                
              relaxation of upwelling events.                                                
                                                                                             
              3. H0: Interspecific differences exist in the importance of                    
              ciliates to co-occurring species of suspension-feeding copepods.               
                                                                                             
                   The study will contrast 3 major suspension-feeding copepods               
              in the California Current System: an epipelagic species (Calanus               
              pacificus californicus), a mesopelagic species (Eucalanus                      
              californicus), and a strong vertical migrant (Metridia pacifica).              
              Laboratory experiments will develop additional antisera and                    
              characterize predation rates on different ciliate taxa. Field                  
              research will be conducted in conjunction with the CalCOFI                     
              program. These cruises will address cross-shore and temporal                   
              variations in the ciliate link to  suspension-feeding copepods,                
              utilizing immunochemical dot blots, gut fluorescenec, and                      
              Iatroscan lipid analyses.  Additional cruises  will address diel               
              and vertical variations, to examine any interspcific differences               
              in the  significance of this linkage to coexisting species of                  
              suspension-feeding zooplankton.
