Title       : High-Resolution Lacustrine Stratigraphy: Application to Hydrologic-Climatic
               Reconstruction in Southwestern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1991   
File        : a9019134

Award Number: 9019134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Y. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Laminations of gypsum sand and silt, eolian and lacustrine                
              clay, and organic-rich material occur on a scale of millimeters in             
              late Pleistocene/Holocene lake sediments in the Estancia Basin in              
              central New Mexico.  A feasibility study has established the                   
              seasonal character of the laminae and their potential for                      
              reconstructing a high-resolution chronostratigraphy.  The vertical             
              and lateral continuity of the laminations provides a basis for                 
              reconstructing a stratigraphic sequence on a decimeter scale and               
              a time-series with a temporal resolution ranging from decimeter                
              decades to centuries.  Changes in the proportion of eolian,                    
              lacustrine, and biogenic components reflect changes in water depth             
              and volume, wind intensity, and in the hydrologic balance of the               
              closed lake system.  Reconstruction of a high-resolution                       
              stratigraphy will eventually permit the measurement of the                     
              hydrologic response to climatic forcing and quantitative estimates             
              of changes in climatic variables.                                              
                   Methods applied elsewhere to the reconstruction of varve time-            
              series will be adapted to reconstruct a time-series based on                   
              accumulated thickness and composition of bedding and laminations.              
              These parameters will be measured in closely spaced samples,                   
              indexed to an age model for the reconstructed time-series, and                 
              expressed as sediment flux.  The radiocarbon chronostratigraphy                
              will be refined with additional analyses.  The high-resolution                 
              stratigraphy in the central area of the basin will be correlated               
              with shoreline deposits to connect the stratigraphic record to an              
              improved hydrologic/climatic model for the Estancia Basin.  In                 
              addition, the investigation will compile a record of eolian influx             
              and will help develop methodologies for reconstructing high-                   
              resolution stratigraphic records in other lacustrine basins.
