Title       : Laser Vaporization Generation of Radical Ions and Reactive Intermediates for
               Matrix Isolation ESR Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1992   
File        : a9019511

Award Number: 9019511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lon B. Knight knight lon/furman@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              Professor Knight is supported by a grant from the Experimental                 
              Physical Chemistry Program to study chemical reaction products                 
              generated under high energy pulsed laser vaporization                          
              conditions using electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy.                   
              Scientific knowledge obtained from these studies could be                      
              important in several areas including silicon deposition                        
              processes involved in the fabrication of microelectronic                       
              components and identification of reactive intermediates                        
              involved in upper atmospheric chemistry.  This research is done                
              in collaboration with undergraduate students in chemistry who                  
              gain experience with lasers, high vacuum technology, ESR                       
              spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, and spectral simulations, all                 
              of which provide good preparation for careers in science and                   
              engineering.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Cation, anion and neutral radicals are produced by pulsed laser                
              vaporization, the radicals are identified by time-of-flight                    
              mass spectroscopy, and are trapped in a neon matrix at 4 K.                    
              Many new molecular radical ions are being generated and                        
              characterized for the first time in Prof. Knight's laboratory.                 
              The electron spin resonance spectra obtained have linewidths                   
              which are comparable to those in the gas phase and allow the                   
              determination of hyperfine structure as well as g values.                      
              Hyperfine parameters are extremely sensitive to the electronic                 
              wavefunction and hence provide stringent tests of ab initio                    
              theoretical calculations which are being carried out in                        
              collaboration with several theoretical groups.
