Title       : Solar System Laboratory Aeronomy by Electron Impact with Emphasis on Terrestrial
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9019970

Award Number: 9019970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 1,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Shemansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In order to understand the details of the way solar energy is                  
              transferred to and within the earth's atmosphere it is essential               
              to have a good understanding of the fundamental properties of the              
              various states of the atoms and molecules that exist at each                   
              level of the atmosphere. It is also important to develop means                 
              to accurately calibrate the instruments that measure the                       
              energetics directly in the atmosphere. This program combines                   
              laboratory measurements with advanced models of atomic and                     
              molecular species to provide basic data to advance research in                 
              upper atmospheric processes.  Detailed models will be used to                  
              simulate the excited night or day upper atmosphere, with                       
              particular attention paid to the energy budget. Concurrently,                  
              laboratory measurements of the light emitted in a crossed beam                 
              collision processes will provide calibrated  spectra over a large              
              wavelength region to provide a primary reference data set for the              
              simulations. Electron impact studies of the species N2, 02, NI,                
              OI, HI, NO and ArI will be performed, and energy dependent                     
              collision strengths will be obtained through model analysis to                 
              allow the construction of collision models capable of producing                
              results for a broad range of relevant conditions.  H2 emission                 
              will be studied because it can provide accurate calibration of                 
              spaceflight and laboratory instrumentation. Also included will                 
              be the determination of dissociation and predissociation yields,               
              absolute transition probability tables, and high resolution                    
              absorption properties for selected species.
