Title       : Integration of Genetic Analysis and Map Generation with the E. coli Genetic
               Stock Center Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9019995

Award Number: 9019995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Toni Kazic                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Berlyn mary.berlyn@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to add advanced features to the               
              E. coli Genetic Stock Center database and to extend the current                
              database to include additional genetic information currently                   
              available at the Center.  Special emphasis will be put on                      
              developing and handling representation, computation, and analysis              
              of mapping information; on the use and handling of pedigree data;              
              and on exploration of interaction and possible integrations with               
              other databases that specialize in information relevant to an E.               
              coli database.                                                                 
              The proposed work will involve extending the current design and the            
              current database and developing plans for integration with other               
              databases.  The design and structure of the current system were                
              developed with these expanded functions in mind, so that the                   
              necessary additions can be accomplished without requiring that any             
              of the earlier work be discarded or redesigned.                                
              This project is significant in                                                 
                                                                                             
                   developing a database management system for a large strain                
                   collection involving complex genetic descriptions with as many            
                   as 20 genetic markers per strain;                                         
                                                                                             
                   providing a means to query (in a database format) types and               
                   positions of mutations ranging from base pair changes in tRNA             
                   (suppressor) loci to insertion of transposons or sex factors              
                   between genes, to intragenic or intergenic deletions, to                  
                   inversions, transpositions, or episome-integration of regions             
                   of the chromosome;                                                        
                                                                                             
                   developing representations of uncertainties inherent in                   
                   genetic data;                                                             
                                                                                             
                   providing retrieval capability for virtually any combination              
                   of genetic or strain traits, including specific mutation                  
                   types, mutations in specific genes or within specific regions,            
                   plasmids with or without markers, and strain attributes such              
                   as sex or lab of origin; and                                              
                                                                                             
                   providing, in relational format, critical genome information              
                   at both the organismal and subcellular level, with capability             
                   of integration with sequence and other physical databases.                
                                                                                             
              Much of the value of our approach to the mapping function lies in              
              the ability to store, analyze, and integrate data from many                    
              experimental sources as well as summary map data, and to have the              
              map data tied to our extensive and accurate database of genes,                 
              alleles, and strains.  This should facilitate detecting, for                   
              example, map anomalies that are strain specific, or allele-                    
              specific, or that consistently differ according to experimental                
              procedure.
