Title       : Regulation of Heterotrophic Microbial Processes in Lake Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1994  
File        : a9019873

Award Number: 9019873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Pace pacem@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan J. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              New York Botanical Garden, Institute of Ecosystem Studies                      
                                                                                             
                   Heterotrophic microorganisms are responsible for a major                  
              portion of the biological productivity and biogeochemical cycling              
              in ecosystems.  Regulation of microbial processes, however, is                 
              poorly understood.  This project will examine how two key                      
              properties of aquatic ecosystems, primary production and food web              
              structure, regulate the biomass, respiration, and productivity of              
              heterotrophic microbes including bacteria, flagellated protozoans              
              and ciliated protozoans.  This research will take advantage of                 
              whole lake experiments already funded by NSF.  Food webs in four               
              lakes will be manipulated to enhance dominance by either                       
              planktivorous or piscivorous fish.  Nutrient loading in two of                 
              these lakes with alternative food webs will be increased to                    
              elevate phytoplankton primary production and biomass.  Pace and                
              Cole hypothesize that heterotrophic microbial processes are a                  
              relatively conservative feature in aquatic ecosystems.  Changes                
              in heterotrophic microbial processes in these experiments will                 
              be primarily a result of changes in primary production and                     
              phytoplankton biomass and secondarily a result of changes in                   
              phytoplankton community structure.  To strengthen the general                  
              applicability of the experimental results, these hypotheses will               
              be tested by a comparative study of bacterial productivity and                 
              biomass in 20 lakes.  Simulation and inverse food web models will              
              be used to examine how variability in food web structure and                   
              primary production influences microbial processes and how                      
              variability in microbial processes influence other components of               
              the system.                                                                    
                   Pace and Cole are productive young scientists.  The                       
              institutional support for this research is excellent.
