Title       : Site-Specific DNA Cleavage at oriT of the F Plasmid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9019800

Award Number: 9019800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Deonier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The F plasmid exemplifies a class of conjugative plasmids that                 
              carry antibiotic resistances, colonization factors, and virulence              
              factors.  The transfer origin, oriT, plays a central role in DNA               
              transfer: it is the site at which the transferred strand is                    
              nicked to initiate DNA transfer.  This research will examine in                
              detail the mechanisms for oriT function in initiation and                      
              termination of strand transfer.  Regions of the oriT locus will                
              be correlated with their role in nicking, transfer, or                         
              termination of transfer.  The four phenotypes to be employed are               
              overall transfer proficiency, in vivo nicking (electrophoretic                 
              assay of plasmid species), copy-number competition (competition                
              for limiting substrate by oriT subregions cloned on small                      
              multicopy plasmids), and product fidelity (production of                       
              aberrantly-terminated oriT plasmids after transfer with mutant                 
              oriT or tra genes).  These mutants will be generated by                        
              oligonucleotide site-directed mutagenesis or deletion, and will                
              include traM, traI, and tray.  We will determine whether host                  
              protein (IHF, DNA gyrase) participate in oriT function.  Proteins              
              will be purfied for DNA binding studies and for establishing and               
              invivo nicking system.  DNA-protein contracts and protein-protein              
              contacts found invivo will be compared to similar data for                     
              relaxation complex that we have isolated from F bacteria also                  
              carrying small oriT plasmids.  The structural and biochemical                  
              data will be related to the genetic data to specify the                        
              biological mechanisms for oriT function.
