Title       : Structure of Antibodies Binding Similar Sites on Cytochromes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1992  
File        : a9019181

Award Number: 9019181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Jemmerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota St Paul
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554552000    612/625-2435

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The physicochemical parameters which guide antibody recognition                
              of a protein antigen will be studied employing cytochrome c                    
              (cyt) as a model antigen.  Of particular interest is the basis                 
              for differences in the antibody repertoires responding to                      
              variant cyts.  Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) will be elicited                   
              against several cyts that differ by as little as one amino acid                
              in an antigenic region.  The epitopes recognized will be                       
              determined from antibody binding assays employing a number of                  
              cyt variants prepared by site-directed mutagenesis or obtained                 
              from natural sources.  The amino acid sequences of the heavy                   
              and light chains of the mAbs will be deduced from the                          
              nucleotide sequences of cDNA. mAbs binding similar epitopes                    
              will be compared in terms of primary structure and any                         
              differences that occur as a result of an amino acid change in                  
              an epitope will be determined.  The three-dimensional                          
              structures of mAbs showing such differences will be modeled                    
              using computer graphics as will their interaction with cyt to                  
              obtain insight into the chemistry of the interaction.  Some of                 
              these models will be tested by X-ray crystallography in a                      
              related study.  Preliminary data indicate relatively restricted                
              antibody gene usage with distinct V region genes used in                       
              response to the two major antigenic regions of cyt.  An effect                 
              of epitope topography on complementary determining region                      
              length is also apparent.  These observations will be studied                   
              further to advance our understanding of antibody recognition                   
              of native protein antigens.  The results should serve as a                     
              model for protein-protein interactions, in general.
