Title       : Signal Transduction Mechanism of The Heat Shock Response in Cell Aging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9019808

Award Number: 9019808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Y. Liu liu@biology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0301000   Aging (Human)                           
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The heat shock response, defined as the rapid induction of heat             
              shock proteins (HSPs), was first described in 1962 by Ritossa in               
              Drosophila.  It has since been shown that the response is                      
              ubiquitous in all living organisms, that it can be elicited by a               
              wide range of physiological and noxious stimuli, and that the genes            
              and proteins of HSPs are highly conserved through evolution.  These            
              features underscore the importance of HSPs in biology.  This                   
              laboratory has shown that the heat shock response is attenuated in             
              senescent human diploid fibroblasts.  Experiments are proposed to              
              study the signal transduction mechanism of the heat shock response             
              and the regulation of this mechanism in cell aging.  Specifically,             
              experiments are proposed to evaluate if cAMP and cAMP-dependent                
              protein kinase may participate in the regulation of heat shock gene            
              expression, and if so, whether this regulation is through the basal            
              or the inducible promoter element.  The approaches to be used                  
              include:  analysis of the effects of expression vectors of cAMP-               
              dependent protein kinase and the protein kinase inhibitor on the               
              basal and heat induced expression of the hsp 70 promoter driven                
              reporter gene; and determining the effects of cAMP-elevating agents            
              on the expression of the endogenous and transfected hsp 70 gene.               
                                                                                             
              The wealth of knowledge of the molecular organization of the heat              
              shock genes, the age-dependent attenuation of this induction, and              
              the acknowledged importance of cAMP and cAMP-dependent protein                 
              kinase as a biological control mechanism are features that make                
              this system particularly useful in analysis of signal transduction             
              and gene expression.  The long-range goal of this research program             
              is to gain a better understanding of the regulation and function               
              of heat shock genes.
