Title       : Mathematical Models of Dynamics and Evolution in Structured Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1991      
File        : a9019990

Award Number: 9019990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shripad D. Tuljapurkar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The observed changes and evolution of natural populations                 
              are closely influenced by the life history of the organisms                    
              involved, and their responses to environmental change.                         
              Environments can drive temporal changes in the rates of vital                  
              events such as birth, death and growth.  They can also result in               
              resource limitations that reveal themselves in density-dependent               
              population responses.   This proposal aims to explore the                      
              consequences of both of these kinds of environmental effects for               
              dynamics and evolution.  One direction of study is the analysis                
              of changing environments as they affect the rate at which                      
              organisms develop, and the distribution of reproduction over the               
              lifespan of organisms, with special attention to repeated                      
              reproduction and developmental delays.  This will be the first                 
              systematic analysis of the effect of environmental pattern on the              
              evolution of complex life cycles, and will also explore the                    
              relationship between population growth and the components of                   
              the life cycle, when the environment is changing unpredictably                 
              over time.                                                                     
                   A second direction of study focuses on resource limitation                
              and density effects in shaping the dynamics of population change;              
              in particular, the ways in which such effects can drive cyclical               
              change in population numbers and composition.  These effects have              
              been studied in experimental populations, and the theory will be               
              applied to these data.
