Title       : Uplift and Exhumation of Eclogites and Blueschists in Venezuela: Constraints
               Based on Structural Analysis, Geothermobarometry, and Geochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9019243

Award Number: 9019243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy K. Dokka                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans G. Ave Lallemant ave@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia B. Sisson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A recently proposed model by the PI explains the uplift and               
              exhumation of high pressure/low temperature rocks in NE Venezuela              
              as the result of oblique subduction beneath an arcuate island arc              
              zone that was convex to the ocean.  The normal component of                    
              convergence is thought to cause arc-normal contraction structures              
              (folds, thrust faults) and the strike-slip component is thought to             
              cause arc-parallel transcurrent faults and shear zones.  An                    
              increase in curvature of the arc along strike may increase the                 
              strike-slip component of convergence, which in turn causes arc-                
              parallel extension and thickness reduction.  The terrane is then               
              uplifted to maintain isostatic equilibrium.  On Margarita Island               
              and the Araya Peninsula of NE Venezuela, a Late Cretaceous                     
              subduction complex/forearc terrane was extended parallel to the                
              Leeward Antilles volcanic island arc during its uplift and                     
              retrograde metamorphism.  The model outlined can explain the                   
              structural geometry of these uplifted subduction-related rocks, but            
              has not yet been rigorously tested.  This project will test the                
              model by collecting data from North Central Venezuela for                      
              structural analysis and geothermobarometry.  Fission track                     
              40Ar/39Ar,                                                                     
              U/Pb, and fluid inclusion studies will be combined with the                    
              structural and geothermobarometric data to produce pressure-                   
              temperature-time-deformation paths for these rocks.  The results               
              of this study will greatly enhance our understanding of Caribbean              
              tectonics, and will give significant insight to the problem of                 
              rapid uplift of high pressure/low temperature rocks during                     
              collisional tectonic processes.
