Title       : Stress Similarity and the Biomechanics of Terrestrial Locomotion in Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9019767

Award Number: 9019767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Animals use their limbs to generate and transmit forces associated             
              with movement and suppport against the force of gravity.  These                
              forces are an important influence both on the evolution of muscle              
              and bone design, as well as on the adaptive response of these                  
              tissues to changes in mechanical loading.  Mechanical requirements             
              for locomotor support, in turn, affect the energy expended by an               
              animal during locomotor activity and dictate the limits of its                 
              performance.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              By comparing the mechanics of locomotion of broadly differing sized            
              species, Dr. Biewener seeks to establish general principles that               
              govern how natural selection has favored strategies for effective              
              support of gravitational loads in terrestrial mammals.  One such               
              strategy appears to be regular size-dependent change in limb                   
              posture.  By adopting a more upright posture, larger animals lower             
              the forces that must be transmitted by their muscles and bones when            
              running.  This decrease in force offsets the diminished ability of             
              larger animals to support their weight due to the effect of size               
              on the area to volume scaling of their tissues.  Underlying this               
              mechanical constraint is the requirement that locomotor stresses               
              (force per unit area) acting in bone and muscle tissue be kept                 
              within a safe fraction of each tissue's strength.  The "safety                 
              factor" of these tissues appears to be roughly one-third of their              
              strength.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research has applied significance relating to the functional              
              mechanism and capacity of bone and muscle to respond adaptively to             
              changes in physical requirements.  This is important in terms of               
              physical training associated with sports-related activity, physical            
              therapy programs for recovery from disabling physical injury, for              
              surgical muscle/tendon transplantation strategies to overcome motor            
              deficits, as well as for evaluating the importance of physical                 
              exercise in relation to age-related bone loss.
