Title       : Atmospheric Field Measurements in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0308748

Award Number: 0308748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce G. Doddridge                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario J. Molina mmolina@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luisa T. Molina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project adds to an existing major international program designed to
              quantify atmospheric emissions and to understand and improve air quality in a
              developing mega-city, the Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA).  In Spring 2003
              an intensive field campaign will be undertaken in the MCMA involving advanced
              instrumentation deployed aboard both a mobile laboratory and at a major surface
              site.  Specifically, the surface site will be enhanced for the intensive by the
              addition of research grade visible/near ultraviolet Differential Optical
              Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS) and LIght Detection And Ranging (LIDAR)
              instruments.  The currently available mobile laboratory will be enhanced by
              integrating new instruments to measure key reactive nitrogen species, including
              gas-phase ammonia and nitric acid, upgrading the current Proton Transfer
              Reaction Mass Spectrometer (PTR-MS) to allow real-time measurements of selected
              aromatic and oxygenated hydrocarbons, and developing and deploying an automated
              sampling system allowing real-time trace gas and fine particle measurements of
              transient emissions.  The investigators will undertake experiments to gain
              insight into the quantity and identity of gaseous pollutants driving
              photochemical oxidants and secondary fine aerosol particle production as well
              as the emission, composition and temporal evolution of the fine aerosol burden.
               The resulting data sets will be analyzed and integrated into the larger
              project data archive as well as into ongoing North American Strategy for
              Tropospheric Ozone (NARSTO) assessment, modeling and policy development
              activities.  Insofar as Mexico City is perhaps representative of other large
              urban centers this project affords some insight as to air quality of
              mega-cities in developing countries.  The educational and capacity building
              impacts include extensive and substantive collaborations between Mexican and
              U.S. researchers in the field, and Mexican student exchange with U.S.
              institutions during the data analysis phase.
