Title       : Algebraic, Geometric, and Asymptotic Properties of Branch Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0308985

Award Number: 0308985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rostislav Grigorchuk grigorch@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0308985
Grigorchuk, Rostislav

Abstract


Title:  Algebraic,
              Geometric, and Asymptotic Properties of Branch Groups

This project will
              focus on properties of branch groups.
Branch groups are abstract mathematical
              objects that play an important 
role in solving major problems on the
              intersection of different parts of 
mathematics, such as Algebra, Number
              Theory, Analysis, Geometry and 
Probability Theory. The proposer will study
              these groups and their relation 
to a number of  important and long-standing
              problems in modern mathematics, 
such as the Burnside and Milnor Problems in
              Group Theory, Atiyah 
Conjecture in Topology, Kadison-Kaplansky Conjecture in
              Functional Analysis. 
The results obtained in this project have useful
              applications in Cybernetics 
and Computer Science, as well as Cryptography and
              Theory of Algorithms.


Combinatorial Group Theory is one of the most
              rapidly developing parts 
of modern mathematics. Starting with works by
              Poincare and Klein this 
area received contribution from some of the most
              prominent 
mathematicians of the twentieth century, such as von Neumann,
              Milnor and 
others. In recent decades Combinatorial Group Theory became an
              object of 
especially intensive research due to newly found connections with
              
Statistical Physics, Quantum Chaos Theory and Computer Science. New
              
promising directions of mathematical research have been developped, one 
of
              them being the theory of branch groups. This theory has strong 
connections to
              several mainstream open problems in modern mathematics. 
Tremendous progress
              acheived in recent years indicates that the 
exploration of these connections
              leads to most fruitful ideas and results.

