Title       : NSF Workshop on Distributed Communications and Signal Processing for Sensor
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0308197

Award Number: 0308197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40802              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thrasyvoulos N. Pappas pappas@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aggelos K. Katsaggelos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0308197
Thrasyvoulos Pappas
Northwestern Univ

The use of
              distributed sensor networks for data gathering and analysis is one of the key
              emerging technologies at the beginning of the 21st century. Such networks
              consist of a possibly large number of devices (nodes) equipped with multiple
              sensors (acoustic, imaging, video, seismic, magnetic, infrared, micro-radar,
              etc.), storage and processing capability, and wireless communication links to
              neighboring nodes and/or a central location.

Distributed sensor networks
              offer a lot of exciting possibilities for a number of applications, ranging
              from environmental monitoring, to industrial process control, to military and
              security applications, to health monitoring. They also pose a lot of
              challenging problems for research that derive from the distributed nature of
              the network, the multimodal nature of the information collected by the sensors,
              the reliability of the individual nodes, the bandwidth and impairments of the
              communication links, the power consumption constraints, and the dynamic nature
              of the overall system.

Recent advances in several domains, including sensor
              technologies, computational speed, storage capacity, networking, and
              miniaturization, make the project possible and set the stage for significant
              breakthroughs. A substantial research effort on various aspects of the problem
              is already under way.

A recent issue of the IEEE Signal Processing magazine
              summarizes some of the ongoing research in the area of signal processing. A
              substantial effort is coordinated by the DARPA Sensor Information Technology
              (SensIT) Program, whose mission is the development of all necessary software
              for networked micro-sensors. SensIT was founded on the concept of a networked
              system of cheap, pervasive platforms that combine multiple sensor types,
              embedded processors, positioning ability and wireless communication.

The
              workshop will take place at the Allen Center on Northwestern University's
              Evanston campus and its duration will be two days. The goal of the proposed
              workshop will be to identify fundamental research directions in the signal
              processing and communications areas, the advancement of which will lead to
              major breakthroughs in the specific focus areas as well as important scientific
              progress, in general.

Based on the discussions of the workshop, a report
              will be generated that will provide advice to NSF on promising directions for
              near and long term research in the area of distributed communications and
              signal processing for sensor networks. The report will also be used to clarify
              the soon to be announced call for proposals under the title "Sensors and Sensor
              Networks for Information, Decision and Action."

