Title       : Cleaner Workshop Three: Collaborative Large-Scale Engineering Assessment Network
               for Environmental Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0308930

Award Number: 0308930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50016              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Jeffrey Peirce peirce@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0308930  Peirce  The objective of CLEANER Workshop Three is to build on the
              accomplishments of two previous NSF workshops to better understand and organize
              the science, engineering, technology, and administration of emerging
              capabilities in sensor technologies, communications, and computation to
              protect, maintain, and restore the water, atmosphere and soil
              environments.
During the past year the academic and NSF vision of CLEANER has
              become targeted: to provide a network of field and laboratory facilities in a
              collaboration among engineers, scientists, policy makers and community groups
              to protect public health and the environment. The need exists for a timely
              immediate CLEANER Workshop Three to continue these past discussions and to
              narrow discussions to such topics as environmental cyberinfrastructures and
              management plans.
CLEANER Workshop One hosted and chaired by Professor Richard
              Luthy at Stanford University in December 2001 provided a forum for initial
              discussions on the vision, concept, vocabulary, content and management options
              for CLEANER. 
CLEANER Workshop Two hosted and chaired by Professor Patrick
              Brezonik at the University of Minnesota in October 2002 provided a larger group
              of participants with opportunities to learn about CLEANER and learn about the
              successes and challenges faced during the planning and operation of efforts
              somewhat similar to CLEANER including NSF's Long Term Ecological Research
              (LTER's), Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES), National
              Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), and the Consortium of Universities for
              the Advancement of Hydrological Science, Inc. (CUAHSI).
 Workshop Three to be
              co- hosted at Duke University in February 2003 by Professor Jeff Peirce (Duke
              University) and Professor Mike Aitken (University of North Carolina) will build
              on the accomplishments of these two previous workshops while continuing those
              discussions and narrowing discussions on CLEANER to such topics as
              environmental cyberinfrastructure and management plans. Workshop Three will
              follow the successful format of Workshop Two with invited participants arriving
              at Duke for a Sunday evening dinner and introductory discussions followed by
              two days of general and breakout meetings with presentations and   reports of
              workshop activities.

