Title       : SGER: Protein Interactions with Nano-Scale Controlled Surfaces: Non-Fouling
               Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0308598

Award Number: 0308598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaoyi Jiang sjiang@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,7234,7237,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shaoyi Jiang
U of Washington

"SGER: Protein Interactions with Nano-Scale
              Controlled Surfaces: Non-Fouling Mechanism."

Non-fouling surfaces are
              critical to the performance of biosensors and biomaterials.
Despite of their
              importance and enormous effort, non-fouling mechanism is still unknown at
              present. Many experiments remain unexplained and many controversial issues
              remain unresolved. There exist several models attempted to elucidate
              non-fouling mechanism. However, there is a lack of a unified model (or
              hypothesis), which can explain various experiments and identify the origin of
              non-fouling surfaces. Among several theoretical studies, either protein
              molecules are not included, or simplified protein models with continuum medium
              are used. The novelty of this proposed work is its hypothesis that nano-scale
              structures of a surface are responsible for protein adsorption/resistance and
              its integrated experimental and simulation approach designed to prove the
              hypothesis. In the proposed work, the state (e.g., ieliquid crystalli or
              ircrystall.) of polyethylene glycol (PEG) terminated self-assembled monolayers
              (SAMs) will be altered by forming the SAMs at different temperatures or by
              adjusting the composition of mixed PEG and OH terminated SAMs. Protein
              adsorption on these surfaces will be measured using surface plasmon resonance
              (SPR) biosensors. Atomic force microscopy (AFM)/scanning tunneling microscopy
              (STM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier transform IR
              spectroscopy-attenuated total reflection (FTIR-ATR), and sum frequency
              generation (SFG) will be used to characterize these SAMs and adsorbed water
              molecules. In parallel, molecular simulations will be performed to study how
              protein adsorption/resistance is affected by nano-scale SAM structures by
              calculating free energy change upon protein adsorption and examining adsorbed
              water structure near SAM surfaces. The success of this work will advance the
              fundamental understanding of protein behavior at interfaces and provide a guide
              to design better biosensors and biomaterials. It will meet the urgent need for
              the detection and identification of chemical and biological substances in many
              areas from homeland security to environmental monitoring to biomedical
              applications.

