Title       : A Fundamental Study of the Bulk Modulus in Polymers and its Dependence on
               Chemical Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0308762

Award Number: 0308762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sindee L. Simon sindee.simon@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental study of the bulk modulus of polymers is proposed with the aim of
              determining how it depends on chemical structure.  The hypothesis that the bulk
              modulus arises primarily from intramolecular relaxations while the shear
              modulus depends on intermolecular (or intersegmental) relaxations will be
              tested using model systems in which the strength of the b-relaxation can be
              systematically varied by changing, for example, tacticity, crosslink density,
              or conversion.  Comparison of the time-dependent bulk modulus with the
              time-dependent shear modulus will also be made in order to resolve the issue of
              whether or not the dispersions in these viscoelastic properties involve a
              similar spectrum of relaxation times and arise from the same molecular origins.
               Three model systems will be investigated, including i) poly(methyl
              methacrylate) as a function of tacticity, ii) a heterocyclic network based on
              hexamethylene diisocyanate and hexyl isocyanate as a function of crosslink
              density, and iii) a dicyanate ester/polycyanurate thermosetting material as a
              function of crosslink density and conversion.  The measurements will be made
              using a pressurizable mercury dilatometer which has been built specifically for
              determination of the time-dependent bulk modulus and bulk compliance in stress-
              and strain-controlled modes, respectively.  Temperature control in the
              instrument is stable to better than 0.01 K, and measurement temperatures will
              cover a broad temperature range from far below to above the glass temperature
              with measurements made in the glass following conventional protocol. 
              Time-temperature superposition will be used to construct master curves from
              which the relaxation or retardation time spectra can be obtained.  The master
              curves and relaxation (or retardation) time spectra for the model compounds
              will be compared in a given family to determine the effects of tacticity,
              crosslink density, and conversion on the bulk modulus, in addition to being
              compared to the data from the shear modulus.  The results for the thermosetting
              system will also be used to test whether a general model based on concepts of
              time-temperature and time-conversion superposition is able to quantitatively
              describe the time, temperature, and conversion dependence of the bulk modulus
              in a reacting system. 


The proposed research program will provide
              excellent training for the graduate student involved in the project and will
              also involve an undergraduate researcher.  Efforts will be made to include
              women and underrepresented minorities through special recruiting efforts at
              women's and minority colleges in the Texas and southwest region.  An attempt
              will be made to include undergraduate students who participate in the TTU
              McNair Scholars Program for first generation college students (often
              minorities).  In addition to providing excellent training for the students
              involved in the program, the work will also be broadly disseminated within the
              scientific community by presentation at national forums and publication in both
              proceedings conferences and archival journals.  The results of the project will
              also be incorporated to the extent feasible in both undergraduate and graduate
              courses taught by the PI.

