Title       : Exploiting Spatial and Channel Diversity in Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0308631

Award Number: 0308631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samir R. Das samir@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Mobile ad hoc networks are multi-hop wireless networks, with dynamically
              changing network
topology. Evaluating network capacity is a hard problem in
              such networks because of the shared
nature of the radio medium and possibility
              of spatial reuse. The latter is again influenced by routes
used and node
              mobility. On the other hand, understanding the network capacity in terms of
              available bandwidth is crucial to design effective routing protocols. The
              resarchers propose empirical techniques to evaluate the network capacity. The
              techniques work in conjunction with a simulator and use mobility and
              session-level traces to compute capacity that can be compared against the
              network utilization reported by the simulator. Preliminary experiments indicate
              interesting results that more capacity is available with higher mobility;
              however common routing protocols fail to utilize the additional capacity for
              better routing performance. Preliminary analysis indicates that spatial
              diversity is not exploited enough by conventional protocols, indicating that
              multipath routing protocols and distributing traffic over multiple paths would
              be quite effective.
     While investigating better techniques to evaluate
              capacity will be one component of the researchers work, they will also expend
              substantial effort in developing multipath protocols and techniques to achieve
              better load balance. For efficiency they will focus on protocols with an
              on-demand nature. The researchers indicate in this proposal how multiple, link-
              or node-disjoint, loop-free routes can be computed on demand without the use of
              source routing, with minimal additional overhead. The researchers  will further
              development and analysis of such protocols. The emphasis will be on obtaining
              as many multipath
routes as possible. Our preliminary results already indicate
              that such routing mechanisms
reduce route discovery attempts, thus improving
              both delay and throughput. We will also focus on
evaluating techniques to
              distribute load on multiple routes effectively for a fuller utilization of
              the
available capacity.
     However, we point out that the dense nature of
              most ad hoc networks will form multiple routes
in radio vicinity. In that
              case, topologically disjoint routes may still share radio medium. To
achieve
              diversity further, we propose using multiple channels in the underlying medium
              access
control (MAC) layer so that independent channels can be assigned to
              neighboring routes. While
individual channels may now have less capacity, some
              preliminary results indicate that significant
performance gains are possible
              if the transmitter is capable of transmitting on multiple
              channels
concurrently. The researchers  wish to explore, among other things,
              channel selection issues for individual links and paths when multipath routes
              are available.
     To summarize, the overall goal in this project is to
              better our understanding of the capacity of
a mobile ad hoc network operating
              with real network protocols; and to exploit spatial and channel
diversity
              significantly with a synergistic use of multipath routing and multichannelMAC
              protocols.
