Title       : Workshops: Proposal for Planning and Implementing a Higher Education Bridge
               Certification Authority (HEBCA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0308292

Award Number: 0308292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Luker mluker@educause.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Worona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educause
	      1150 18th Street NW, Suite 1010
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/872-4200

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research and education community faces a pressing need for trusted
              electronic communications between institutions of higher education and the
              federal agencies.  The only general solutions to this problem are based on
              Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), a system that uses digital certificates and
              signatures to bring to network communications the levels of trust and security
              required by the applications.  A major barrier to the implementation of PKI
              among institutions is the fact that versions of the technology implemented by
              different vendors or certified by different vendors or certified by different
              authorities may not interoperate, effectively limiting their use to single
              institutions.

A widely-accepted solution to this problem has been designed
              and implemented in the Federal Bridge Certification Authority (FBCA), which
              provides the legal, policy and technical framework to translate levels of trust
              from one institution or agency to another.  In 2001-2002, EDUCAUSE implemented
              a test version of the Higher Education Bridge Certification Authority (HEBCA),
              which extends this approach to the Higher Education Community.   While the test
              version demonstrated the technical feasibility of the approach, it cannot be
              used for production because it lacks the corresponding legal, policy and
              financial framework.

Assuming the success of the design efforts, EDUCAUSE
              intends to use the results of the workshops as a roadmap to implement a
              production HEBCA, cross certify it with the FBCA, and invite Certificate
              Authorities that serve higher education to join the HEBCA.  This will provide a
              uniform foundation on which universities can initiate a wide range of trusted
              electronic communications with various federal agencies to better support
              research and education.
  
The proposal will develop and conduct a series of
              expert workshops to plan and implement the steps required to establish and
              create the HEBCA, and to move it into production.

