Title       : Opportunities in Block Copolymers: Reactive Rod/Coils and Magnetooptic
               Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0308133

Award Number: 0308133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Freddy A. Khoury                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin L. Thomas elt@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The research proposed will further the possibility that block copolymers gain
              entry into higher value, high technology applications, such as chemically
              patterned surface coatings, lithographic masks and improved optical components.
               To this end, the investigator proposes two broadly related fundamental
              research areas:  (1) creation of nanopatterns with surface-reactive rod/coil
              diblock copolymers and (2) fabrication of tunable magneto-optical materials
              from nanoparticle-filled block copolymers.  In both these projects, the PI's
              previous experience with block copolymer processing and structure-property
              characterization will provide a firm base to build structure and chemical
              interactions between the host copolymer and a substrate and/or an applied
              field, or between the host polymer and surface engineered nanoparticles
              determines the resultant nanocomposite morphology will permit attainment of new
              and enhanced physical properties.  Improved insight into the principles of how
              to best create ordered block copolymer based systems will have broad
              applicability to a host of emerging technologies.  Key to this will be
              knowledge of how the processing conditions interplay with chemical structure to
              achieve desirable end states and thus afford superior materials based on
              BCPs.

Rod/coil BCPs and their blends with both coil- and rod-homopolymers
              are largely unexplored and present an opportunity to learn about the role of
              liquid crystallinity on microphase separation.  Emphasis will be on rod/coil -
              coil blends to investigate rod BCP micelles, and on the presence of reactive
              groups on the rod block to provide means for locking-in morphologics, for
              tuning substrate interaction, and to create synthetic anistropic organic
              nano-objects, which can then be employed as unique building blocks in
              hierarchical self assembly.  Self assembled nanocomposites based on
              polymer-inorganic materials with magnetic field tunable optical properties will
              be produced by spatially templating superparamagnetic nanoparticles in BCPs. 
              Surface engineering nanoparticles will be sequestered in the BCP and should
              display superior properties over the corresponding bulk materials due to their
              small size (single domain particles).  By choosing a BCP that has sufficient
              molecular weight so that the microdomains'  periodicity provides a visible
              wavelength  photonic ban gap (PBG), these researchers will fabricate a magnetic
              field tunable PBG materials.  Such materials have potential as polarization
              rotators and optical isolators ("one way light valves") via the field dependent
              Verdet constant of the composite.  In addition, the experimental data set of
              nanoparticle-BDP morphologies will be used to compare to recent theoretical
              models of the geometry of nanoparticle-BCP self-assembly.

This project has
              several ways to impact society.  Visits of graduate students to other
              universities and to industry are envisioned to give them a broader experience,
              as well as to access to novel instrumentation.  The PI has several highly
              productive collaborations:  C. Ober and S. Gruner  (Cornell) - block copolymer
              synthesis and synchrotron scattering (routine visits by 3-4 students to CHESS
              and short (one week) periods to Ober lab; S. Margel (Var-Llan, Israel) -
              nanoparticle synthesis (due to the present situation in Israel, no students
              have yet visited his lab) and B. Lotz  Strasbourg) - TEM and electron
              diffraction characterization (month long visit to CNRS).  The PI has recent
              experience co-founding a start up (Omni Guide Communications, Inc.) with
              another professor and a former graduate student,  affording a perspective on
              how to undertake tech transfer from the university into the market place.  Over
              the past 12 years, the PI has filed a total of 15 patent disclosures and 5
              patents have been issued.  In addition, the PI's group has always hosted
              several undergraduates, called UROPs, at MIT.  Their successful participation
              in research is attested by co-authorzship of several publications. 

