Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Archaeomagnetism in the U.S. Southeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0308798

Award Number: 0308798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11642              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Schiffer schiffer@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Schiffer, Ms. Stacey Lengyel will collect and
              analyze data necessary for the completion of her doctoral dissertation. This
              project seeks to provide archaeologists working in the U.S. Southeast with a
              new way to date their archaeological findings. The technique that will be
              established through this project is called archaeomagnetic dating, and it uses
              preserved records of changes in the position of the earth's magnetic north pole
              to date burned, clay-rich archaeological features such as cooking hearths,
              pottery kilns, or the walls and floors of burned structures. This technique has
              been used successfully over the past 30 years to date sites throughout the U.S.
              Southwest, Europe and Japan, and this project aims to make the dating technique
              possible in the U.S. Southeast as well.

Archaeomagnetic dating depends on 1)
              the fact that the earth's magnetic north pole drifts around the geographic
              rotation axis on the order of decades, and 2) the fact that burned, clay-rich
              archaeological features, such as cooking hearths, accurately record the
              position of the magnetic north pole at the time they were last fired (e.g., the
              last time a cooking hearth was used). When enough archaeomagnetic directional
              data are collected from well-dated archaeological features (e.g., a cooking
              hearth that also yielded a radiocarbon date) in a given region, a master record
              of archaeomagnetic change can be constructed in the form of a regional
              reference curve. However, due to local variations in the magnetic field, each
              reference curve is only valid over a 2000-km wide region. Therefore, the goal
              of this project is to construct the reference curve for the Southeast, thus
              making archaeomagnetic dating possible in this region.

This project is
              important because it will provide archaeologists working in the U.S. Southeast
              with a means of establishing, verifying, and refining the temporal frameworks
              needed to address basic anthropological questions about past cultures. By
              furnishing researchers with tighter temporal control over the archaeological
              data, the regional archaeomagnetic curve developed through this project will
              allow archaeologists to examine the play of sociocultural processes across time
              and space and at a variety of scales, ranging from the sub-site level (e.g.,
              between structures) to the pan-continent level (e.g., between the Tennessee
              River Valley and the Phoenix Basin). In short, the completion of the Southeast
              archaeomagnetic curve will provide researchers with an independent dating
              method that not only complements existing chronometric tools, but, when used in
              conjunction with those tools will allow for more temporally refined treatments
              of prehistoric cultural processes. This award will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

