Title       : RIA: Efficient Processing of Queries in Heterogeneous Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9309225

Award Number: 9309225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98208              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiyi Meng meng@cs.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              RIA:  Efficient Processing of Queries in Heterogeneous Database                
              Systems                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Users not familiar with different types of database systems                    
              (including textual database systems) often have difficulty                     
              retrieving data stored in these databases. One popular method is               
              to create a global schema from the schemas of existing databases               
              and to allow the global schema to be queried. Each query against               
              the global schema needs to be decomposed into subqueries which                 
              are then translated to queries acceptable by the corresponding                 
              underlying database systems for data retrieval. The objective of               
              this project is to improve the processing speed of the global                  
              queries when using an object-oriented global schema. The speedup               
              is achieved by two types of optimization mechanisms. One is built              
              into the process of query decomposition and the other into query               
              translation.  The optimization in query decomposition evaluates                
              different decomposition strategies and chooses the best strategy.              
              The optimization in query translation similarly evaluates                      
              different translation plans. The existence of different types of               
              databases requires that several translators be developed.                      
              Relational, object-oriented and textual database systems are used              
              as the underlying database systems in the project. The proposed                
              optimizations of queries against the global schema are expected                
              to significantly improve the overall performance of heterogeneous              
              database systems.
