Title       : Multinomial Processing Tree Models of Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9309667

Award Number: 9309667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254961             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Batchelder whbatche@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Riefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309667  BATCHELDER    This project will continue research on a class of formal
              cognitive  models known as general processing tree (GPT) models.  GPT models 
              are a special class of simple statistical models that have great  potential to
              help researchers measure unobservable cognitive  capacities, such as memory
              storage, memory organization, and  retrieval capacity.  Prior research involved
              the invention of a  number of new models and their application to different
              issues in  human memory, including bilingualism, eyewitness memory, mnemonics, 
              source memory, and memory loss in the elderly.  Also, advances in  the
              statistical theory behind this type of modeling have led to the  work beginning
              to have an impact on the basic research of a number  of psychologists.  The
              goal of this new project is to expand this  research program and take it to the
              "next level."  This will  include the development of new GPT models and
              expansion of their  application to a wider range of topics in psychology.  For
              example,  one project will take current complex theories of human cognition 
              and represent them approximately with more simple GPT models.   Recent research
              suggests that the class of cognitive models that  can be represented in this
              manner is quite large.  When theoretical  models are expressed in GPT form, the
              extensive statistical theory  behind GPT modeling can provide a simple yet
              thorough method for  evaluating and understanding the models.  Another project
              will  explore the use of GPT models to measure different types of 
              logical-reasoning capacities, such as the ability to find  confirming and
              disconfirming evidence for a hypothesis.  The  research will develop GPT models
              to disentangle these and other  factors in reasoning.  The result should be a
              clearer idea of how  to assess a person's logical strengths and weaknesses.  In
               addition, the research will include further analysis of the  statistical and
              structural properties of GPT models.  This analytic  work will include
              extending the models to han dle individual  differences in cognitive abilities
              and also expanding them to  analyze the time it takes to make various responses
              (i.e.,  reaction-time data).  Finally, a major goal of this project is to 
              develop and document user-friendly software programs on the use of  GPT models.
               The material will be targeted to a large class of  research psychologists and
              will include a general overview of GPT  modeling, examples from inside and
              outside psychology, and the  statistical results from this research.  The
              computer programs will  be general enough to enable researchers to develop,
              analyze, and  test their own GPT models in a wide variety of situations.  These
               materials will serve to make this methodology more accessible to  other
              psychologists.     ***
