Title       : Colloidal Processing and Microstructural Design of Glass- Ceramic Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1993      
File        : a9309073

Award Number: 9309073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prashant N. Kumta kumta@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Prashant Kumta  Abstract    The current and future emphasis in packaging
              technology are aimed  at achieving high device densities.  These development
              place  stringent requirements on substrate technology.  The substrates  need to
              possess good heat dissipation and signal propagation  characteristics.  Several
              compromises seem to be essential to match  the device output characteristics
              with the economics of the  process.  A composite material with optimum thermal
              and dielectric  properties would offer an ideal solution to this problem.  A 
              colloidal processing technique combined with a unique  microstructural design
              is proposed to process a glass-ceramic  composite with optimum thermal and
              electrical properties.  Modified  metal oxide sol-gel (MOSG) process utilizing
              inexpensive metal  oxide precursors is proposed to synthesize
              borophosphosilicate  glass-ceramics.  An in-situ solution coating technique
              will be used  to introduce the thermally conducting second phase.  Systematic 
              control of the processing parameters such as temperature, solution  viscosity,
              sintering time, and volume  fraction will be initiated  to generate a duplex
              microstructure in the dense composite  containing a continuous network of the
              thermally conducting phase.   The three main objectives of the proposed   study
              are:  (1)  Synthesis of the glass-ceramic composite material using the 
              modified solution approach (2) Systematic study and control of the  evolved
              microstructure of the glass-ceramic composite and (3) To  understand the effect
              of the gel structure and the process  variables (volume fraction, coating
              thickness, gel structure,  sintering time, temperature) on the microstructure
              and its  properties, using  thermal analyses, X-ray diffraction, scanning  and
              transmission electron microscopy.  The effect of the  microstructure on the
              electrical and thermal properties will also  be assessed by measuring the
              dielectric constant, thermal expansion  and thermal conductivity of the dense
              composites.    The present approach  offers a novel method to process dual
              phase  composites with a contiguous microstructure and can be easily  extended
              to process other glass- ceramic, ceramic-ceramic or metal-  ceramic composites
              for electronic and structural application.  ***
