Title       : Dissertation Research: Alternative Prehistoric Economies of the Central
               Moluccas, Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9309874

Award Number: 9309874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8377               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ken J. Stark  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. P. Bion Griffin, Mr. Ken Stark will                 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Preliminary survey has             
              revealed the presence of rich archaeological sites in the Molucca              
              Islands of Indonesia. While it is likely that this area was first              
              inhabited by humans at least 40,000 years ago, very little is known            
              of the prehistory of this region. Mr. Stark and colleagues will                
              carry out a three stage field project. First they will return to               
              two known rockshelter sites, one in a humid coastal the other in a             
              drier inland environment. Test excavations will be conducted to                
              characterize site stratigraphy and depth, to collect faunal                    
              botanical, lithic and ceramic materials as well as materials                   
              suitable for radiocarbon dating. In the second stage of the                    
              research intensive areal survey will be carried out to locate other            
              sites. Finally large-scale excavation will be conducted in the most            
              promising localities to enlarge sample size and to provide                     
              additional information on human activities and how they changed                
              over time.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists are extremely interested in early human adaptation              
              to tropical rainforest environments. Although it has appeared, on              
              the basis of ethnographic evidence, that hunters and gatherers                 
              successfully adapted to such regions, recent studies have thrown               
              doubt on this conclusion. Some anthropologists have argued that                
              rainforests are carbohydrate poor and that what at first appear to             
              be ancient ways of life recently changed by contact with                       
              agriculturalists, are not so. Rather a "pure" hunting and gathering            
              lifestyle in such environments is impossible; it also is recent and            
              dependent on nutritional input from domestic plants. The Moluccas              
              provide an excellent site to examine this issue since it is likely             
              that hunters and gatherers lived on the island by ca. 40,000 years             
              ago and that the introduction of agriculture dates back only                   
              several thousand years. Mr. Stark's research will address this                 
              question. Assuming that evidence of early habitation is found, the             
              research should shed light on the specific subsistence adaptations             
              which were employed and examine how they changed over time. It will            
              also examine how introduced domestic crops affected the traditional            
              pattern.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              archaeological knowledge in a relatively unknown part of the world.            
              It will shed new light on how humans adapt, at a simple level of               
              technology, to tropical environments and it will contribute to the             
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
