Title       : Studies in the Dynamics of Representation and Campaign Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9309825

Award Number: 9309825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Romer romer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309825  Romer    For nearly two decades, scholars have worked to explain the
              pattern  of campaign contributions by political action committees (PACs) in 
              U.S. congressional elections.  Earlier studies in this field tended  to focus
              on the effects of candidates' party affiliations,  incumbency status, and
              competitiveness on the allocation of PAC  contributions.  More recent studies
              have gone on to study the  relative importance of more detailed characteristics
              of  congressmen, especially their committee and subcommittee  assignments,
              party and committee leadership positions, seniority,  and roll-call voting
              records.  A primary goal of the latter group  of studies has been to determine
              the extent to which various PACs  contribute disproportionately to members and
              chairmen of the  committees and subcommittees whose policy jurisdictions are of
              most  concern to the PACs.    Overall, the findings regarding PAC-committee
              relationships are  mixed.  One likely reason for these mixed results is the
              inherent  difficulty in guessing which PACs should be attracted to which 
              committees.  In studies to date, the researcher postulates a priori  the
              committes that are "relevant" to a particular PAC or set of  PACs.  In most
              cases, however, the choices are not so obvious, and  the researcher is forced
              to make subjective judgments.    In this research investigation, the
              researchers avoid making  specific assumptions about which committees are
              relevant to  different PACs or types of PACs, by taking a dynamic view of the 
              problem.  They examine the effects of changes in representative's  committee
              and leadership assignments on changes in the pattern of  PAC contributions
              received by the representative.  The underlying  assumption is that if PACs
              tend to favor certain committees, then  a representative who switches
              committees, or who moves into a  leadership position on a committee, will tend
              to see more changes  in the pattern of his contributions than a representative
              who does  not change committee positions.    A  further advantage of the
              dynamic approach is that the researchers  can distinguish between "adding" and
              "dropping" PACs.  If it is  important for PACs to develop and maintain
              long-term relationships  with representatives to achieve their goals, then
              there may be a  tendency for PACs not to "abandon" representatives to whom they
               have contributed in the past, even representatives who move off the 
              committees that the PACs consider to be most relevant.    The research
              investigation covers campaign contributions to races  for seats to the U.S.
              House of Representatives, for the election  cycles of 1979/80 through 1987/88. 
              ***
