Title       : Research Initiation Award: Development of Diamond Growth Techniques Using
               Oxyacetylene Combustion Flame Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9309669

Award Number: 9309669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bi Zhang zhang@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9309669  Zhang       This research concerns development of diamond growth 
              techniques in which the oxyacetylene combustion synthesis method  is employed. 
              The project involves design and construction of a  diamond growth apparatus
              consisting of an oxyacetylene welding  torch, fitted with a brazing or cutting
              nozzle, two mass flow  controllers and a mass flow programmer, etc., and growth
              of diamond  films on a variety of cutting tool materials.  The ultimate goal 
              is to apply the research findings to an industrial situation,  namely to
              produce viable, inexpensive techniques of diamond coating  on various cutting
              tools for manufacturing applications.       Currently, the mechanisms for
              nucleation of the diamond phase  and for adherent bonding of diamond film to
              the substrate are not  will understood, making the application of this
              technology very  limited.  The research will investigate the nucleation
              mechanisms  of diamond phase involved in the diamond growth processes.  The 
              investigation will include pretreatment of substrate surfaces in  various
              conditions, detection of dangling bond densities on the  pre-treated substrate
              using the electron paramagnetic resonance  (EPR) technique, and analysis of the
              precursor gas within and  beyond stagnation zone of the acetylene flame using
              the residual  gas analysis technique.  Nucleation mechanisms of diamond phase 
              will be researched by incorporating studies of chemical species of  precursor
              gas and dangling bond densities  of the substrate.   Parametric studies will be
              towards enhancing nucleation density of  diamond phase and improving quality of
              diamond films.  The  researcher will seek to develop a fundamental
              understanding   of  these mechanisms which will facilitate the application of 
              oxyacetylene combustion synthesis of diamond films to industrial  applications.
