Title       : RIA: Scalable Technologies for Highly Parallel Database Management System
               Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9309609

Award Number: 9309609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Y. T. Chien                             
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kien A. Hua kienhua@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              RIA:  Scalable Technologies for Highly Parallel Database                       
              Management System Implementation                                               
                                                                                             
              The Federal HPCC Initiative calls for the development of scalable              
              parallel computing systems capable of sustaining trillions of                  
              operations per second on very large datasets.  In meeting this                 
              challenge, analytic and experimental investigations of scalable                
              parallel processing techniques required for data management                    
              systems have been identified as critical needs for many grand                  
              challenge studies.  This research is aimed at studying these                   
              issues, in particular, to investigate scalable storage structures              
              and efficient query processing techniques.  The work involves                  
              both theoretical analysis and system implementation.  The                      
              expected results of this project include: (1) a multidimensional               
              distributed file structure that facilitates an efficient                       
              environment for handling very large data sets; (2) an efficient                
              join strategy with dynamic load balancing capabilities for the                 
              multidimensional data declustering environment; and (3) an                     
              effective query optimization technique that takes the costs of                 
              load balancing into consideration.  Products of this                           
              investigation include an advanced query optimizer that serves                  
              both as a vehicle for feasibility demonstrations, and a platform               
              for future database machine development.  The significance of                  
              this research is in advancing the scalable software technologies               
              required for the implementation of large parallel database                     
              systems.  The results will have an impact on providing efficient               
              solutions to the grand challenge problems.
