Title       : Serotonin and Development of the Superior Colliculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9309597

Award Number: 9309597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Mooney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nae J. Dun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Rhoades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3000 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436142598    419/381-4172

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309597  Mooney    Molecules that transfer information between nerve cells in
              the mature brain are called neurotransmitters.  They may also influence the
              development of connections between nerve cells.  One neurotransmitter that may
              have such dual functions is serotonin.  Preliminary experiments have shown that
              increasing serotonin in the superior colliculus, a part of the brain involved
              in vision and attention, stops the normal maturation of the projections from
              the eye to this structure.  In contrast, reducing serotonin during development
              appears to lead to an abnormally well-focused projection from the eye to the
              superior colliculus.  The proposed research will determine the mechanism(s)
              underlying these phenomena.  The hypothesis guiding this work is that serotonin
              influences development by altering levels of nerve cell activity in the young
              brain.  It is already known that reducing activity impedes normal maturation of
              connections between nerve cells, and high levels of serotonin may actually
              block communication between such cells in the eye and those in the superior
              colliculus.  Conversely, reduced serotonin levels increase communication
              between the eye and the brain and enhance normal developmental processes. 
              Whether or not these proposals are correct will be determined by: 1) testing
              whether or not serotonin affects communication between the eye and the
              developing superior colliculus; 2) providing a complete description of the
              effects of altered serotonin levels on the pattern of  connections between the
              eye and the brain; 3) asking whether there are effects of serotonin on the
              development of nerve cell connec tions whose activity is not influenced by this
              neurotransmitter; 4) determining whether the enhanced focusing of  nerve cell
              connections that occurs when serotonin levels are reduced still occurs when all
              activity is blocked by a nonspecific agent, tetrodotoxin.  ***                 
                                                                                             
                                                   9309597  Mooney    Molecules that transfer
              information between nerve cells in the mature brain are called
              neurotransmitters.  Th                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           !         !       
               !              F                             }             }                  
                            (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial       {   {         {    
                    "             h     _      E   E  &       w         A    mooney   
              William Proctor, IBN William Proctor, IBN                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
