Title       : The Contracting Approach to the Design of Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1993   
File        : a9309518

Award Number: 9309518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Walsh walshc@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309518  Walsh    This project will explore insights that the principal-agent 
              perspective can shed on the institutional design of monetary policy  and
              central banks.  Recent work suggests that important new  insights can be gained
              from this approach.  The contracting  approach shows that problems of private
              information and the trade-  off between inflation bias reduction and optimal
              stabilization may  be solved by simple contracts that act to affect the
              incentives  faced by the central bank.  Perhaps most interestingly, these 
              contracts look like targeting rules in which the central bank is  penalized (or
              rewarded) on the basis of deviations around a target  inflation rate or money
              growth rate.  Since the targets depend on  central bank announcements about its
              private information, these  contracts are targeting rules with reporting
              requirements.  As  such, they bear a resemblance to the institutional structure
              of  monetary policy in some countries.    The research will extend the
              contracting approach to more closely  study its implications for choosing among
              various performance  measures for monetary policy defined over policy
              instruments (e.g.,  the monetary base), intermediate targets (e.g., the growth
              rate of  a monetary aggregate) or final targets (e.g., the rate of  inflation).
               The role of imperfect information on the central bank  type will be examined
              to see how performance contracts might help  to reveal information.  In
              addition to addressing many other  theoretical issues suggested by the
              contracting approach, the  project will examine the empirical evidence on
              central bank design  to determine the extent to which the empirical
              implications of the  contracting approach might be reflected in the actual
              institutional  structure of central banks.    Recent work in monetary economics
              has suggested the importance of  designing institutional structures that grant
              a large degree of  independence to the central bank.  This work has had an
              impact on  the proposed design of a European Central  Bank.  No existing 
              central banks have been granted complete independence.  If greater 
              independence leads to low inflation but undesired fluctuations in  real
              economic activity, it is important to examine other approaches  that might lead
              to new insights that could be applied to the  problem of designing monetary
              policy institutions.    ***
