Title       : Research Initiation Award: System Reduction Strategies for Efficient Design
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9309706

Award Number: 9309706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina L. Bloebaum clb@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The CE design approach requires the interaction of all                    
              engineering, production, and manufacturing groups simultaneously               
              so as to reduce cost and bring higher quality products to market               
              faster.  One dilemma that makes CE difficult to practically                    
              implement in an industrial setting is the excessive computational              
              requirements due to the inordinate number of participating groups.             
              The number of 'communication paths' amongst these groups (which can            
              be considered as 'couplings') is so large that formal optimization             
              methods are impossible to apply.  Sensitivity-based strategies that            
              reduce the number of required communication paths amongst                      
              participating design groups, without sacrificing solution accuracy,            
              are researched.  These strategies are augmented by AI techniques               
              to allow for human interface capabilities.  A redesign of the                  
              design process itself is so as to facilitate concurrent engineering            
              implementation.  Some of the research issues addressed  include:               
              quantification of coupling strengths between subsystems,                       
              identification of candidate couplings for suspension or                        
              elimination, and optimal convergence schemes. United States                    
              automotive, aerospace, computer and electronics industries, among              
              others, have been forced to respond to competitive pressures that              
              have resulted in crippling losses of market share due to extensive             
              product development times and inordinate costs.  These industries              
              have recognized the necessity of adopting the Concurrent                       
              Engineering (CE) design approach in order to create higher quality             
              products that can be brought to market for significantly lower cost            
              and time.                                                                      
                   The objective of this research is to develop AI-augmented                 
              strategies for increasing the efficiency of the design process for             
              large scale, complex engineering systems, such as are encountered              
              in Concurrent Engineering (CE) applications.  Complex engineering              
              systems are characterized by inherent couplings amongst the                    
              participating design groups, which makes traditional design and                
              optimization approaches impractical.
