Title       : Cement Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9309528

Award Number: 9309528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Brown etx@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9309528  Brown    Evidence continues to emerge that cements over a time-frame of
               years to produce compounds compositionally distinct from those  which form
              during initial hardening.  These reactions have two  effects on the ability of
              cement-based systems to immobilize  hazardous wastes.  First, the capacities of
              the secondary  compounds to bind hazardous materials are likely to be different
               from those of the primary compounds. Second, formation of  secondary compounds
              often result in cracking and disruption of  monolithic forms.  Cracking results
              in an increase in the  surface area of a monolith and may heighten the
              susceptibility  to leaching.    Three chemical processes are of particular
              importance in this  regard.  These are carbonation, the alkali-silica reaction
              and  sulfate attack.  Carbonation results from interaction of the  hydration
              products of cement with atmospheric CO2 or bicarbonate  in water.  This results
              in the depression of pH.  If the  sequestration of a heavy metal or an oxyanion
              is pH-dependent,  increased solubility may occur.  However, the occurrence of
              the  phenomena depends on the exposure of the mass to carbonate and  the
              effects carbonation seem to have been ignored because, it is  regarded as a
              surface phenomenon.  The alkali-silica reaction in  concrete is conventionally
              associated with the reaction between  siliceous aggregate and the alkalis in
              cement.  However, the  reaction resulting in the conversion of the calcium
              silicate  hydrate binder phase to a calcium-alkali silicate gel is 
              thermodynamically favorable regardless of the presence of  aggregate.  Sulfate
              attack occurs when hydrated calcium silicate  hydrate binder phase to a
              calcium-alkali silicate gel is  thermodynamically favorable regardless of the
              presence of  aggregate.  Sulfate attack occurs when hydrated calcium 
              aluminates react with sulfate to form a compound similar to the  natural
              mineral ettringite.  Both alkali-silica reaction and  sulfate attack form
              expansive products which eventually dest roy  the structural integrity of a
              monolith.  As a result of the  cracks formed, a significant increase in the
              effective surface  area available for carbonation occurs.  Thus, the synergy 
              between various chemical reactions can result in the premature  liberation of
              incorporated hazardous species.    Although the alkali-silica reaction is
              recognized as a major  cause of deterioration in structures, the conditions
              under which  this deleterious reaction occurs are not well defined.  Based on 
              the generally accepted view of the sequence of reactions which  lead to
              strength development in cement, sulfate attack should  not occur  in the
              absence of sulfate from an external source.   However, internal sulfate attack
              is now being observed as well.   The mechanism causing this does not seem to be
              understood.  It  is not generally recognized that onset of internal sulfate 
              attack is linked synergistically with the alkali-silica  reaction.  Both
              reactions are able to occur in the absence of  exposure to external sources of
              ions.    This research program will establish the stability ranges of the 
              compounds slowly formed in portland cement-based systems which  are likely to
              compromise the integrity of waste forms.  These  include the alkali-silica
              reaction, sulfate attack, and  carbonation.  Because these are chemical
              processes, the  progression  of these reactions exhibit compositional 
              dependencies.  The products of these reactions are ettringite,  calcium
              substituted potassium silicate hydrate and various  carbonates.  The conditions
              favoring the formation of these  compounds will be established as functions of
              composition and  temperature.  This is a necessary step in the eventual 
              determination of the effects of hazardous materials on the long-  term
              stabilities of cements.  Establishment of the stability  ranges for these
              compounds in turn provide the link between  conditions required for their
              formation and the bulk  compositions of cement.  Therefore, limiting these
              deleterious  reactions, can, pot entially, be accomplished by controlling the 
              compositions of the cement used when specifying a waste form.   Pragmatically,
              this will make it possible to develop a rational,  prescriptive basis to
              facilitate the long-term performance of  cement-based systems used in waste
              disposal.  ***
