Title       : Explaining Political Transitions in Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9309215

Award Number: 9309215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Bratton mbratton@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicolas Van de Walle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This investigation compares and analyzes recent and ongoing regime             
              transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Between November, 1989, and the            
              end of 1992, over two-thirds of Africa's governments responded to              
              the demands of protesters for greater pluralism and competition                
              within the polity.  For the first time in a generation, incumbent              
              leaders released political prisoners, tolerated the emergence of               
              independent newspapers, and permitted the formation of opposition              
              political parties.  By the end of 1992, multiparty elections had               
              been held in fourteen African countries and were scheduled for 1993            
              in a dozen more.  A peaceful democratic transition, with an                    
              electoral transfer of power to a new government, occurred in Zambia            
              and Benin, among other countries.                                              
              Yet Africa's regime transitions have not attracted the same                    
              scholarly and media attention as the democratization processes in              
              Eastern Europe or Latin America.  As a result, they are neither yet            
              fully documented nor well understood.  This project will explain               
              the trajectory and outcomes of political transitions in Africa,                
              especially whether they conclude in a free and fair election whose             
              results are accepted by all contending parties.  The research asks:            
              why do some regimes undergo political reform while others do not?              
              Have political transitions followed a similar pattern or are there             
              major divergences in trajectories and outcomes?  Which sort of                 
              regimes are likely to make a peaceful transition to democracy and              
              which are subject to disruption and reversal?  To what extent are              
              political transitions in Africa similar or different to those in               
              other parts of the world?  How can any such differences be                     
              explained?  What are the long term prospects for democracy in                  
              Africa?                                                                        
              To address these questions, the investigators compile and                      
              disseminate a cross-national computerized database of transition               
              events, regime characteristics, and political resources for the                
              forty seven countries of sub-Saharan Africa for the period 1989-               
              1994.  When completed, this database will provide a uniquely                   
              comprehensive and easily accessible source of information on the               
              political events surrounding each transition.  The completed                   
              database will be made available to decision makers and scholars to             
              let them use the database to compare and contrast the different                
              national experiences and thereby increase our understanding of                 
              political transitions.                                                         
              In addition, the researchers analyze facts from the database to                
              develop and test a theory of transitions in Africa.  Most                      
              contemporary research on democratization has focused either on the             
              highly contingent interaction of political actors or on deep                   
              socioeconomic variables.  The project starts from the premise that             
              political transitions can be most profitably explained with                    
              reference to the proximate structure of political institutions                 
              which delimits the opportunities and capacities of actors to shape             
              events in everyday politics.  This research analyzes the prospects             
              and problems of political transition in sub-Saharan Africa in terms            
              of these political-institutional variables.
