Title       : RIA: Developing Reflexes for Robots: Recovery from Mechanical Errors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9309189

Award Number: 9309189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Hodgins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,6840,9264,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309189  Hodgins  This is the first year of a three-year continuing award. 
              Humans  are excellent at recovering from physical failures:  we can often 
              catch ourselves when we slip on ice, trip over an electric cord, or  miss a
              step.  We can sometimes catch a dropped object and prevent  it from breaking. 
              We are not always successful in recovering from  errors but present-day robots
              rarely even attempt such behavior.   An ability to recover from errors would
              allow robots to operate  more robustly in unpredictable and unstructured
              environments.  This  research aims to provide robots with a few simple
              reflexes: a  tripping reflex that will allow a legged robot to recover from a 
              stumble, a slipping reflex that will allow it to cross a slippery  floor
              without falling, and a catching reflex that will allow it to  interrupt the
              fall of a dropped object and prevent it from  breaking.  The reflexes will be
              designed and tested in simulation  and on experimental hardware.  Reflex
              responses are unlike most  robot control algorithms because of the time
              constraints of a  rapidly evolving dynamic system and because of the need to
              respond  to discontinuous events.  These properties make this an ideal  domain
              for exploring questions of parameterization and choice of  strategies for
              control.  This work will help to provide a  scientific foundation upon which
              useful transportation and  manipulation systems for unstructured environments
              may be  constructed, and perhaps to explain some behaviors observed in 
              biological systems.
