Title       : Gender and Industrial Restructuring: An Analysis of Women's Home-Based Work
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9309275

Award Number: 9309275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74607              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Oberhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309275  OBERHAUSER       In areas like the Appalachian states where
              manufacturing and  mining employment has declined in recent decades, households
              have  placed greater reliance on women to generate income.  Increasing  numbers
              of women have become active members of the workforce,  although many continue
              to engage in income-generating activities  like telephone solicitation, child
              care, computer-related work,  and housecleaning while based at their homes. 
              Because of the  informal character of women's housework, relatively little 
              attention has been devoted by scholars to its nature and its role  in both
              social and economic spheres.  This research project will  constitute a case
              study of household economic strategies during  economic restructuring over the
              last few decades by examining the  nature and role of women's housework in
              three economically  diverse regions of West Virginia.  The study will consist
              of two  related parts.  In the first part, aggregate data on socio-  economic
              variables like employment, labor-force participation,  household composition,
              and income will be gathered and analyzed  to identify general trends and to
              distinguish among patterns in  the different regions.  In the second part of
              the project, 75  women houseworkers will be interviewed at length to provide 
              information about gender relations in the household and women's  home-based
              economic strategies.       This project will provide valuable new information
              about  this understudied form of work, and it will expand general 
              understandings of the complex interactions between social and  economic
              requirements and the ways that women simultaneously  respond to both sets of
              requirements.  In addition to its  contributions to basic knowledge, the
              results of this project  will benefit regional development efforts and
              community  development programs by making them more aware of the potentials 
              for and needs of women working at home.  ***
