Title       : Inference About Predictive Accuracy; Exchange Rate Volatility: Inventory Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9309927

Award Number: 9309927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. West kdwest@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9309927  West    Data-mining or over-fitting, perhaps as a result of
              repeated  profession-wide use of a limited body of data, leads at times to 
              spuriously good in sample fits.  Some economists have argued that  out of
              sample predictive accuracy is the critical measure of  model quality. 
              Unfortunately most empirical work in economics  relies mainly on in-sample
              evidence.  Many of the out of sample  tests of predictions and predictive
              accuracy are informal and  qualitative in part because applied researchers find
              procedures  developed to date inadequate.  Procedures that have worked well  in
              sample also do not appear to work well out of sample.  One  contribution of
              this project comes from developing new procedures  for econometric inference
              about out of sample predictions and  prediction errors general enough to be
              useful in a wide range of  applications, including eventually models of the
              socioeconomic  impacts of global environmental change.  An earlier study found 
              that complicated models of exchange rates with good in-sample fit  do no better
              than a random walk model in out of sample  predictions.  This project uses
              these procedures to study the  predictive ability of competing models of
              exchange rate  volatility and develops alternative models, including one that 
              links exchange rates to interest rates.     The final area of research for this
              project is on empirical  inventory models.  In one part of the research,
              asymptotic theory  and simulation methods will be used to evaluate alternative 
              methods for estimating inventory models.  Issues include  sensitivity to
              normalization, finite sample behavior of efficient  GMM estimators, and the
              tradeoff between what has been called  "exogeneity" and "relevance" in choice
              of instruments.  The  results will be relevant in estimation of not just
              inventory but  other time series models as well.  In a second part, inventory 
              models will be estimated on two digit U.S., U.K., Canadian and  Japanese data,
              using the results of the first part.  Questi ons to  be studied include
              convexity of cost functions, dynamic responses  to shocks, and the importance
              of idiosyncratic versus aggregate  shocks.
