Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Building for Linear and Non- linear Mixed Effects
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9309101

Award Number: 9309101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69929              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Bates bates@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mixed effects models are used with data where several  observations are made on
              each of several different subjects and  the observations are assumed to be
              generated by a model function.   Some of the parameters in the model function
              are assumed to be  common to all subjects (fixed effects) and some vary between
               subjects (random effects).  The purpose of the analysis is to  estimate the
              fixed effects and characterize the distribution of  the random effects. Linear
              mixed effects models, in which all the  parameters occur linearly in the model
              function, provide an  explicit objective function to define maximum likelihood
              or  restricted maximum likelihood estimates.  We will investigate  properties
              of these estimates including the asymptotic  uncorrelation of the fixed effects
              and the variance-covariance of  the random effects.  This work includes
              determining effective  parameterizations of the variance-covariance of the
              random  effects.  Using this we can assess the effectiveness of the  two-stage
              algorithm for nonlinear mixed effects models proposed  by Lindstrom and Bates. 
              The type of mathematical modelling which statisticians call  "mixed effects"
              has been widely applied in pharmacokinetics, the  study of the rate at which
              the body absorbs and eliminates drugs.   This statistical tool allows, a
              pharmacologist to build a  mathematical model of the pharmacokinetics of a drug
              in the  "average" person, then update that model with a few concentration 
              measurements on a particular person.  In this way, we augment  limited
              information on the individual with general information  about the population to
              establish more accurate dosage schedules.   This saves both time and money.  We
              will be developing  statistical techniques to make the development of mixed
              effects  models easier and more accurate.
