Title       : Dynamic Pricing and Allocation Models for Revenue Management in the Airline and
               Retail Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9309394

Award Number: 9309394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89427              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Gallego ggallego@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garrett van Ryzin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9149,
Abstract    :
              9309394  Gallego  Many important U.S. industries incur high fixed costs to
              provide  goods or services. These include the transportation (airlines,  cruise
              ships), lodging (hotels, resorts), fashion, and seasonal  manufacturing and
              retailing industries. Because of long lead times  capacity can be considered
              fixed, at least in the short run, and  its cost sunk. The relatively low
              marginal costs of providing goods  or services within capacity makes revenue
              maximization a main  concern for these industries. Effective temporal pricing
              and  allocation decisions can significantly increase revenues in these 
              industries and hence strengthen their competitive positions. At  present there
              is a wealth of reservation and point-of-sale data  which can be used to make
              temporal pricing and allocation  decisions. The goal of this research is to
              develop theoretical and  practical temporal pricing and allocation methods that
              take full  advantage of these data.  This research develops modeling 
              techniques and algorithms that capture realistic and complex  multiple product
              problems.  The framework will ultimately be  capable of handling extremely
              complicated problems such as pricing  and allocating the capacity of an entire
              airline carrier network  over multiple markets.  Also planned is a study of
              joint pricing,  allocation, and demand estimation, an essential building block
              for  the future implementation of the research. Toward this end, an  initial
              program of empirical studies in conjunction with a major  fashion retailer is
              also proposed to secure financial and in-kind  support from both the retail and
              airline industry for continued  funding of the research.  ***
