Title       : Research Initiation Award: Task-Level Programming for Manipulation of Multiple
               Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9309207

Award Number: 9309207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Cheng hhcheng@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The task-level robot programming with computations of language            
              processing, kinematics, dynamics, path planning, control, collision            
              avoidance, and sensory fusion for multiple robot manipulators will             
              be achieved in real time via coarse-grain vectorization and                    
              parallelization using an industrial standard VMEbus-based                      
              distributed computing system consisting of multiple scalar and                 
              vector processors.  This computer system is assembled with off-                
              the-shelf commercial VME boards.  The results of the project can,              
              therefore, be easily transferred for practical industrial                      
              applications and should thus make a meaningful and significant                 
              contribution towards the development of task-level multi-robot                 
              manipulation systems.  Since the programming environment is C/Unix             
              compatible, the robot programming can draw on the large existing               
              body of skilled C programmers and Unix users.                                  
                   This research investigates task-level programming for                     
              manipulation of multiple robots, and studies its underlying                    
              principles and algorithms for force and motion coordinations,                  
              collision detection and collision avoidance, and sensor fusion.                
              The research developes a theory for sensor-based multi-robot                   
              manipulation and force coordination with extensive information                 
              sharing among different robots, algorithms for collision detection             
              and collision avoidance of moving objects, and techniques for force            
              and vision sensor integration with robot motions.  A set of                    
              standard task-level functions are developed.  Through these task-              
              level functions, a complicated robot task can be conveniently                  
              accomplished.  The theory, algorithms, and task-level robot                    
              programming are validated through computer simulations as well as              
              physical experimentations.
