Title       : Research Initiation Award: Compilation of Data-Parallel Programs for Scalable
               Shared-Address Space Multiprocessors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9309054

Award Number: 9309054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50811              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Hudak hudak@onu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Northern University
	      525 Main Street
	      Ada, OH  45810    419/772-2000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,9264,
Abstract    :
              9309054  Hudak  Shared-address distributed-memory massively parallel  processing
              (MPP) system offer the simplicity of a single  address space while maintaining
              the potential for teraflops  performance.  However, to obtain reasonable
              efficiency on  these systems, the programmer or compiler must specify and 
              appropriate distribution of work and data among the processors  and the
              physically distributed memories.  This project will  address the problem of
              determining the optimal distributions  for a given parallel application.   
              Ongoing research in compilation for MPP's has yielded a  collection of
              techniques for the specification of work and  data distributions for individual
              data-parallel loops.  This  project will combine those techniques with
              flow-graph  representations of data-parallel programs to generate code  which
              specifics the creation and alteration of work and data  distributions.  The
              distributions will be designed maximum  efficiency across program constructs
              for altering the flow of  control of a program, such as conditional statements
              (e.g., if  statements) and procedure calls.    The research will lead to the
              development of a software system  named DPF+, a new system that will analyze an
              partition data-  parallel programs as well as provide an efficient environment 
              for object-oriented data-parallel programming.  Data parallel  program can be
              built from user-defined objects, with the DFT+  compiler automatically tuning
              each object's procedures for  high performance on an existing shared-address
              spaced  multiprocessor system.  This research will greatly increase  the
              usability of MPPs, the portability of parallel programs  and the performance
              level achieved by users.  ***
