Title       : The Macroeconomic Implications of Adjustment Costs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9309979

Award Number: 9309979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236546             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Leahy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Caplin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9309979  Leahy    Questions concerning the dynamics of aggregate variables
              such as  prices, employment, investment, and consumption represent the  core of
              business cycle analysis.  One striking feature of these  variables is the
              radical difference between properties of these  aggregates and the nature of
              the individual behavior that  underlies them.  The behavior of a firm's prices,
              investment, and  employment, and the behavior of an individual's consumption
              all  involve frictional elements that lead to inertia at the  microeconomic
              level.  Heterogeneity among individuals, however,  tends to smooth the behavior
              of the corresponding aggregates.   Yet, in spite of their apparent continuity,
              these aggregates are  in the end the sum of their parts.  They therefore
              inherit  certain properties from the behavior components.  Renewed funding 
              will continue this research on the precise way in which  microeconomic
              frictions influence aggregates.      Previous work focussed on theoretical
              issues involved with the  introduction of informational considerations into the
              field of  aggregation.  The current project will pursue empirical  approaches
              to aggregation using a unique data set on mortgage  refinancing that is
              particularly well suited to the study of  aggregation.  The project also
              develops new theoretical ideas and  tests the applicability of the theoretical
              research with data  from specific historical episodes such as the Latin
              American debt  crisis of the early 1980's.  The project also develops a model
              of  monetary policy formulation in the presence of adjustment costs  and
              imperfect information.  The model permits rigorous analysis  of the issues
              involved in choosing between a gradualist and a  more aggressive approach to
              monetary policy.  The results will  shed light on the nature of recent U.S.
              monetary policy and have  lessons for a wide range of other policy issues.  ***
