Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models in Microbial Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9105424

Award Number: 9105424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76694              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty M. Tang ATBYT@ASUACAD  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9178,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   In this project research will be focused on differential                  
              equation models studying the effects of spatial heterogeneity and              
              indirect nutrient consumption on microbial growth.  The model                  
              equations for two competing species generate a strongly monotone               
              dynamical system, and steady state coexistence has been shown to               
              be possible.  Using various techniques in nonlinear analysis and               
              numerical simulations, the investigator will study the choice of               
              parameters for coexistence, the effect of microbial mobility on                
              coexistence, and the maximum number of coexisting species.                     
              Research on indirect nutrient consumption will focus on models of              
              both extracellular and intracellular conversion of the nutrient                
              to an intermediate product which is assimilated for growth.  The               
              goal is to compare the efficiency of the different consumption                 
              processes, and to study the possibility of coexistence of species              
              with different mechanisms of nutrient assimilation.                            
                   This project is concerned with the study of mathematical                  
              models of microbial growth and competition in continuous culture,              
              a commonly used laboratory technique in microbiology.                          
              Microorganisms play very important roles in natural ecological                 
              systems, and their activities have numerous industrial                         
              applications, e.g., waste water treatment, production of food,                 
              drugs and various other chemicals, bacterial control, etc.                     
              Competition between different species is an important feature in               
              many ecological systems, and the design of many industrial                     
              processes, e.g., use of biological agents in bacterial control or              
              waste disposal, is based on the competitiveness of different                   
              species.  Experimental study of microbial activities in                        
              laboratory environments are especially amenable to mathe matical               
              modeling by differential equations.  Analysis of the model                     
              equations gives better understanding of the underlying principles              
              of microbial behaviors, and often leads to new experimental                    
              designs.
