Title       : Regulation of Cell Division Cycles by Circadian Oscillators:Role of the cAMP
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9105752

Award Number: 9105752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leland N. Edmunds ledmunds@ccmail.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Among other mechanisms that have been proposed to control microbial            
              cell division cycles, autonomous biological oscillators provide a              
              possible means of integrating the disparate concepts of cell cycle,            
              exit, and transit.  The proposed research will be concerned with               
              the means by which this coupling between oscillator and cell                   
              division cycle is effected.  Cyclic AMP, which exhibits bimodal                
              circadian rhythmicity in the algal flagellate Euglena gracilis, and            
              which is known to have the capacity to control certain rate-                   
              limiting steps in the progression of the cell division cycle in                
              many cell types, may play such a coupling role, participating in               
              the gating of cell division cycle events to specific phases of the             
              circadian cycle.  Two problems will be addressed:  First, how the              
              clock confers rhythmicity upon the adenyl cyclase/cAMP-                        
              phosphodiesterase system, and second, how the adenyl cyclase/cAMP-             
              phosphodiesterase interacts with and modulates the cell division               
              cycle.  The regulation of the level and rhythmicity of cAMP by                 
              adenyl cyclase, phosphodiesterase, and other second messengers                 
              (such as cGMP and calcium) will be studied in synchronously                    
              dividing and nondividing cultures of the achlorophyllous ZC mutant             
              of Euglena, maintained in constant darkness, by examining the                  
              ability of pulses of various drugs and chemicals that are known to             
              activate or inhibit these biochemical species to phase-shift the               
              rhythms of cAMP level, adenyl cyclase and phosphodiesterase                    
              activities, and cell division.  The cellular receptor for cAMP,                
              which preliminary results suggest is a cAMP-dependent kinase, will             
              be characterized, and a correlation between kinase stimulation and             
              effects of cAMP or cAMP analogs on the cell division cycle will be             
              sought.  Finally, a Euglena homolog of p34 (the cdc 2 protein-                 
              kinase gene product of fission yeast) will be sought, and if it is             
              identified, its histone H1 kinase activity will be measured at                 
              different phases of the cell division cycle in synchronous cultures            
              perturbed by a cAMP pulse.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Circadian rhythms have been documented in organisms ranging from               
              unicellular eukaryotes to higher plants and animals and concern                
              activities as varied as leaf movements in plants, locomotor                    
              activity in insects and mammals, and photosynthesis in unicellular             
              algae.  The cell division cycle of many algae, fungi, and protozoa             
              also exhibit circadian rhythms; cell division occurs only during               
              restricted intervals of the circadian cycle, often at the times                
              corresponding to the dark intervals in a diurnal light-dark cycle.             
              This phenomenon is thought to reflect an interaction between the               
              circadian clock and the cell cycle oscillator.  The long range goal            
              of this research is to determine the nature of the circadian                   
              clock(s) presumed to couple to the cell division cycle and to                  
              generate periodicity of division, as well as to underlie circadian             
              rhythmicity in general.
