Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1991      
File        : a9105865

Award Number: 9105865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Roger Byrne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Mensing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The failure of many forms of vegetation to regenerate                     
              results both from human-induced environmental change processes                 
              and natural processes.  Moreover, both types of impacts may be                 
              constrained within the normal dynamics of certain species.  In                 
              the case of long-lived species that are capable of cyclic                      
              regeneration patterns, it is necessary to conduct historical                   
              biogeographical studies in order to interpret their regeneration               
              status.  Absence of seedlings and saplings in California oak                   
              woodlands indicates that the present rate of oak regeneration is               
              insufficient to maintain existing stands.  Evidence suggests that              
              the failure to regenerate is a result of human-induced                         
              environmental change associated with European settlement.  This                
              doctoral dissertation project will reconstruct the history of oak              
              woodlands in California over the last 500 years.  Fossil pollen                
              analyses and an automated image analysis system to quantify                    
              changes in charcoal abundance will be used to assess the impact                
              of European settlement on oak regeneration and fire frequency.                 
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide a history of vegetation change                  
              essential to understanding changes in regeneration over time and               
              to evaluating the extent to which the current failure of                       
              California oaks to regenerate is caused by human-induced change.               
              This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a                  
              promising young scholar to continue to develop independent                     
              research skills.
