Title       : Characterization of the Endogenous Opioid and its Receptor in Tetrahymena: A
               Model System for the Evolution of ChemicalSignaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9105024

Award Number: 9105024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando L. Renaud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      P.O. Box 21926
	      San Juan, PR  009311926    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,1228,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term goal of this project is to elucidate the nature of               
              the signal transduction mechanisms in the protozoan ciliate                    
              Tetrahymena.  This is an important question from the point of view             
              of evolution because it seems likely that the mechanisms of signal             
              transduction in metazoa originated from autocrine and paracrine                
              mechanisms in unicellular eukaryotes.  There is evidence that                  
              opioid mechanisms may play an important role in the modulation of              
              phagocytosis in the protozoan ciliate Tetrahymena.  In particular,             
              a beta-endorphin-like peptide has been reported in this organism,              
              and mammalian beta-endorphin inhibits phagocytosis in these cells              
              with a high potency and efficacy.  The proposed research will                  
              characterize two important elements of the opioid mechanism in this            
              organism, the endogenous opioid and the receptor.  This laboratory             
              has confirmed by means of a radioimmunoassay the presence of a                 
              beta-endorphin-like peptide in Tetrahymena.  The next goals are to             
              establish the optimal conditions for the maximal expression of the             
              peptide by studying how different factors, both environmental and              
              biochemical, modulate the level of the peptide in the cell and in              
              the culture medium, and then to purify the peptide from cell                   
              extracts.  The effect of the purified peptide on phagocytosis in               
              Tetrahymena and in metazoan models will be compared to that of                 
              mammalian beta-endorphin.  The primary sequence of the purified                
              peptide will be studied to determine its degree of homology with               
              mammalian beta-endorphin or with other peptides that have been                 
              reported to have opioid-like activities.  Studies on the putative              
              beta-endorphin gene in tetrahymena will also be initiated, using               
              standard recombinant DNA techniques.  This will be done by probing             
              a cDNA library with either a pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) probe or              
              an oligonucleotide probe based on the amino acid sequence.  This               
              will determine whether the putative beta-endorphin gene in                     
              Tetrahymena is coded independently or is part of a POMC gene, as               
              in vertebrates.  Studies of the opioid receptor will also be                   
              initiated to establish whether there is a correlation between the              
              potency of opioid agonists and antagonists on phagocytosis, and                
              their potency in radioligand displacement assays in membrane                   
              fractions.  This work will also give information about the degree              
              of opioid receptor microheterogeneity in Tetrahymena.  In addition,            
              studies will be done to determine how the properties of the                    
              receptor, including desensitization, are affected by changes in the            
              ionic environment and by G-proteins.  This will be done to compare             
              the characteristics of the opioid receptor in Tetrahymena with                 
              other described subtypes.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will contribute to our understanding              
              of the origins and mechanisms of chemical signaling.  In                       
              particular, it will provide new information on the phylogenetic                
              origin of beta-endorphin-like peptides and opioid receptors.  These            
              studies of the mechanisms by which such peptide mediators affect               
              a ciliated protozoan may also shed new light on their mechanisms               
              of action on the cells of higher animals.
