Title       : Anemone Mechanoreceptor Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1993      
File        : a9105058

Award Number: 9105058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen M. Watson gmw5722@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The discharge of nematocysts on sea anemone tentacles is                    
              regulated by vibration-sensitive mechanoreceptors (VSMs).  These               
              VSMs have the useful attribute of being tuned to lower frequencies             
              by chemoreceptors for N-acetylated sugars, and to higher                       
              frequencies by chemoreceptors for amino compounds.  Thus, frequency            
              responsiveness can be modulated upward or downward depending on the            
              presence of different chemical agonists.  Furthermore, the                     
              morphology of the VSMs is significantly affected by the agonists.              
              Exposure to N-acetylated sugars induces the VSMs to elongate,                  
              whereas exposure to amino compounds induces the VSMs to widen at               
              the base.  Hence, agonist effects on VSM structure can be analyzed             
              in relation to agonist effects on VSM function.  In this project,              
              parallel studies will be conducted in which VSMs are measured, and             
              nematocyst discharge is tested after exposing sea anemeones to                 
              specific chemical agonists.  The resulting data will be used to                
              develop models predicting frequency and amplitude responsiveness               
              according to the morphology of the VSMs.  In addition, the effects             
              of agonists on the ultrastructure of stereocilia comprising the                
              VSMs will be determined.  The proposed research will examine the               
              relationship between structure and function for dynamic VSMs, and              
              open the door for investigations on the molecular basis for VSM                
              tuning.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project addresses a topic of fundamental importance to the                
              survival of primitive animals, in that the research has direct                 
              implications for understanding how sea anemones select and capture             
              prey.  The VSMs on the tentacles of sea anemones are similar in                
              morphology to the VSMs of the acousticolateralis system of                     
              vertebrates, in that in each case the VSMs comprise a bundle of                
              stereocilia.  Because the sea anemone VSMs are induced by                      
              chemoreceptors to alter their shape and responsiveness to                      
              vibrations, they are ideally suited for evaluating structure in                
              relation to function.  Furthermore, the project has relevance to               
              the broader topic of biosensors.
