Title       : Essential Roles of Pro-Sequence in Subtilisin Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9105293

Award Number: 9105293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Masayori Inouye inouye@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are a large number of proteins whose three dimensional                   
              structures have been determined.  However, virtually very                      
              little is known as to how these proteins are folded.  In order                 
              to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of protein folding, the                  
              role of the pro-sequence in the folding of subtilisin E, an                    
              alkaline serine protease produced by Bacillus subtilis has been                
              studied.  This protein is produced from the pre-pro subtilisin                 
              consisting of the pro-sequence (signal peptide) of 21 residues,                
              the pro-sequence of 77 residues, and the mature protease of 275                
              residues.  The pro-sequence is absolutely essential for the                    
              production of enzymatically active subtilisin, and functions as                
              an intramolecular chaperon for protein folding.                                
              This is a novel, unprecedented finding and provides and ideal                  
              and unique system for studying the molecular mechanisms of                     
              protein folding.  In this application the exact role of the                    
              pro-sequence in the folding pathway will be elucidated. It is                  
              of interest to investigate how the pro-sequence interacts with                 
              mature, active subtilisin and pursue biochemical and                           
              biophysical characterization of pro-subtilisin and of pro-                     
              peptides of various sequences and lengths.  By using molecular                 
              genetic approaches as well as synthetic pro-peptides, the site                 
              or regions responsible for refolding denatured subtilisins will                
              be determined.  The goal in this proposal is to elucidate the                  
              precise roles of the pro-peptide in the folding of subtilisin,                 
              which is expected to provide important insight into                            
              understanding of the molecular mechanisms of protein folding.                  
              For this purpose, the following experiments will be performed:                 
              1. Isolation of mutant pro-subtilisins defective in                            
              autoprocessing and their characterization; 2.  Isolation and                   
              characterization of mutations within the pro-peptide defective                 
              in producing active subtilisin; 3.  Isolation of second site                   
              suppressor mutations a new method developed in the laboratory                  
              will be extensively employed using localized PCR random                        
              mutagenesis; 4.  Characterization of folding intermediated                     
              accumulated as a result of mutations; 5.  Production of the                    
              wild-type and mutant pro-peptides by organic synthesis and by                  
              recombinant DNA technology.  Their biochemical an biophysical                  
              characterization and their interaction with mature subtilisin.
