Title       : The Biochemistry of CAD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9105826

Award Number: 9105826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jerry D. Johnson                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey N. Davidson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kuey-Chu Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The first three enzymatic steps in the de novo synthesis of                    
              pyrimidines (carbamyl phosphate synthetase II, aspartate                       
              transcarbamylase, dihydroorotase) are the same in all cells,                   
              whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic.  The structure, organization,               
              and regulation of these three enzymatic activities and their                   
              respective genes vary among species.  In bacteria, each enzyme                 
              activity is associated with a separate protein.  In mammals, they              
              are found together in a single translation product of 240,000                  
              daltons called CAD. By placing portions of hamster CAD cDNA into               
              expression vectors, one can attempt to complement E. coli and                  
              hamster cell mutants defective in each of the three enzyme                     
              activities.  This avenue of experimentation allows one (i) identify            
              the minimum genetic information encoding each domain, (ii) to learn            
              pyrimidine metabolism is affected when specific mutations are                  
              introduced that eliminate allosteric regulation of CAD or alter                
              activity of one of its enzymes and (iii) to gain insight into the              
              roles of the bridging sequences that link the enzymatic domains.               
              Combining the approaches of molecular biology, genetics, and                   
              biochemistry should provide insight about the structure, function              
              and evolution of a multifunctional protein that plays a key role               
              in an important biosynthetic pathway.
