Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9105700

Award Number: 9105700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Borello  (Student current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Theoretical understandings derived from the study of                      
              industrial North Atlantic nations may not be useful when applied               
              to Third World settings.  Argentina is an example of a nation                  
              that has had many of the resources necessary for robust                        
              industrial development in the twentieth century.  Argentina's                  
              development process was thwarted, however, thereby calling into                
              question current knowledge about processes of industrialization                
              and regional development.  This doctoral dissertation project                  
              will examine the development of the capital-goods industries of                
              Mendoza, Argentina.  In-depth interviews with chief executive                  
              officers of capital-goods firms will be conducted to uncover the               
              origins, evolution, and current form of industrial governance                  
              systems.  Information also will be collected about the material,               
              information, and financial linkages among firms and local,                     
              national, and international economies.  These interviews will be               
              validated and complemented by data gathered from existing                      
              manufacturing surveys, public and nongovernmental industrial                   
              sector reports, economic censuses, and information from                        
              interviews with chief executive officers from other firms linked               
              to the capital-goods enterprises in Mendoza province.                          
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide valuable information about and                  
              analyses of processes of industrialization and regional                        
              development in Third World settings.  This project also will                   
              provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to              
              continue to develop independent research skills.
