Title       : RUI: Endoplasmic Reticulum and Protein Secretion in Heat Shocked Plant Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9105888

Award Number: 9105888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Brodl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                 The long-term goal of this research is to understand the cell               
              biology of higher plant responses to environmental stress.  The                
              model system for investigation is the heat shock response of the               
              aleurone layer of barley grains.  The cells of this tissue are                 
              normally dedicated to protein secretion; however, heat shock                   
              dramatically redirects their cellular activities.  The synthesis               
              of secretory proteins is abruptly arrested when the tissue is                  
              subjected to heat shock, yet the synthesis of nonsecretory proteins            
              continues.  This is accomplished by the selective destabilization              
              of otherwise stable secretory protein mRNAs.  Heat shock also                  
              causes the loss of endoplasmic reticulum lamellar structures upon              
              which secretory protein mRNAs are translated; only small fragments             
              of ER remain.  This appears to provide the discriminatory mechanism            
              for selectively stopping the synthesis of secretory proteins, as               
              nonsecretory protein mRNAs are not translated by ER-bound                      
              ribosomes.  The work proposed investigates the molecular and                   
              cellular basis for these heat shock-induced events.  In vitro                  
              translation reactions supplemented with barley microsomes will be              
              used to investigate whether the ER fragments of heat-shocked                   
              aleurone cells can serve as sites for the translation and                      
              translocation of proteins.  The ER lamellae are supported by a                 
              cytoskeleton.  In other organisms, the cytoskeleton has been shown             
              to be unstable during heat shock.  Immunofluorescence microscopy               
              will be used to investigate the effect of heat shock on                        
              cytoskeletal elements of barley aleurone cells.  Heat-induced                  
              shifts in the buoyant densities of ER membranes have been observed;            
              these will be investigated by assaying protein:lipid ratios of                 
              microsomes isolated on sucrose density gradients.  Secretory                   
              protein mRNAs contain secretory signals that direct them to be                 
              translated on ER lamellae.  Aleurone cells transformed with signal             
              sequence - reporter gene constructs will be used to determine of               
              the presence of such a signal is sufficient to render the mRNA                 
              unstable during heat shock.                                                    
                                                                                             
              These experiments should provide insights into the cell biology of             
              ER, as well as reveal mechanisms for regulating protein expression             
              during heat shock.  These efforts will ultimately build a better               
              understanding of how plants respond and adapt to stress.
