Title       : Structural and Functional Analysis of Two Parvalbumins of Extramuscular Origin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9105801

Award Number: 9105801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : January 1,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Henzl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The parvalbumins were originally identified as calcium-binding                 
              cytoplasmic proteins in striated muscle where they are thought to              
              function as calcium buffers.  The subject of this research is the              
              structure and function of two members of the parvalbumin family of             
              proteins from non-muscle tissues.  The parvalbumin, oncomodulin,               
              binds calcium and magnesium far less tightly than rat parvalbumin,             
              despite 53% sequence identity.   Production and characterization               
              of additional site-specific variants of oncomodulin will further               
              elucidate the factors responsible for ion-binding affinity in this             
              family of calcium binding proteins.  These results should have                 
              relevance not only to calcium-binding proteins, but to protein-                
              ligand interactions in general.  A surprising result of prior                  
              studies was the finding that a molecule previously known as Avian              
              Thymic Hormone (ATH) is a member of the parvalbumin family,                    
              expressed specifically in the thymus.  Avian thymic hormone is                 
              believed to facilitate avian T-lymphocyte maturation, but virtually            
              nothing is known about its mechanism of action.  Pursuit of this               
              finding by identifying a receptor for ATH on bone marrow precursor             
              cells and/or immature lymphocytes is a second major goal of this               
              proposal.  Characterization of the receptor should provide insight             
              into the physiological significance of the parvalbumin-like thymic             
              hormones.  Avian thymic hormone and the muscle-associated                      
              parvalbumin from chicken are both expressed in a tissue-specific               
              manner.  Comparison of regulatory sequences in the two parvalbumin             
              genes and characterization of specific DNA-binding proteins should             
              provide insight into regulation of tissue-specific gene expression.            
                                                                                             
              Parvalbumins are calcium-binding proteins believed to function as              
              cytoplasmic calcium ion buffers in muscle.  There is evidence to               
              suggest that they play additional, possibly regulatory, roles in               
              non-muscle tissues.  This research is directed toward understanding            
              the molecular structure and cellular function of these proteins.               
              The results of this research will contribute new knowledge                     
              concerning the molecular basis for the role of calcium binding                 
              proteins in cellular signaling.
