Title       : Signaling Mechanisms and Mobility of the EGF Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9105429

Award Number: 9105429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81500              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Gross dgross@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on the regulation of ionic signaling in                   
              mitogen-stimulated cells in culture.  Both epidermal growth factor             
              (EGF) and extracellular ATP will be studied as mitogenic agonists.             
              Individual cell ionic signals will be studied by a combination of              
              fluorescent probe imaging and patch clamp electrophysiology.                   
              Heterologous interactions between these agonists will be examined.             
              The chemical kinetic consequences of the signal transduction                   
              cascade, from activated receptor through G-protein, lipase, kinase,            
              and soluble second messengers, will be modeled.  Kinetic                       
              predictions will be compared with single cell data to clarify the              
              roles of the various signaling components in the temporal response             
              pattern of intracellular calcium changes subsequent to a primary               
              mitogenic signal.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This research focuses on the signal transduction cascade following             
              activation of the cellular receptor for epidermal growth factor.               
              Optical microscopy in combination with fluorescent indicators of               
              cytosolic free calcium ion concentration and of membrane potential             
              will be used to study these factors at the level of a single cell.             
              A mathematical model of the signaling cascade will be constructed              
              to aid in the understanding of this complex sequence of events.                
              The results of this research will contribute to understanding of               
              the molecular basis of the response of cells to external signaling             
              molecules.
