Title       : The German Mesolithic/Neolithic Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1991      
File        : a9105463

Award Number: 9105463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Michael                 
              Jochim will conduct archaeological excavations at the site of                  
              Henauhof Northwest 2 (HNW-2) located in south-central Germany.                 
              Preliminary work by Dr. Jochim indicates that the site was                     
              occupied by Mesolithic hunter-gatherers approximately 6500 years               
              ago.  It lies on the shoreline of a former lake and is rich in                 
              both lithic and faunal remains.  During one season of fieldwork                
              Dr. Jochim and his colleagues will excavate an area of 80-100                  
              square meters.  All finds will be measured in three dimensions                 
              and all sediments screened.  In addition, soil samples will be                 
              studied to recover small lithic debitage and faunal remains.                   
              Soil samples will be taken for palynological and botanical                     
              analysis and charcoal samples collected for radiocarbon dating.                
              Botanical floral and lithic analysis will be conducted.                        
                                                                                             
              The period around 6500 years ago marks a time of marked change in              
              this region.  The local Mesolithic inhabitants, who for thousands              
              of years hunted and gathered, were exposed to intrusive "Linear                
              Band Ceramic" (LBK) cultures which were intrusive to the region                
              and which followed a Neolithic way of life.  The LBK peoples                   
              planted crops, kept domestic animals and used ceramic vessels.                 
              Because archaeologists are interested in questions of culture                  
              change and contact, the interaction between Mesolithic foragers                
              and LBK immigrants is a subject of great interest.  Several                    
              models, ranging from avoidance to open warfare to cooperation                  
              have been proposed yet data is not available to select among                   
              them.  Because the HNW-2 contains rich well stratified remains                 
              from the appropriate time period, it has the potential to shed                 
              light on this issue.  The small scale work proposed for this one               
              season project should establish a basis for a larger project.                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of Europeanist archaeologists.              
              It will, hopefully, provide new insight into how cultures                      
              interact and change Finally it will aid in the training of                     
              students.
