Title       : Mutational Analysis of Intermediate Filaments in Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9105523

Award Number: 9105523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Klymkowsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Intermediate filaments (IFs) are a major structural component of               
              striated muscle.  To study the organization and functions of                   
              muscle IFs, we have constructed two types of mutant forms of the               
              IF protein vimentin.  C-terminal truncations of vimentin co-                   
              assemble with and disrupt IFs.  The expression of such                         
              "disruptive" mutants in the rat myogenic cell line L6 will be                  
              used to study the effects of disrupting IF organization during                 
              the course of muscle differentiation in vitro.  A combination of               
              light and election microscopy will be used to determine whether                
              an intact IF system is required for myoblast fusion, the                       
              establishment of sarcomeric organization, the formation and                    
              stability of costameres (i.e. regions of interaction between Z-                
              lines and the plasma membrane), or the lateral alignment of                    
              myofibrils into myofibers.  To complement these in vitro studies,              
              we will examine the effects of disruptive vimentin mutants on                  
              skeletal muscle organization in the developing Xenopus tadpole.                
              In the context of the swimming tadpole, functions of IFs related               
              to mechanical integration of muscle and muscle components may                  
              become more obvious than in cultured cells.                                    
                                                                                             
              To identify proteins involved in muscle IF organization, we have               
              made mutants forms of vimentin that do not co-assemble with                    
              endogenous IFs.  These soluble, "non-assemblying" mutants retain               
              either the C- and/or N-terminal domains of the vimentin molecule               
              intact.  It is through these domains that IF proteins are thought              
              to intact with other molecules.  Non-asssemblying mutants are                  
              therefore expected to interact with, and perhaps sequester,                    
              specific IF-associated proteins involved in the interaction                    
              between IFs and the Z-disc, the plasma membrane, microtubules and              
              mitochondria.  We will determine whether the expression of non-                
              assemblying vimentin mutants affects IF organization or cellular               
              differentiation in muscle and myogenic cells.  We will then                    
              determine whether specific cellular proteins co-isolate with the               
              exogenous, non-assemblying, mutant proteins.  The study of these               
              proteins should extend our understanding of how the changing                   
              organization of IFs during myogenesis is controlled.                           
                                                                                             
              The result of our studies should provide a clear definition of                 
              the functions of IFs in striated muscle and, through the                       
              identification of IF-associated proteins, a better understanding               
              of the molecular architecture of muscle.
