Title       : Shell Ornament Production in Ejutla
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9105780

Award Number: 9105780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Feinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With NSF support, Dr. Feinman has conducted archaeological survey              
              in the Ejutla Valley which is located in South Central Mexico to               
              the south of the Valley of Oaxaca.  This latter, with its                      
              prehistoric capital of Monte Alban, saw the rise of a centralized              
              state which likely controlled a large hinterland.  After many                  
              years of archaeological research, the prehistory of Oaxaca is                  
              fairly well known.  As a result of the Ejutla survey, Dr. Feinman              
              was able to begin an examination of the interaction between this               
              marginal area and the center at Monte Alban.                                   
                                                                                             
              Dr. Feinman has located a large stratified site on the edge of                 
              the modern town of Ejutla.  Large surface scatters of shell                    
              fragments as well as in situ material indicate that this area                  
              served as a factory in which shells brought from the Pacific                   
              coastline were turned into finished objects and then presumably                
              traded to Monte Alban.  Excavation will provide information on                 
              the time interval covered and the social context in which this                 
              work took place. Analysis of the objects themselves will identify              
              shell species - and through this areas of origin - and will also               
              allow reconstruction of the manufacturing process.  These data                 
              will provide insight into the interactions between the core area               
              of Monte Alban and the Ejutla periphery.                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              provide insight into how complex societies arise and are                       
              maintained.  Secondly, it will increase our understanding of the               
              interactions between core and peripheral areas and how these                   
              develop and change over time.
