Title       : Sulfur Reduction in Eubacterial Thermophile Thermotogo neapolitana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9105403

Award Number: 9105403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Noll noll@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research program will investigate the biochemical                 
              mechanisms used by the extremely thermophilic eubacterium                      
              Thermotoga neapolitana to derive energy from the oxidation of                  
              carbohydrates and the reduction of elemental sulfur.  T.                       
              neapolitana grows less efficiently in the absence of elemental                 
              sulfur by producing hydrogen as a fermentation endproduct.  The                
              regulation of the switching between this hydrogen-generating                   
              metabolism and a sulfur-reducing metabolism will be studied by                 
              analyzing growth responses and protein profiles of cells grown                 
              under different conditions.  Other sulfur-containing compounds will            
              be screened for their ability to act as electron acceptors to                  
              identify the actual substrate of the electron-donating enzyme(s).              
              The sulfur reduction system will be fractionated to identify its               
              components and determine their location within the cell.  The                  
              enzymes involved in glucose metabolism will also be investigated               
              briefly to identify the source of the electrons used for sulfur                
              reduction.  T. neapolitana belongs to a group of eubacteria that               
              may be the closest living relatives of the ancestral eubacterium.              
              Sulfur reduction may be an ancient physiological trait since it is             
              found in Thermotoga species as well as many archaebacteria.  An                
              understanding of this process may reveal how metabolic processes               
              evolved in early microorganisms.  In addition, sulfur reduction may            
              have biotechnological applications for the removal of sulfurous                
              compounds from ores, coal and petrochemical products.//
