Title       : Salt Tolerance and Sodium Transport in Freshwater and Salt Tolerant Charophyte
               Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9105582

Award Number: 9105582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Bisson bisson@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ability to tolerate saline conditions is a variable and complex            
              trait in plants.  Salinity tolerance includes the ability to                   
              respond to osmotic stress and resistance to toxicity of individual             
              ions.  These traits are significant in determining the natural                 
              distribution of plants, and are important in agriculture, because              
              salinity may limit productivity, especially in irrigated soils.                
              The study will be done on Charophytes, complex macrophytic algae               
              closely related to the line which gave rise to higher plants.                  
              These algae have large internodal cells, permitting experimental               
              manipulations not possible in other plants.  Two closely related               
              species, Chara corallina, an obligate freshwater species, and C.               
              buckellii, a species collected from a salt lake which can be                   
              cultured in fresh or salt water will be studied.  The two species              
              differ in their ability to regulate turgor and in their tolerance              
              to sodium and magnesium.  Dr. Bisson will study ion fluxes and the             
              mechanism by which they occur in intact cells, cells with                      
              permeabilized plasmalemma, cells whose internal contents have been             
              perfused away and replaced by controlled solutions, isolated                   
              vesicles of membrane, and patches of membrane.  The aim is to                  
              elucidate the mechanism of movement and how this movement is                   
              controlled by environmental and cytoplasmic factors to confer                  
              resistance to salt toxicity.//
