Title       : Lipid Metabolism and Photosynthesis in Fatty Acid Mutants ofArabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9105550

Award Number: 9105550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Browse jab@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,1145,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The acyl lipids of chloroplasts contain characteristically high                
              proportions of trienoic fatty acids.  Because this feature is                  
              universal among higher plants, it has been inferred that the fatty             
              acid composition of chloroplast membranes is important for                     
              maintaining photosynthetic function.  However, the enzymology and              
              regulation of polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis are poorly                  
              understood, and there is at present no accepted model of exactly               
              how photosynthesis might be dependent on a highly unsaturated                  
              membrane.  The principal investigator has isolated a series of                 
              Arabidopsis mutants with specific alterations in leaf fatty acid               
              composition and these have provided a novel means to study both                
              plant lipid metabolism and the physiological significance of                   
              membrane lipid composition.  This proposal describes experiments               
              to characterize the biochemistry of newly isolated mutants, and of             
              double mutants produced by crossing mutant lines.  This aspect of              
              the project will involve assaying enzymes of fatty acid synthesis              
              as well as in vivo labeling experiments and analysis of the fatty              
              acid compositions of individual lipids and subcellular fractions.              
              The most extreme double mutants are unable to grow autotrophically,            
              but many of the mutations only affect growth and development of the            
              plants at low temperatures.  For this reason, photosynthesis in the            
              different mutants will be analyzed under a range of environmental              
              conditions using non-invasive fluorescence and light absorption                
              techniques which can be used on intact plants.  These experiments              
              would provide a clear picture of exactly how photosynthesis is                 
              affected by thylakoid lipid composition under the different growth             
              conditions normally encountered by temperate plants.  The improved             
              understanding of lipid metabolism and photosynthesis that will                 
              result from the work are important prerequisites to modifying these            
              processes for increase plant productivity.                                     
                                                                                             
                   //
