Title       : Community Persistence and the Pattern of Community Variability Over Time: A Test
               Using Fossil Assemblages From Four Marine Transgressions in the Breathitt
               Formation......
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1992        
File        : a9105469

Award Number: 9105469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Bambach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will use the fossil record of four separate marine             
              inundations of eastern Kentucky to test for community persistence              
              on a time scale of 10  - 10  years.  Each marine inundation                    
              resulted in the establishment of benthic habitats that were                    
              colonized by the same or similar species of marine invertebrates               
              and preserved as layers of fossiliferous shale.  Four marine units             
              will be sampled with replication at multiple locations to obtain               
              complete fossil species abundances for each sample.  The                       
              lithological and microfaunal characteristics of each sample will               
              be used to determine which samples formed in comparable habitats.              
              Samples from comparable habitats will be statistically compared.               
              Replicate samples will provide an estimate of variation due to                 
              sampling that will form the basis for judging the significance of              
              variation between localities within a marine unit.  Statistical                
              tests comparing multiple localities within a marine unit will                  
              demonstrate the geographic pattern of variation in community                   
              structure that existed during each marine inundation.  The                     
              variation in species abundances seen within each marine unit will,             
              in turn, provide a basis for judging whether the same community                
              structure was reassembled after major disruptions and persisted                
              through some or all of the marine inundations.  The project is                 
              designed to rigorously test (a) whether fossil assemblages                     
              represent communities in a more highly structured sense than just              
              the coincidental co-occurrence of component species, and (b)                   
              whether fossil communities (as represented by fossil assemblages               
              from particular habitats) persist through time despite major                   
              disruptions.
