Title       : Analysis of Genes That Contribute to Embryogenesis in the Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9105585

Award Number: 9105585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Grunwald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goals of the proposed study are 1) to identify genes that                  
              contribute to cell differentiation and formation of the body plan              
              during embryogenesis of the zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio, and 2)               
              to characterize when and where in the embryo cell or region                    
              specific gene expression originates. To examine gene function                  
              during development, Dr. Grunwald will generate transgenic                      
              zebrafish that harbor promoter-less lacZ reporter genes                        
              integrated at random locations in the genome. Expression of the                
              reporter gene will necessarily be derived from endogenous                      
              transcriptional promoters. Patterns of gene expression that                    
              signal early embryonic differentiation events will be recognized               
              by virtue of the expression of the lacZ transgene. Developmental               
              mutation that arise from disruption of host genes and that                     
              disturb the normal structure of the one day embryo will be                     
              recognized using simple anatomical and behavioral screens. The                 
              developmental mutations and their associated phenotypes will be                
              characterized in detail. Mutations of interest will be                         
              molecularly isolated and analyzed. To characterize in detail the               
              ontogeny of the earliest tissues that arise during zebrafish                   
              embryogenesis, Dr. Grunwald will examine the expression of well                
              defined tissue specific genes. Analysis of the expression of Vg1               
              will contribute to an understanding of the maternal contribution               
              to development in animals with pluripotent blastomeres.                        
              Establishing when and where tissue specific gene expression                    
              originates will help clarify the relation between cell movements               
              at gastrulation and the induction of tissue differentiation, and               
              will be a critical first step toward developing experimentally                 
              testable hypotheses regarding the forces that promote tissue                   
              differentiation in the zebrafish embryo.
