Title       : Insulin Receptor Metabolism: Hormone-Induced Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9105624

Award Number: 9105624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria P. Knutson vknutson@farmrl.med.uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The insulin receptor binds its ligand, insulin, at the plasma                  
              membrane of the cell. This binding event initiates two processes:              
              1) Autophosphorylation of the receptor protein on tyrosine                     
              residues. This autophosphorylation ultimately leads to the changes             
              in cellular metabolism associated with insulin action. 2)                      
              Endocytosis of the insulin-receptor complex and the subsequent                 
              movement (routing or trafficking) of the receptor through the                  
              multiple compartments of the endosomal pathway. Both of these                  
              processes are affected by chronic treatment of the cultured cells              
              with either insulin or glucocorticoids. The hypothesis to be tested            
              in this project is that the key step by which these hormones                   
              regulate cellular insulin receptor number is by regulating the rate            
              at which the receptor is inactivated and degraded. From previous               
              work, the inactivation and degradation of the receptor occurs                  
              within the endosomal compartment. Therefore, the hypothesis will               
              be tested through the following goals: 1) The various endosomal                
              compartments through which the active insulin receptor moves in the            
              basal or hormone-simulated states will be isolated by preparative              
              isoelectric focusing. By metabolically labeling the receptor with              
              32 P-phosphate, changes in the autophosphorylation state of the                
              receptor as it moves through the endosomal compartments will be                
              quantified. 2) The mechanism(s) by which the insulin receptor                  
              protein is inactivated will be determined in the basal and hormone-            
              stimulated states. Isoelectric focusing will be utilized to                    
              ascertain the endosomal compartment in which inactive receptor is              
              activated. The enzymes responsible for these processes will be                 
              characterized and isolated.                                                    
              These studies will provide the first characterization off the                  
              physico-chemical status of a receptor protein as it moves through              
              the various compartments of the endosomes, and will provide a                  
              mechanism by which a membrane-bound receptor is inactivated and                
              removed from the cell.
