Title       : Physiology of Isoprene Emission from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9105274

Award Number: 9105274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Sharkey tsharkey@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Isoprene emitted from trees is the largest source of hydrocarbons              
              in the atmosphere.  Isoprene decomposition in the atmosphere is                
              rapid and causes lower atmosphere formation, acid rain, and blue               
              hazes.  Only some plants produce isoprene, it is a common trait in             
              trees ferns, and tropical plants.  The production of isoprene is               
              closely associated with the carbon photosynthesis,  but mechanism              
              of isoprene formation and its function in plants is unknown.  To               
              better understand isoprene emission and to predict changes in                  
              isoprene emission which may occur in the future the effect of                  
              growth conditions on isoprene synthesis will be studied.  The                  
              mechanism of isoprene synthesis will also be studied.                          
                                                                                             
              Previous results indicated that when oak trees are grown in high               
              carbon dioxide atmospheres the rate of isoprene emission can                   
              double.  In this project the effect of carbon dioxide will be                  
              further tested and the effect of increased temperature, believed               
              to be a consequence of increased carbon dioxide, will also be                  
              tested.  Rates of acclimation to the various growth conditions will            
              be assesed.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The pathway of isoprene synthesis will be investigated using                   
              techniques developed to study photosynthesis.  Stable isotopes                 
              (nonradioactive) of carbon and hydrogen will be used to trace the              
              pathway of carbon during isoprene synthesis in leaves.                         
                                                                                             
              These studies are important because of the role of biogenic                    
              isoprene in atmospheric chemistry, because isoprene synthesis can              
              be a fast, nondestructive measure of important,  nonphotosynthetic             
              carbon metabolism inside chloroplasts (e.g. carotenoid synthesis),             
              because isoprene synthesis can affect the overall carbon budget of             
              plants.
