Title       : Circadian Mechanism Controlling Rhythmic Release of Sperm from the Insect
               Testis.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1991     
File        : a9105932

Award Number: 9105932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67758              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jadwiga M. Giebultowicz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The increasing resistance of pest insects to convenional                       
              insecticides and public concern about environmental contamination              
              mandate the search for effective and safe pest control methods.                
              One hope for the future depends on designing new selective methods             
              of insect control by exploration and exploitation of those                     
              biochemical and physiological processes which are unique to                    
              insects.  In an effort toward this goal Dr. Giebultowicz is                    
              studying physiological processes which, when disrupted, cause                  
              sterility in male moths.                                                       
                                                                                             
              She has discovered and investigated the rhythms of sperm release               
              from the testis and rhythmic secretory activity in the reproductive            
              tract of the gypsy moth.  These rhythms are necessary for post-                
              testicular sperm maturation and their disruption results in sterile            
              insect males.  Timing of sperm release is controlled by a                      
              biological "clock" located in the testis and that rhythmic sperm               
              release persists in testis cultured in vitro.  This finding provide            
              a unique opportunity to identify and study molecular correlates of             
              the rythms associated with sperm maturation.  Proteins involved in             
              the circadian rhythm of sperm release will be characterize by                  
              electrophoretic protein separation, generation of antisera and                 
              subsequent investigation of the role of specific proteins in the               
              rhythmic sperm release.  Separation and purification of proteins               
              would provide a first step toward resolving molecular basis for                
              biological clock controlling rhythmic release of sperm in insects.             
              Partial sequencing of selected proteins and synthesis of specific              
              peptides might lead to the isolation and identification of genes               
              involved in the mechanism controlling sperm release.  In future,               
              she plans to clone such genes and to attempt introducing them into             
              insects using pest-specific baculoviruses which are harmless to                
              other living organisms.  In this way sperm release could be                    
              disrupted and pest moths in the field would become sterile.//
