Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9105628

Award Number: 9105628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Konrad  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Geographic factors strongly influence the atmospheric processes           
              that lead to heavy rains.  This doctoral dissertation project will             
              provide an analysis of the subsynoptic character of heavy rain for a           
              broad area encompassing the flood-prone Appalachian mountains of the           
              United States.  The horizontal movement of masses of air that causes           
              changes in the physical properties of air will be calculated for a             
              large, spatially unbiased sample of heavy rain events.  A principal            
              components analysis will be performed to identify modes of covariance in       
              the advection fields associated by these air movements.  This analysis         
              will be followed by a cluster analysis to objectively determine groups         
              of heavy rain events with common low-level moisture, thermal and mid-          
              level vorticity advection patterns.  After examining geographic patterns       
              in the occurrence of heavy rain groups, subsynoptic scenarios of heavy         
              rain for the Appalachian region will be developed.                             
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide a better understanding of the role of           
              advection processes in heavy rain development.  Patterns of geographic         
              variations expected in the relationship of the advection fields will           
              permit inferences to be made about the ways that mountain orientation          
              and the location of moisture sources alters the subsynoptic regimes            
              associated with heavy rainfall.  The development of heavy rain scenarios       
              for the flood-prone Appalachian region will provide forecasters with           
              much needed guidance in the prediction of heavy rain.  This project also       
              will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to         
              continue to develop independent research skills.
