Title       : Neural-Immune Interactions in the Beluga Whale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9105791

Award Number: 9105791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111698             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Felten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rochester Sch Med
	      30 Administration Building
	      Rochester, NY  14627    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An extraordinary arrangement between the Canadian Fish and Marine              
              Mammal Management Office, Churchill native Canadian hunters, the               
              Naval Ocean Systems Center, and the University of Rochester                    
              Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy has permitted this                      
              laboratory to obtain fresh specimens of tissue from Beluga whales              
              taken during a sanctioned hunt.  These arrangements provide the                
              continuing opportunity to collect sufficient numbers of specimens              
              to carry out a comprehensive study of the organization and                     
              compartmentation of the immune system, and relationships between               
              autonomic noradrenergic nerves and specific cells of these organs.             
               The specific focus of the present proposal is investigation of                
              neural-immune relationships in the Beluga whale.  The first                    
              Churchill field collection trip resulted in the development of                 
              protocols for optimum preservation of antigens and tissue                      
              morphology for immunocytochemical studies of the innervation of                
              specific lymphoid compartments in secondary lymphoid organs of the             
              Beluga whale at the light and electron microscope levels.                      
              Preliminary findings in the Beluga spleen have revealed a                      
              compartmentation of white pulp and red pulp, with distribution of              
              lymphocytes in a periarteriolar lymphatic sheath and follicles                 
              similar to rodents and primates.  Immunocytochemical staining for              
              tyrosine hydroxylase-positive noradrenergic nerve fibers and                   
              neuropeptide-Y (NPY) nerve fibers showed abundant innervation of               
              the white pulp, including both the vasculature and some areas of               
              parenchymal cells.  This close association between nerve fibers and            
              lymphoid cells was further substantiated at the electron microscope            
              level with tyrosine hydroxylase and NPY-positive nerve terminals               
              forming synaptic-like contacts with lymphocytes and macrophages.               
              These studies will be continued by investigating the extent to                 
              which these contacts fulfill the criteria for neurotransmission.               
              Norepinephrine and its metabolites will be measured in freshly                 
              frozen tissue using high performance liquid chromatography with                
              electrochemical detection (LCEC).  Dissociated lymphocytes from the            
              spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes will be used in assays for                     
              expression of adrenoceptors, particularly the beta 2 subset.                   
              Dissociated cells will also be placed in culture for studies of the            
              effects of norepinephrine and NPY on functional assays to study a              
              possible role for neural-immune interaction in the Beluga spleen.              
                                                                                             
              This project will take advantage of an extraordinary opportunity,              
              to obtain tissues from Beluga whales killed by native Canadian                 
              hunters in officially sanctioned hunts, to study the organization              
              of the immune system and interactions of the nervous system with               
              the immune system in these marine mammals.  A better understanding             
              of the regulation of immune function by the nervous system is                  
              increasingly regarded as important to the understanding of the                 
              effects of stress on survival of all vertebrate animals.   This                
              unique opportunity represents the opening of a new area of basic               
              research that should lead to a better understanding of the                     
              physiological mechanisms underlying effects of the environment on              
              the survival of marine mammals.***
