Title       : Variations in Eruptive Style of High-Temperature Rhyolites of the Juniper Mtn.
               Volcanic Center, Owyhee Plateau, SW Idaho
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9105329

Award Number: 9105329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hervig hervig@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is to investigate the temperatures, pre-eruptive                  
              volatile contents, compositions, and ages of three high-                       
              temperature rhyolites that had contrasting eruptive styles.  The               
              units are a moderately-welded ash flow sequence overlain by a                  
              spatter-fed rhyolitic flow complex, which in turn is overlain by               
              a voluminous (15 km3) effusive rhyolite lava flow.  Because these              
              units apparently erupted over a short period of time and show                  
              very different styles of eruptive activity, they provide and                   
              excellent opportunity to learn not only about the pre-eruptive                 
              volatile content of "anhydrous" high-temperature rhyolites, but                
              also to explore the control of volatile content, temperature, and              
              crystallinity on style of eruption.  The ion microprobe will be                
              used to analyze melt inclusions for volatile and lithophile trace              
              elements and to investigate trace element zoning in host                       
              pheoncrysts.  Bulk analyses of selected pumice and scoria lumps                
              and of vitrophyric lava will provide information on the                        
              geochemistry of the magmatic system.  Detailed field work will                 
              supply information on volumes of the units and key samples for                 
              radiometric age determinations.  Among other things the study                  
              should place constraints on the petrogenesis of these rhyolites,               
              determine whether the eruptive style relates to temperature as                 
              recorded by phenocrysts, and increase understanding of volatile                
              composition prior to eruption.
