Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1991      
File        : a9105493

Award Number: 9105493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-biu Liu kliu1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam L. Fearn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Paleoecological studies have demonstrated that shifts in the              
              transition areas between grasslands and forests have occurred in               
              response to climate change, but few such studies have examined                 
              tropical or subtropical grasslands.  This doctoral dissertation                
              project will examine the Holocene vegetation dynamics of the                   
              southwestern Louisiana prairie, a subtropical grassland.  Pollen,              
              charcoal, and stratigraphic analyses will be used to reconstruct               
              the vegetation history and to identify controlling factors in the              
              development and maintenance of this subtropical grassland.  Core               
              of lake bottom sediments from Lake Arthur, an estuarine lake with              
              a drainage basin entirely within the natural tall-grass prairie,               
              will yield at least a 6000-year record.  Vertical profiles from                
              Prien Lake, with a similar origin but with a drainage basin                    
              outside the prairie, will be used to detect possible shifts in                 
              the grassland.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide the first radiocarbon-dated pollen              
              record of the southwestern Louisiana prairie and will be one of                
              few data points for the entire American tropics and subtropics                 
              that contain a detailed Holocene history of savanna vegetation.                
              It will provide a rare opportunity to examine the sensitivity of               
              prairie vegetation to climate change in a subtropical context,                 
              thus adding to broader understandings of the effects of climatic               
              changes.  In addressing the factors of fire, edaphic control, and              
              human disturbance, the project will add further to this                        
              understanding by answering questions concerning the origin and                 
              evolution of a southern grassland.  This project also will                     
              provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to              
              continue to develop independent research skills.
