Title       : Genetic Dissection of Disturbances of Meiosis & Spermatogenesis in Drosophila.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9105902

Award Number: 9105902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence W. Lyttle tlyttle@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Haymer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose continuing the investigation of the Segregation                     
              distorter (SD) system which results in abnormal meiosis and/or                 
              spermatogenesis in Drosophila.  The main elements of the SD system             
              include the euchromatic allele Sd and the heterochromatic element              
              E(SD), whose products interact to cause dysfunction of sperm                   
              containing a repetitive DNA sequence (Rsps) mapping to the 2                   
              centromere.  Transpositions, partial deletions and additions of                
              Rsps DNA by P-element mediated transformation will be used to                  
              specify dose-response relationships between number of SD elements,             
              Rsps repeat copy number, and level of sperm dysfunction, and to                
              demonstrate directly the role of the DNA repeats in causing sperm              
              dysfunction.  These experiments will also lead to a cytogenetic                
              characterization of 2R heterochromatin; in particular, a side                  
              product may be the use of chromosome rearrangements with                       
              breakpoints tagged by Rsps DNA repeats to identify centromeric DNA.            
              We will use P-element mutagenesis to produce tagged mutations in               
              E(SD), Sd or other as yet uncharacterized genes of the SD system,              
              and we will use detachment of X^X chromosomes to yield Dp                      
              (2;X)E(SD) chromosomes, useful for measuring the dosage                        
              relationships between Sd and E(SD) in causing sperm dysfunction.               
              These should allow detailed analysis of E(SD), the last major locus            
              of the SD system so characterized.                                             
                                                                                             
              An understanding of genetic changes leading to errors in sperm                 
              development in Drosophila may provide clues for a better                       
              understanding of the normal fertility process in more complex                  
              eukaryotic organisms.***//
