Title       : Development and Evolution of the Vertebrate Head: A Symposium at the American
               Society of Zoology Meeting, Atlanta, GA; December 29, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1991   
File        : a9105483

Award Number: 9105483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 30,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Solursh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian K. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Langille  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Funds are requested for a one day symposium entitled "Development              
              and Evolution of the Vertebrate Head". This symposium, sponsored               
              by the American Society of Zoology's Division of Developmental                 
              and Cell Biology and co-sponsored by the Division of Vertebrate                
              Morphology will be held as part of the Society's 1991 annual                   
              meeting in Atlanta, Georgia. The goal of this symposium is to                  
              develop a stronger understanding of the special role of                        
              development in evolution by focusing on a single topic, the                    
              vertebrate head. To accomplish this goal, the organizers will                  
              bring together biologists from a wide range of fields, all of                  
              whom are actively pursuing research into one or more areas of                  
              developmental and/or evolutionary biology of the vertebrate head.              
              Among the invited speakers are both world renowned experts and                 
              some of the most promising young investigators in this field.                  
              Their topics span from functional morphology and evolution,                    
              through morphological and experimental embryology, cell/tissue                 
              culture to molecular analysis providing comprehensive inclusion                
              of the various 'levels' at which the development of the                        
              vertebrate head is studied. With this wide range of experts,                   
              focusing on a single issue, the vertebrate head, this symposium                
              will be able to synthesize a more fundamental understanding of                 
              the relationship of development and evolution. Proceedings of the              
              symposium, which will be published either by American Zoologist                
              or is a separate book volume, will provide students and                        
              scientists with an interest in development and evolution, a                    
              timely and insightful synthesis on our current understanding of                
              the interrelationships of these two biological fields and will                 
              provide a useful reference source for future studies for many                  
              years to come.
