Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Chronostratigraphy and Paleoclimate of the
               Palocene-Eocene Boundary in the Big Horn Basin: An Isotopic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1991      
File        : a9105147

Award Number: 9105147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 16,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37300              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Zachos   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip D. Gingerich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Geochemical, sedimentological and paleontologic evidence from             
              deep sea sedimentary sequences indicates that significant changes              
              in the ocean climate and chemical system occurred from the late                
              Paleocene to early Eocene.  The early Eocene climate was                       
              characterized by elevated temperatures at high latitudes and in                
              deep oceans, by diminished thermal gradients, and by decreased                 
              atmospheric circulation.  Moreover, the mean isotopic composition              
              of marine carbonate dropped by 3 part per mil.  Climate models                 
              indicate that such decreases in planetary temperature gradient must            
              have had profound effects on continental climates.  Paleocene-                 
              Eocene climate change has been proposed as an important driving                
              force in the evolution of continental plants and animals.  However,            
              verification of model results with empirical data is difficult                 
              because of the low precision of marine-terrestrial correlations and            
              because of a general lack of quantitative terrestrial climate                  
              proxies.                                                                       
                   This study has two goals: 1) to correlate with greater                    
              precision Paleocene through early Eocene marine strata to                      
              continental sections from the Bighorn Basin, WY, and 2) to evaluate            
              changes in mean annual temperature and humidity in continental                 
              regions.  Large scale, synchronous perturbations in the carbon                 
              isotope composition of terrestrial carbon reservoirs (organic                  
              matter, soil carbonates, and tooth apatite) and marine carbonates              
              will supply isochrons for correlation.  Temperature and humidity               
              will be determined through oxygen isotope analysis of soil                     
              carbonates, and teeth from terrestrial and aquatic mammals.
