Title       : Dispersion of Water Age in Aquifer Systems and in Groundwater Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0208492

Award Number: 0208492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham E. Fogg gefogg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0208492
Fogg

Groundwater age dates estimated using various environmental
              tracer methods is being increasingly called upon to address groundwater quality
              problems and to understand many other aspects of subsurface systems.  However,
              systematic analysis of the meaning of groundwater age dates is lacking, which
              may limit the application, or result in serious misinterpretations.  The PI's
              recent work indicates that common interpretations of estimated groundwater ages
              are dependent on assumptions about dispersion and mixing that are not
              appropriate in many, perhaps most, cases.  The PI finds that, while most age
              dates are thought to be representative of all the water molecules in the water
              sample if the well screen is not too long, actual ages within that sample can
              vary significantly  (from IO0 to 102+ yr.) in typically heterogeneous systems. 
              Although some subsurface hydrologists already anticipated this, the scientific
              basis for evaluating groundwater age dates remains undeveloped and vague.  This
              in turn has led to an extreme range of interpretations and assumptions by both
              water managers and researchers.  Herein the PI proposes a theoretically
              accurate, tested simulation approach to provide the first ever quantitative
              evaluation of the roles of heterogeneity, well-bore mixing, well screen depth
              and length, aquifer parameters, and boundary conditions on groundwater age
              variations in space and time in geologically realistic alluvial aquifer
              systems.  In particular, the research will investigate how ages of water
              "particles" can be expected to vary within individual water samples in space
              and time in subsurface with different degrees of heterogeneity.  Through both
              modeling and field-testing the PI also proposes to explore a new hypothesis
              that variation in age dates during long-term pumping of a well provides a
              signal indicative of aquifer heterogeneity and vulnerability
. Understanding
              of the main factors controlling groundwater ages and age distributions is a
              prerequisite for any application of tracer-based age-dating data.  Fluctuations
              in groundwater age as a function of space and time may be used to explore
              subsurface hydrologic processes far beyond the traditional static groundwater
              age dating method.  Proposed testing of the above hypothesis holds out the
              possibility that groundwater age dating approaches can be transformed from
              qualitiative procedures dependent on vague, untested assumptions to powerful
              characterization tools for quantitatively (or semiquantitatively) assessing
              groundwater conditions in previously unanticipated ways.  The PI shows abundant
              preliminary simulation results to support this problem statement and to
              demonstrate feasibility of the general approach.

Key words: groundwater,
              contamination, transport, aquifer vulnerability, modeling, age
Date.

