Title       : Security Protocols for Pervasive Computing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0208631

Award Number: 0208631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Devadas devadas@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The integration of wearable and embedded devices into a pervasive computing
              environment requires significant attention to security and privacy issues.  A
              system architecture with associated protocols for secure pervasive computing is
              investigated.

The system architecture is based on the existence of a
              software proxy for each device. All objects in the system, e.g., appliances,
              wearable gadgets, software agents, and users have associated trusted software
              proxies that either run on an embedded processor on the appliance, or on a
              trusted computer. In the case where the device has minimal computational power,
              and communicates to its proxy through a wired or wireless network, the
              communication in the proposed system adheres to a proposed device-to-proxy
              protocol.  It is also proposed that proxies communicate with each other using a
              secure proxy-to-proxy protocol based on SPKI/SDSI (Simple Public Key
              Infrastructure / Simple Distributed Security Infrastructure).  Some devices,
              e.g., terminals or displays, may not be trusted or their security might be
              compromised, but users may still wish to use them, because they provide a large
              screen or large bandwidth resources.  An untrusted computer protocol based on
              visual authentication is proposed such that users can use the untrusted
              computer and authenticate displayed information as well as communicate securely
              to a remote application.

Using the architectural ideas described above, the
              design and implementation of a pervasive-computing environment which allows for
              secure, yet efficient, access to networked, mobile devices is proposed.
