Title       : Collaborative Research: Doppler on Wheels International H2O Project
               Participation and Studies of Convective Initiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0208651

Award Number: 0208651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvette P. Richardson yrichardson@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tammy M. Weckwerth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The International H20 Project (IHOP) is a multi-investigator, multi-agency
              program whose chief aim is improved characterization of the four-dimensional
              distribution of water vapor and its application to improving the understanding
              and prediction of convection.  Program emphasis is on four important research
              areas: quantitative precipitation forecasting; convective initiation,
              atmospheric boundary layer processes; and instrumentation testing. 

Critical
              to the success of the IHOP is the measurement of wind and thermodynamic values
              spanning several scales of motion.  This will be accomplished with unique and
              varied instrumentation.  To contribute to achieving the goals of IHOP, the
              Principal Investigators have submitted collaborative proposals.  As part of the
              required IHOP instrumentation suite, the Principal Investigators will deploy
              the University of Oklahoma Doppler on Wheels (DOW) radars.  These radars
              provide the IHOP researchers with a high resolution instrument for obtaining
              detailed wind measurements.  These measurements have applications to all four
              IHOP research components.  The DOWs will coordinate with both fixed-site and
              mobile observing platforms to sample with unprecedented data density and
              resolution the pre-convective environment, including wind and thermodynamic
              properties within and along boundaries and convergence lines.

For their
              research contribution to the IHOP, the Principal Investigators will analyze
              these data to elucidate the magnitude of gradients in the water vapor field and
              the role of the wind field in focusing these inhomogeneities.  For example, the
              Principal Investigators will determine if locally convergent mesoscale
              circulations along boundaries or intersections between convergence zones,
              possibly associated with horizontal convective rolls (HCRs), create pockets of
              high water vapor content.  They will further assess the orientation of water
              vapor gradients with respect to the HCRs.  In addition to boundary studies, the
              Principal Investigators will perform analyses of data collected on days without
              obvious convergence zones to determine the degree of variability in the water
              vapor field in the absence of substantial focusing mechanisms.  

After
              understanding the nature and degree of water vapor variability in the
              pre-convective environment further analysis will focus on the relationship of
              these inhomogeneities to the convective initiation process based on current
              hypotheses.  For example, if pockets of high water vapor content are found to
              exist, the Principal Investigators will then examine whether deep convection
              indeed is favored at these locations.  They will examine in detail the depth of
              lifting associated with observed very small scale circulations and convergence
              zones to determine the transport of water vapor in the boundary layer. 

The
              goal is a better understanding of the mechanisms governing water vapor
              variability in the preconvective environment and the dynamical processes by
              which this variability is manifested in the convective initiation process.
