Title       : Collaborative Research: Formation and Exhumation of UHP and HP Terranes in the
               Greenland Caledonides - Understanding Processes at the Base of Continental
               Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0208158

Award Number: 0208158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162310             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McClelland wmcclell@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Both the Greenland and Scandinavian Caledonides expose huge slabs of continental
              crust that have experienced high-pressure (HP) metamorphism during the
              collision between Laurentia and Baltica. An ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) terrane
              has been recognized in western Norway for the past fifteen years, while the
              first evidence for UHP metamorphism has just been found in Greenland a few
              months ago. Taken together, these two coherent continental eclogite terranes
              comprise the most extensive exposure of a deep, ancient mountain root on the
              planet - giving us a view of mountain belt anatomy that is generally hidden at
              the base of active orogens like the Himalayas. The ultimate goal of this
              project is to understand how this thick or deep orogenic root formed, and how
              it was brought back up to the earth's surface. Extensional collapse of
              overthickened crust, whereby HP and UHP rocks are unroofed along listric normal
              faults, is an oft-cited mechanism of exhumation; however, major extensional
              structures are not exposed in the Geenland eclogite province. Gilotti's earlier
              NSF supported research found that the peak pessure was attained approximately
              410 to 370 Ma ago; whereas, workers in the Fjord Region, to the south of the
              eclogite province, are finding widespread evidence of synchronous melting,
              leucogranite generation and extensional faulting that is 10-70 Ma older. Either
              the observed extensional detachments in the south have nothing to do with
              eclogite exhumation, or the PI's previous ages are recording cooling at the end
              of the exhumation path instead of peak pressure conditions. The main objectives
              of the proposed research are: 1) to identify the extent and timing of UHP
              metamorphism; 2) to test the robustness of our previous ages for HP
              metamorphism by comparing zircon populations from the retrograde margins of
              eclogite pods to zircon populations from the well-preserved centers; 3) to
              establish the pressure-temperature-time history of this slab of
              eclogite-bearing crust as it returns to the earth's surface; and 4) to
              determine the geometry and timing of contractional and strike-slip fabrics that
              might be possible exhumation structures. The PI's data set is essential for
              formulating an orogen-wide model of eclogite formation and exhumation in this
              important continent-continent collision. Although the necessary studies are
              underway in Norway, their results cannot be put into context without the
              corresponding knowledge of HP and UHP metamorphism in Greenland. The
              preliminary results also have the potential to provide new insight on the
              behavior of U-Pb isotope systems during HP/UHP metamorphism and subsequent
              decompression. 
