Title       : Beyond Eigenvalues - Describing the Behavior of Nonnormal Matrices and Linear
               Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0208353

Award Number: 0208353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Greenbaum greenbau@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The behavior of a normal matrix (e.g., a real symmetric matrix or a complex
              Hermitian matrix) is governed by its eigenvalues; that is, the 2-norm of any
              analytic function of a normal matrix is just the maximum absolute value of that
              function on the spectrum of the matrix. The same holds for normal linear
              operators, except that now the spectrum may include more than just the
              eigenvalues.  This statement does not hold for nonnormal matrices and linear
              operators, and there is considerable interest in identifying sets in the
              complex plane that can be associated with nonnormal operators to provide the
              sort of information that the spectrum provides in the normal case.  The goal of
              this project is to  identify such sets and determine their geometrical
              properties, to find efficient ways to compute or approximate these sets, and to
              apply them to some interesting problems in applied mathematics. 

Eigenvalues
              explain the asymptotic behavior of many different systems: from hydrodynamic
              stability to the behavior of finite difference chemes and iterative linear
              system solvers to the Markov chain modeling of probabilistic events. 
              Eigenvalues do not explain the transient behavior of these systems, however,
              and it is this transient behavior that is often most important.  In this work
              we attempt to provide the tools necessary to understand and predict this
              transient behavior.  This will lead to better understanding of such diverse
              phenomena as transition to turbulence, controllability of mechanical or
              biological systems, and cutoff behavior in Markov chains modeling everything
              from card shuffling to statistical mechanics. 

