Title       : The Evolution of Hierarchical Structure in Organisms: A Test for an Increasing
               Tendency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0208156

Award Number: 0208156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. McShea dmcshea@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Evolution of Hierarchical Structure in Organisms: A Test for an Increasing
              Tendency

Daniel McShea, Duke University

EAR-0208156

ABSTRACT

	One
              of the clearest trends in the history of life is the increase in the
              hierarchical structure of organisms, that is, in the degree to which they are
              nested, parts within wholes. Well-known cases of hierarchy increase include the
              so-called "major transitions" in evolution, such as the various origins of
              multicellular organisms (e.g., plants and animals) from aggregates of
              free-living cells, and also at a higher level, the origins of colonies (e.g.,
              social-insect colonies) from clones of multicellular individuals.  The trend is
              clear, but we know little about the mechanism, about what drives the trend. One
              possibility is that there has been a bias, a positive tendency for hierarchy to
              increase, perhaps because greater nestedness is favored by natural selection.
              But it could also be that there is no such tendency, that hierarchy decreases
              as often as it increases, and that the trend is the result of the passive
              spread of evolutionary lineages across the hierarchy spectrum. To see how this
              might work, suppose that the first organisms (presumably bacteria) were
              hierarchically as shallow as possible, so that initially hierarchy could only
              increase. Then, as life diversified, with both increases and decreases
              occurring in various groups, the outer envelope of hierarchical structure would
              be pushed toward ever-higher levels. Stephen Jay Gould argued forcefully for
              this mechanism in his book, Full House.  The evidence on this question -
              whether any increasing tendency exists - is equivocal. We know that losses of
              hierarchical structure have occurred, especially at the colony level, in the
              transitions back to solitary life. But their frequency, relative to increases,
              is unknown. The study proposed here is a first-ever attempt to answer the
              question in a rigorous way. One barrier to investigation has been the fact that
              too few major transitions are known to estimate relative frequencies of
              increase and decrease in a statistically robust way. This study solves the
              problem by employing a recently developed high-resolution hierarchy scale. The
              scale identifies intermediate levels between the major levels (e.g., between
              multicellular individual and colony), in effect interpolating a series of
              "minor transitions" within the major transitions and thereby increasing the
              number of transitions available to be studied. To test for an increasing
              tendency, the study will examine minor transitions across the spectrum of
              hierarchical organization, from bacteria to supercolony. Modern phylogenetic
              methods will be used to reconstruct the history of hierarchy with each group
              studied, to count numbers of increases and decreases in hierarchy, and to
              assess their relative probabilities. 

