Title       : Inter-Annual Variability of the Hydrologic Cycle over North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0208009

Award Number: 0208009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Praveen Kumar kumar1@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mingfang Ting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xin-Zhong Liang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0208009
Kumar

The goal of the proposed research is to develop a better
              understanding of the coupling between the atmospheric and terrestrial (land)
              branches of the hydrologic cycle and identifies the physical basis of their
              inter-annual variability.  The underlying hypothesis of the proposed research
              is that the regional atmospheric moisture transport is governed by both the
              large scale forcing as well as local recycling, and their relative
              contributions have important implications in the inter-annual variability of
              the hydrologic cycle.  The relative contributions of advected and recycled
              moisture may depend on the season, re-ion and the memory of the various
              reservoirs such as the atmosphere. near-surface and sub-surface storage.  Two
              specific science objectives will be addressed in this project:

Objective I:
              Identify the modes of the observed inter-annual variability of the hydrologic
              cycle and the underlying causal mechanism.

Objective 2: Identify the roles
              of land surface and sub-surface storage  (water and snow/ice) in regulating the
              inter-annual variability of the hydrologic cycle.

Climate variability,
              natural or human induced. Have the potential to alter the moisture fluxes,
              which can have significant societal impact.  For example, it is speculated that
              C02-induced global warming would lead to an intensification of global water
              cycle (an increase in global water fluxes), leading to greater -global
              precipitation. faster evaporation and a general exacerbation of extreme weather
              and hydrological regimes including floods and droughts.  In addition we may see
              a shift in the spatial patterns of transport, resulting from the feedback
              between the changes in the hydrologic cycle and general circulation patterns. 
              Changes in hydrologic regimes have implications for water resource management
              as well as biogeochemical processes in ecosystems.  A better understanding of
              the dynamics of the hydrologic cycle and the underlying causal mechanism will
              have significant impact in all areas of water-related processes.

