Title       : Ion Exchange at Metal/Ceramic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0208008

Award Number: 0208008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Ernst fxe5@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the investigation is to understand the fundamental aspects on
              the possible bonding mechanism between metals and ceramics. Since the
              ion-exchange reaction can substantially change several fundamental materials
              properties, it is important to understand this reaction at a quantitative
              level. The goal is to study model systems with a particularly simple interface
              geometry that will be more suitable for microanalysis and will allow to
              distinguish the influence of various parameters. The work involves fabrication
              of ideal aluminum-spinel interfaces by thin-film techniques. The atomistic
              structure of the resulting interfaces and the spatial distribution of aluminum,
              magnesium, and oxygen in their immediate environment will be analyzed by
              cross-sectional high-resolution analytical TEM. Quantitative analysis of the
              elemental distribution at different stages of the reaction will give
              fundamental insight in the kinetics of this technologically important process.
              Mechanical testing, employing the method of periodic cracking, will be used to
              assess the interface strength after different annealing treatments and to
              correlate it with the observed concentration profiles of the three elements
              across the aluminum-spinel interface. The experimentally obtained concentration
              profiles will be used for modeling the kinetics of the ion-exchange reaction as
              a function of a few key parameters such as temperature, diffusion and activity
              coefficients. The results of mechanical testing and their correlation with the
              concentration profiles will serve for modeling the influence of a space-charge
              layer on metal-ceramic adhesion and to investigate the hypothesis that the
              ion-exchange reaction causes the experimentally observed strong mechanical
              bonding between aluminum and spinel. The possibility of manipulating the
              interfacial bonding will be pursued by applying an external electric field
              during the ion-exchange reaction. 

The study involves fundamental research
              on aluminum-spinel interfaces via thin-film techniques. Along with
              microstructural characterization at the interface and quantitative analysis of
              elemental distribution for studying kinetics, mechanical testing is used to
              assess the interface strength. Synthesis and HRTEM work will be carried out at
              CWRU while the mechanical testing and modeling/correlation of ion-exchange with
              strength will be performed at UCB. The project has a team-oriented approach to
              the involvement of undergraduates and minorities in research. The link between
              the mechanical strength and ion-exchange at the metal-ceramic interface
              involves fundamental materials science while will have major impact in the
              metal-ceramic bonding technology in many industries.

