Title       : RUI: Quaternary Vertebrate Paleontology and Biogeography of Southeast Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0208247

Award Number: 0208247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy H. Heaton theaton@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              RUI: Quaternary Vertebrate Paleontology and Biogeography of Southeast
              Alaska

Timothy H. Heaton
University of South
              Dakota
EAR-0208247

Southeast Alaska occupies a critical position in
              understanding the human and animal history of North America. During glacial
              epochs of the recent Ice Age, central Alaska was connected to Asia by the
              Bering Land Bridge, and the barriers to intercontinental travel were the large
              ice sheets that covered most of Canada. Coastal Alaska was a logical route for
              travel between ice-free areas because the Pacific Ocean kept the region
              relatively warm and provided a constant source of food. Until recently
              Quaternary fossils were unknown from Southeast Alaska, and geologists and
              biologists believed that the coast had been completely overridden with ice. But
              a decade of research has demonstrated that Southeast Alaska was home to an
              arctic community of mammals and birds that thrived even during the coldest
              period of the Last Glacial Maximum. Beginning in 1990, limestone caves
              containing Ice Age fossil remains were discovered on northern Prince of Wales
              Island. The most productive of these was On Your Knees Cave, which contained a
              nearly complete fossil record spanning the last 50,000 years as well as the
              most extensive archaeological record of Southeast Alaska (spanning the last
              10,000 years). The next step is to excavate caves on multiple islands and on
              the mainland of Southeast Alaska to gain a complete biogeographic history of
              the region during and following the Last Glacial Maximum. Promising sites
              containing vertebrate fossils have been located on the outermost islands (Dall,
              Heceta, and Coronation Islands) and on the mainland near the town of Wrangell.
              Other regions being explored are karst areas of northern Chichagof Island and
              Glacier Bay National Park. The objectives of this project are to locate and
              conduct small-scale excavations at many sites in hopes of finding other fossil
              deposits of similar antiquity to On Your Knees Cave. It is also hoped that
              additional archaeological records can be located that will help determine the
              antiquity of humans in the region and assess the possibility that Southeast
              Alaska was a corridor for travel between Asia and North America during the Ice
              Age.

