Title       : Collaborative Research: Formal Privacy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0208996

Award Number: 0208996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Gunter gunter@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Growing pressure to collect information on the Internet has created a need
              for
more sophisticated ways to characterize privacy rights and balance them
              against
legitimate commercial and law enforcement objectives.  A wide range of
              businesses
now rely on their ability to collect information about online
              customers as a
foundation of their added value in the market place.  The use
              or potential use of
the Internet for purposes such as child pornography and
              planning of hate crimes
and terrorism have heighted interest in (and loosened
              regulations on) network
monitoring.  Theft of intellectual property has led to
              the development of
numerous protection mechanisms; these often involve
              registrations and involuntary
monitoring of various kinds.  In order to make
              security easier (and explore a
lucrative business model), a number of
              companies seek to act as third-party
caretakers of private information such as
              keys, authentication secrets, and
credit card numbers.  Arrayed against these
              trends are many citizens incensed by
aggressive means used to collect
              information from them and a variety of groups
that champion privacy
              rights.

There have been many advances in technologies both to aid
              information gathering
and limit it.  One important trend is toward more
              advanced systems for creating
and managing digital credentials and
              authorization databases.  In current
practice credentials are sometimes
              `pushed' (like presenting a ticket to get into
a movie theater) sometimes
              `pulled' (like getting access to an airplane seat with
a `paperless' ticket)
              and sometimes both (like making a purchase at a store with
a credit card whose
              validity is confirmed online).  These approaches have
Internet-based analogs,
              and technical advances have increased the range of
options considerably in
              recent years.  For example, work on public key systems
has advanced techniques
              for delegation based on chains of `pushed' credentials
and increased the
              automation of credential collection.  Another important trend
is toward more
              advanced systems for protecting privacy using anonymizing
techniques.  Tools
              such as onion routers and anonymous web publication servers
provide some
              support but other techniques directly aid fine-grained mechanisms
for
              obtaining privileges without exposing information unnecessarily.  

This work
              aims to develop formal support for characterizing privacy in the
context of
              these advances.  Efforts to improve access control systems and
credential
              distribution have paid little attention to privacy mechanisms so
              far,
resulting in systems that are good at propagating credentials reliably,
              but not
tuned to do so within well-understood privacy constraints.  This
              collaboration
will build on our work in credential distribution and anonymity
              to create an
integrated architecture and protocols to provide advanced access
              control within
the limitations of privacy constraints.
