Title       : Do Porphyroblast Inclusion Trails Provide Information About Regional Tectonism?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0208394

Award Number: 0208394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Vernon mcraney@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI, Dr. Ron Vernon, was recently appointed a Research Professor at the
              University of Southern California.  This proposal would support research by the
              PI and USC graduate student, Luke Jensen.  This proposal outlines a project
              designed to examine several hypotheses regarding the significance of inclusion
              trails preserved within porphyroblasts and the timing and structural setting of
              porphyroblast growth.  It has been suggested that porphyroblast inclusion
              trails may preserve information about regional orogenic events and possibly
              past plate motions.  If this hypothesis is correct, then porphyroblast studies
              provide a powerful method of unraveling orogeny and past plate motions. 
              However, the PI 's studies elsewhere suggest that structural and metamorphic
              heterogeneities are formed by various processes at all scales and can markedly
              affect inclusion trail patterns in porphyroblasts; that complex porphyroblast
              growth features and internal inclusion trail patterns can fon-n in
              potphyroblasts that grow during short time intervals in contact aureoles,
              indicating that local complexity in porphyroblasts does not imply regional
              comple xity, and that using microstructural information preserved only in
              porphyroblasts to infer orogenic processes and plate motions is generally
              unjustified.  They hope to test these contradictory hypotheses by examining
              porphyroblasts in a prograde metamorphic sequence (chlorite to sillimanite
              zones),Cascades core, Washington in three settings: regional, contact aureoles,
              and in folds.  They will combine modem techniques for studying poiphyroblast
              matrix relationships with cathode luminescence, neutron diffraction, and
              limited geochronologic studies.
