Title       : Synthetic Receptors for Anions, Salts and Neutral Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0208024

Award Number: 0208024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley D. Smith smith.115@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 0000,1144,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The general goal of this experimental research program is to design and
              synthesize organic receptor molecules with useful supramolecular functions, and
              to employ analytical, biochemical and physical chemistry methods to evaluate
              the success of the designs. The current proposal has three research objectives
              that build on discoveries made in the previous grant cycle. The structure and
              reactivity of ion-pairs has been a major chemical research topic for many
              decades, however, the majority of studies have been complicated by the inherent
              lability of the ion-pairs. The principal investigator has developed synthetic
              receptors that bind and solubilize isolated contact ion-pairs in non-polar
              solvents. These complexes provide a unique opportunity to characterize ion-pair
              structure and dynamics using NMR and X-ray crystallography. The major question
              to be addressed is how do biologically important, anisotropic anions with pi
              -electron density such as RCO2-, CN-, N3-, and NO3-, simultaneously interact
              with receptor NH residues and the bound metal cation. It is hypothesized that
              the receptor NH residues form hydrogen bonds with anion pi
              -electrons.

Another objective is to develop synthetic membrane transport
              carriers for chloride salts. Biologically, anion transport is a ubiquitous
              process in nearly all cells and defective Cl- transport is related to a number
              of disease states. One example is cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease that
              afflicts 1 in 2000 Caucasians. Some researchers think that synthetic Cl-
              conductors have potential as therapeutic agents. As a first step towards
              testing this hypothesis, low-molecular-weight salt carriers will be synthesized
              and evaluated for their abilities to selectively transport sodium chloride or
              potassium chloride across vesicle membranes. And finally, Professor Smith will
              demonstrate how rotaxanes can be used in novel prodrug strategies. An anion
              template method will be employed to prepare interlocked molecules known as
              rotaxanes with crown ether-containing wheels and acetal-containing axles. The
              molecular design allows conjugation of the rotaxane wheels with molecular
              entities that improve tissue-selective targeting. Thus, the rotaxane wheel can
              be thought of as a novel drug carrier that is equipped with target recognition
              capability, as well as a reductively activated drug-release trigger.

With
              this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) will support
              the research of Professor Bradley Smith of the University of Notre Dame.
              Professor Smith's work in the supramolecular chemistry field has many potential
              applications in biochemistry, such as uses in membrane transport and control
              released prodrug systems. The research may offer benefits to society as
              potential therapeutic agents for cystic fibrosis and as control released
              prodrugs for curing tumors or cancers. An important human resources outcome of
              this program is that the project workers (students and postdoctoral associates)
              receive broad multidisciplinary training, which enables them to successfully
              pursue a range of scientific career choices.

