Title       : CDMA/HMD (Hierarchical Multiuser Diversity) Access Schemes for Multimedia
               Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0208135

Award Number: 0208135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279926             (Estimated)
Investigator: Junshan Zhang junshan.zhang@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at developing a suite of multiuser diversity driven algorithms
              for packet scheduling and localized routing, and to obtain some overriding
              principles in multimedia wireless systems. In particular, the issues of
              hierarchical multiuser diversity (HMD) driven downlink and uplink access
              schemes for multimedia traffic will be studied. The objective related to HMD
              driven downlink access schemes is to devise efficient packet transmission
              schemes for the downlink, exploiting multiuser diversity gain in a multiuser
              wireless system. Specifically, the proposal addresses such an HMD scheme in
              which each user can choose either a direct transmission mode or a relay
              transmission mode. Treating delay tolerance as a network resource, the
              HMD-driven scheduling for both direct trans-mission and relay transmission is
              then explored for both single-cell setting and cellular networks. Also the
              localized routing algorithms will be developed for both slowly fading channels
              and fast fading channels, due to mobility. In the part of the project related
              to based on code division multiple access (CDMA/HMD) uplink access schemes, the
              pro-ject will include studies of access schemes taking into account explicitly
              the delay con-straints of different multimedia traffic, with particular focus
              on the uplink. Since the up-link is a multi-access channel, the multiuser
              diversity will be explored in the context of CDMA. In particular, the number of
              simultaneous transmissions will be optimized, based on the channel conditions
              across the users. The project will also address the critical issues related to
              the buffering, jitter, fairness and possible loss due to switching to a new
              relay. Finally, the trade-off between HMD and CDMA will be studied, with the
              aim at develop-ing a hybrid scheme that achieves multiuser diversity gain and
              guarantee the user's minimal throughput requirement as the same time.
