Title       : Towards Improved Logics For Reasoning About Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0208535

Award Number: 0208535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Y. Halpern halpern@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Security protocols are notoriously difficult to design and prove correct. The
              goal of this project is to design a logic that deals with a number of
              deficiencies in current logics.  The focus will be on  two issues: 

(1)
              Getting more realistic notions of knowledge: Informal arguments regarding the
              correctness of security protocols often involve statements about knowledge and
              belief.  Assumptions such as "The adversary does not know the key" and "The
              participants believe that k is a good session key" are standard.  The standard
              semantics for these operators has the problem that agents are able to deduce
              all logical tautologies and the logical consequences of their knowledge.
              Because agents "know" how to factor, for example, they can break RSA.

(2)
              Modeling more general intruders: Current logics almost invariably use the
              Dolev-Yao intruder model, which assume that an intruder can compose messages,
              replay them, or decipher them if she knows the right keys, but cannot otherwise
              "crack" encrypted messages.  While useful, this model is restrictive, in that
              it does not consider the knowledge that agents have of the protocol being run
              and cannot deal with probabilistic arguments, such as an adversary randomly
              guessing the right key to use.  

The research will take as its point of
              departure the standard models of knowledge and belief based on possible worlds,
              augmented with probability, so as to be able to reason about knowledge and
              probability.  The notion of algorithmic knowledge, where an agent uses an
              algorithm to compute what it knows, will be used to deal with resource-bounded
              reasoning.  


