Title       : Ge Islands on Ultrathin Silicon-on-Insulator: Opportunities for Nanoscale
               Characterization and Processing of Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0208673

Award Number: 0208673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Sutter psutter@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eli A. Sutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project involves a combination of experimental research and numerical
              simulation with the objectives of understanding heteroepitaxial materials
              integration using oxide-supported compos-ite substrates, and of identifying
              novel routes for materials processing using the strain-fields of self-assembled
              nanostructures. The proposed work is motivated by recent results on the
              forma-tion of Ge quantum dot (QD) islands on ultrathin silicon-on-insulator
              (SOI) substrates. For growth of pyramidal 'hut' islands, a previously unknown
              local strain relaxation process was found that involves the nanoscale stressor
              as well as the thin substrate, and results in a pro-nounced buckling of the Si
              substrate slab. This result suggests a novel route for comprehensive
              characterization of the incoherent c-Si/a-SiO2 interface in SOI and related
              composite structures. These studies strive to determine the mechanism by which
              this interface responds to applied stress, and the temperature-dependent
              kinetic parameters that govern and limit the response. 
%%%  
The project
              addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic
              materi-als science having technological relevance. An important feature of the
              project is the strong em-phasis on education, and the integration of research
              and education. The proposed project offers outstanding research and training
              opportunities for students at all levels. It will involve participa-tion of
              undergraduates, and promote the integration of minorities, particularly female
              students, into science and technology. Planned outreach activities focus on
              networking with local middle- and high schools and aim at sparking the interest
              of the younger generation. 
***     

