Title       : Role of Silicon-Organic Interactions in Silica Biomineralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0208036

Award Number: 0208036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nita Sahai sahai@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Sahai
EAR-0208036

There is a growing appreciation of the need to understand
              organic-inorganic interactions at the molecular-level for processes relevant to
              biogeochemistry as exemplified by silica biomineralization, and to materials
              science as in the controlled synthesis of biomimetic mesoporous silica. I
              propose to investigate the nature of silica interactions with carbohydrates and
              amines in the aqueous phase combining theoretical and experimental approaches.
              We will (i) determine whether putative hypercoordinated Si-carbohydrate
              complexes can play a role in biological silicon uptake, and (ii) identify the
              role of amines in catalyzing the biopolymerization of dissolved silicon
              species. The carbohydrates examined will include polyalcohols, sugar-acids and
              polysaccharides. The amines will be examined for the most likely pathway of
              biogenic silica nucleation and polymerization. Specifically, we will attempt to
              determine whether the amines act to catalyze hydrolysis of a starting
              Si-organic compound via a SN2 mechanism or whether polyamines act to bring
              about aggregation of inorganically formed silica clusters from a starting
              compound of silicic acid. For the former mechanism, we will examine amines of
              different nucleophilicities including methylamine, dimethylamine, pyridine,
              guanidine, imidazole, lysine, arginine and histidine. The alternative mechanism
              will be studied using 1,2-diaminoethane, 1,2-diaminopropane,
              1,3-diaminopropane, 1,2,3-triaminopropane, and analogous triamines on a butane
              backbone as the model polyamines. The effect of nitrogen hybridization will be
              determined by comparing 1,3-diaminopentane to imidazole. Further, the effect of
              1,6-diaminohexane versus 1,4-diaminobenzene will permit examination of carbon
              hybridization effects. Experimental NMR and Attenuated Total Reflectance
              Fourier Transform Infra-Red (ATR FTIR) spectroscopy will provide independent
              measurements. Temperature dependence NMR will provide activation enthalpies.
              The computational method used will be ab initio MO theory to calculate the
              structure, energy, vibrational frequencies and 29Si Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              (NMR) shifts to explain the experimental spectra, and to determine the
              electronic contributions to the overall nucleophilicities of the amines.

