Title       : Stable Isotope Studies of Vegetation Change and Mammal Evolution in Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0208123

Award Number: 0208123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Ayliffe layliffe@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thure E. Cerling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to study the stable carbon and oxygen isotopes preserved in the tooth
              enamel of Australia's herbivorous mammals to reveal dietary shifts and
              environmental changes over the past 24 million years, especially in relation to
              the spread of the tropical grasses which employ the C4 photosynthetic pathway.
              As an island continent, Australia's physiographic and climatic histories are
              unique. Intercontinental biotic migration has been severely constrained by vast
              transoceanic dispersal distances, which isolated the continent to terrestrial
              faunal migration for most of the Cenozoic. Superimposed upon this is the fact
              that most of Australia's endemic mammals are marsupials. They diversified in
              situ and filled a broad spectrum of niches comparable with placental mammals on
              other continents. Australia thus presents us with an unparalleled experiment in
              mammal evolution: an isolated radiation of fundamentally different mammals,
              adapting to landscape and climatic changes in the absence of competing
              immigrants. Stable isotope analyses of Australian herbivore teeth will allow us
              to examine the relative strengths of hypotheses previously advanced for the
              expansion of C4 vegetation and faunal turnover in the over the past 24 million
              years. Does Australia fit the global model, and if not, why?
The proposal
              seeks to address the following key issues.
1. Timing of the appearance and
              expansion of C4 vegetation in Australia compared with the rest of the world, as
              interpreted from d13C values in the tooth enamel of the three terrestrial
              herbivore lineages: kangaroos, wombats and diprotodontoids.
2. Relationships
              between evolutionary trends in Australian Neogene terrestrial herbivores and
              shifts in prevailing climate/vegetation regimes inferred from enamel d13C and
              d18O values.
3. Development of "seasonality" in Australian climate since the
              Miocene deduced from isotopic fluctuations down the profile of ever-growing
              wombat molars, and relationship to occurrence of C4 plants.
4. Paleoecologies
              of late Cenozoic Australian herbivores and communities.
Critical to tackling
              these issues is the need to establish modern Australian isotope baselines. We
              will ascertain diet-enamel enrichment factors for extant kangaroos and wombats,
              and dietary isotopic variation within species across different seasons and
              environments. There is no basis for assuming that isotopic offsets between diet
              and animal tissues established for herbivorous placental mammals will hold for
              marsupials, especially given their overt differences in developmental biology.
              Indeed, our pilot data do reveal marked ontogenetic variation along the molar
              row for several different kangaroo species. 
Our preliminary d13C data of
              fossil marsupials also indicate a diet containing C4 plants for animals from
              only the two youngest of 11 northern, central and eastern fossil localities so
              far sampled. Both are ~3.4 million years old and, if their C4 signatures can be
              attributed to grasses, are much younger than those sites in which the earliest
              appearances of C4 grass diets are observed in Asia, Africa and the Americas. We
              intend to extend this initial work to cover all of the significant Neogene
              fossil deposits in Australia to better outline the isotope changes recorded in
              the teeth of fossil marsupials through time.

