Title       : Wilberforce University STEP-UP (Science, Technology and Engineering Preeminent
               Undergraduate Program)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0208265

Award Number: 0208265
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2256817            (Estimated)
Investigator: Delbert R. Buffinger dbuffing@wilberforce.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wilberforce University
	      Brush Row Road
	      Wilberforce, OH  45384    513/376-2911

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The Wilberforce University Science, Technology, and Engineering Preeminent
              Undergraduate (STEP-UP) Program addresses the underrepresentation of minorities
              in Science, Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) by 
enhancing
              minority access, retention, graduation and successful transition to graduate
              study in STEM fields.

The program starts with a Pre-College Summer Institute
              addressing deficiencies in mathematical reasoning, problem solving, critical
              reading, verbal reasoning, technical writing and vocabulary building. During
              the freshman year, all STEM majors will be housed on the same floors of the
              men's and women's dormitories to foster a sense of community and shared goals
              as well as to enhance performance rates. Freshmen will enroll in a series of
              seminars focussing on careers in STEM and the importance of graduate school.
              During the summer between the freshmen and sophomore years, undergraduates will
              participate in an intensive Summer Program focusing on STEM content, study
              skills and problem solving. 

A series of activities will be put in place to
              ensure that undergraduates successfully matriculate through the STEM curricula
              and prepare for graduate school. These include a peer tutoring-mentor program
              in all gatekeeper courses including a mandatory two-hour drill session for each
              course each week, Summer research opportunities in collaboration with Florida
              A&M University, and a GRE-Preparation Course. 

A Science and Engineering
              Graduate School Fair will allow juniors and seniors to examine various graduate
              programs and to network with faculty at other universities.  In addition, the
              biology program will be revised and restructured. A course in experimental
              biology will be developed with a focus on emerging techniques required in the
              biotechnology area. 

