Title       : Continental Extension in the western Woodlark Basin: P-T-t-D constraints from
               Normanby and Misima Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0208334

Award Number: 0208334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne L. Baldwin sbaldwin@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Fitzgerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Woodlark Basin of southeastern Papua New Guinea is one of the world's most
              rapidly extending rifts and provides a natural laboratory to study how
              continental lithosphere ruptures during the transition from rifting to seafloor
              spreading.  It is here that the active metamorphic core complexes of the
              D'Entrecasteaux Islands were first discovered (e.g.,Hill et al.,1992). These
              islands preserve some of the youngest, most rapidly exhumed metamorphic and
              igneous rocks known on Earth (Baldwin et al.,1993).The exhumed lower plates of
              the D'Entrecasteaux Island metamorphic core complexes provide a record of
              active continental extension and magmatism synchronous with the westward
              propagation of the Woodlark Basin
seafloor spreading system. While the
              seafloor spreading history (e.g.,Taylor et al.,1999) and the transition from
              rifting to spreading in the vicinity of the Moresby Seamount (Taylor and
              Huchon, in review) is known, more onshore geologic research is required to
              fully understand the history and mechanisms of continental rifting in the
              Woodlark Basin.  Rupturing of continental lithosphere imparts a thermal record
              of events that are preserved as isotopic variations within minerals. These
              events can be revealed using thermochronology, and when integrated with P-T-D
              constraints, can be used to determine the timing and rates of exhumation
              associated with continental extension and magmatism.  The PI's propose to
              further investigate the relationship between continental rifting and seafloor
              spreading in the western Woodlark Basin by 1) documenting the P-T-t-D histories
              of rocks exposed on Normanby Island, the easternmost of the D'Entrecasteaux
              Islands, located west of the active rift tip, 2) documenting the P-T-t-D
              histories of rocks exposed on Misima Island, part of the southern rifted
              continental margin and 3) determining the age of eclogite facies metamorphism
              in the exhumed lower plates of the D'Entrecasteaux Islands core complexes. 
              Results will be compared to previous P-T-t-D studies on the D'Entrecasteaux
              Islands and Moresby Seamount.  Longitudinal and latitudinal variations (or lack
              thereof) in the timing of continental extension and magmatism will be
              interpreted in relation to the history of seafloor spreading in the Woodlark
              Basin and recently proposed models for the evolution of the region. 
