Title       : GPS Measurements of Plate Interactions and Intra-Plate Deformation in the
               Western Mediterranean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0208200

Award Number: 0208200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Reilinger reilinge@erl.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For the past three years, MIT, Cornell University, and their Moroccan partners
              have developed and observed a network comprising 3 continuous (CGPS) and 22
              survey-mode (SGPS) GPS sites in Morocco to determine more precisely Africa
              plate motion, the interaction of the African and Eurasian plates in the western
              Mediterranean, and deformation associated with present-day tectonics of the NW
              part of the African plate (Morocco). This work is being facilitated by
              complementary GPS studies being pursued
by the PI's partners in Spain and
              Portugal with whom they are collaborating within the framework of the AMIGO
              Project (Atlantic and Mediterranean Interdisciplinary GPS Observations). Their
              work in Morocco is providing new kinematic information on plate motions and
              interactions that promise to constrain dynamic models for continental collision
              processes as well as intra-plate deformation. In this proposal, they request
              support to continue to monitor the Morocco GPS network for an additional 3
              years, and to densify station coverage to determine better strain patterns in
              the most actively deforming regions.

Preliminary GPS site velocities derived
              from three surveys over a 2 year period (10/99 - 10/01) have been resolved to
              ~2 mm/yr (1 sigma, or 5 mm/yr 95%). These uncertainties are on the order of the
              entire Africa-Eurasia convergence rate (~4 - 5 mm/yr in Morocco), and are not
              yet sufficient to provide reliable constraints on Africa plate motion or intra-
              plate deformation. However, the present velocity field does indicate overall
              WNW motion relative to Eurasia at about 6 +or- 2 mm/yr (1 sigma) for sites
              located south of the Rif Mountains, consistent within uncertainties with our
              new GPS estimates of Africa plate motion derived from available GPS data for
              the entire African plate (~ 4.7 mm/yr WNW). In contrast, sites located along
              the western Rif Mountains in NW Morocco indicate significantly slower northward
              motion, and possibly southward motion, suggesting present-day extension in the
              Alboran Sea. These two observations are consistent with the continuing NW
              motion of the African plate, active extension of the Alboran Sea (westernmost
              part of the Mediterranean between Morocco and Spain), and left-lateral, strike
              slip deformation between the western and eastern Rif. This overall, first-order
              pattern is consistent with deformation as estimated from earthquakes and
              neotectonic field studies. The PI's request continued support for 3 years to:
              1) resolve better velocities on existing SGPS sites with surveys in 2002, 2003,
              2004, and 2005 (all field costs borne by the Morocco side), and integrate the
              Morocco velocity field with GPS observations from Iberia, 2) establish 10 new
              SGPS sites in the Rif Mountains to constrain better apparent intra- late
              deformation (shortening and left lateral, strike-slip), 3) develop and apply
              elastic block, and finite element models for active deformation in the western
              Mediterranean, and, 4) further develop Moroccan in-country capabilities in
              GPS-geodynamic applications. This last task will allow the Moroccan partners
              (retaining the equipment provided by our joint project) to carry out all future
              GPS observations on their own and with Moroccan support beyond the requested
              grant period. We expect that future requests for support from NSF for this
              work, if required, will be restricted to data integration, modeling, and
              interpretation.
