Title       : UMEB: Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental Sciences (R.I.M.E.S.)
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0208517

Award Number: 0208517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Farrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1135,1228,5926,9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental Sciences (R.I.M.E.S.)
              Program is an international research and educational collaboration.  It was
              created for highly motivated minority scholars who have completed two years of
              college and who are committed to research careers in marine or environmental
              sciences.  As with Dr. Jackson's highly successful Biotechnology Program for
              nontraditional students at Massachusetts Bay Community College, the guiding
              philosophy of the R.I.M.E.S. Program is that continuous interdisciplinary
              research training coupled with intensive mentoring drive the success of
              nontraditional scholars in science.  The goal is to produce an outstanding and
              numerically significant corps of minority researchers in the marine and
              environmental sciences who will bring distinction and much-needed diversity to
              their fields.

The academic component of the R.I.M.E.S. Program occurs at
              Boston University School of Medicine (BUSM) and prepares scholars for the
              scholastic rigor of a doctoral-degree program.  This is achieved through
              intensive mentoring and rigorous tutorials designed to enhance the academic
              performance of scholars during their junior and senior years.  Scholars are
              selected to the R.I.M.E.S. Program through a rigorous application process
              designed to identify and recruit only the most motivated individuals. 
              Recruitment focuses on men and women whose personal circumstances made
              traditional college education difficult or impossible.  Thus, recruitment is
              primarily from three categories of college sophomores:  (1) young
              African-American and Hispanic males from single-parent families (the two most
              at-risk societal groups in the nation), (2) single mothers whose children are
              12 years and older, and (3) married women who deferred their education to raise
              children.  Scholars from these categories attend college in the face of
              overwhelming obstacles.  Thus, they already possess the human qualities that
              drive the career of a successful scientist: persistence, focus,
              resourcefulness, guile and tenacity.  The academic component of the R.I.M.E.S.
              Program promotes the utilization of these attributes so that scholars achieve
              and expect continuous scholastic excellence.

The research component of the
              R.I.M.E.S. Program integrates marine and environmental science and molecular
              biology through molecular investigations at BUSM of organisms collected in
              summer field research on the volcanic island of Montserrat (Northern Antilles).
               A corps of research mentors, established marine and environmental scientists
              from several countries, is available to guide the scholars on Montserrat and
              (by e-mail, phone and fax) after they return to Dr. Jackson's lab at BUSM.  The
              research projects converge on effects of the environmental stresses exerted on
              the ecosystem of Montserrat by the eruptions (in 1995 and 1997) and ongoing
              activity of the Soufriere Hills volcano.  The abrupt environmental changes
              produced by this cataclysm provide a rare opportunity to study ecosystem
              development at the molecular level.  The investigative focus is on molecular
              processes that have been modified in adaptive response of organisms to sudden
              environmental changes caused by the volcano.
