Title       : BAC and YAC Libraries for Exploring Metazoan Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0208335

Award Number: 0208335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Steele resteele@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sean B. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pieter de Jong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Technau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0208335
Steele

A complete description of the evolutionary history of
              multicellular animals will require detailed information on the content,
              organization, and regulatory mechanisms of the genomes of animals from phyla
              throughout the animal phylogenetic tree. Of particular importance for such
              studies are species that diverged early from the rest of the animals and
              unicellular organisms which are close relatives of animals. Features of the
              genomes of such organisms which are shared with more recently diverged animals
              would then be ones which were present in the ancestor of all modern animals.
              The goal of this project is to prepare and archive bacterial artificial
              chromosome libraries from Nematostella vectensis (a sea anemome which is a
              member of the early diverging animal phylum Cnidaria) and from the
              choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis, a unicellular organism closely related
              to multicellular animals. These libraries will provide important resources for
              addressing a variety of questions related to the origins, evolution, and
              development of multicellular animals. Such questions include: How did the Hox
              family of developmental regulatory genes evolve? When did various other
              developmental regulatory gene families appear during animal evolution? How
              closely related are choanoflagellates and multicellular animals, and what genes
              were necessary to make the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity?
              What happened at the genome level when nerves were added to multicellular
              animals? What cell adhesion and intercellular signaling molecules were present
              in the common ancestor of modern animals? Are  cnidarian genes organized into
              operons, as suggested by the presence of spliced leader addition in this
              phylum? In addition to providing material for analysis of animal evolution, the
              libraries will facilitate the isolation of gene promoters, which will be
              essential for the development of functional assays in these organisms and for
              dissecting gene regulatory networks. The libraries generated by this project
              will be freely available to the research community. Information on the
              libraries and their availability will be provided through various means,
              including appropriate scientific newsgroups and web sites. 

