Title       : Applied Harmonic Analysis and Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0208568

Award Number: 0208568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Strohmer strohmer@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The increasing requirements on data rate and quality of
service for
              wireless communications systems call for new
techniques to improve radio link
              reliability and to increase
spectral efficiency.  The three key technologies
              to achieve these
goals are equalization, diversity, and channel
              coding.
Mathematics is of fundamental importance to these
              technologies,
providing the theoretical basis as well as the means
              for
efficient numerical implementations.  The investigator derives
              a
theoretical and numerical framework for designing equalization
techniques
              for time-varying channels.  Using methods from
pseudo-differential operator
              theory and time-frequency analysis,
he develops a qualitative and quantitative
              theory for the
approximate diagonalization of operators associated
              with
time-varying systems.  These theoretical results form a keystone
in the
              construction of fast and reliable numerical equalization
methods that are
              based on Krylov subspace techniques.  The
investigator also studies the use of
              frame theory in wireless
communications.  Using concepts from sphere packings
              and group
theory, he analyzes theoretical properties of special frames
              such
as Grassmannian frames.  Furthermore, he develops theoretical
              and
numerical schemes in connection with multi-carrier communication
systems
              such as OFDM.  This includes the design of transmission
signals with specific
              properties using a generalization of the
concept of prolate spheroidal wave
              functions.  By taking recent
tools from harmonic analysis into the wireless
              communications
community, this project enables further advances
              and
breakthroughs in wireless communications.  At the same time it
stimulates
              new research areas in applied mathematics and paves
the road for further
              interactions between applied mathematicians
and communication engineers.
    
              The goal of this project is to develop mathematical concepts
and computational
              methods for wireless communications technology.
The investigator combines
              modern tools from mathematics with
methods from information theory and signal
              processing to develop
new concepts and algorithms for key technologies in
              wireless
communications, such as coding, transmission, and
              equalization.
Mathematics is of fundamental importance to these
              technologies,
because it provides the theoretical basis as well as the
              means
for efficient numerical implementations.  By providing tools to
improve
              radio link reliability and increase data rates, this
project is instrumental
              in meeting the increasing requirements on
future wireless communications
              systems.  The project produces
conceptual deliverables in the form of new
              mathematical methods
to analyze and construct wireless transmission systems. 
              The
project also produces concrete deliverables in the form of
numerical
              algorithms for use in the scientific and industrial
sector.
