Title       : COM-MTDP: A New Approach for Analysis of Multiagent Teamwork
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0208580

Award Number: 0208580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milind Tambe tambe@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite significant progress in the Belief-desire-intention theories of teamwork
              and their applications, existing multiagent teamwork research suffers from at 
              least two serious shortcomings. First, there  is no quantitative analysis of 
              the optimality of its prescriptions for agent behavior in teamwork.  Second,
              there is no analysis  of the complexity of the  general teamwork problem or
              specific team coordination  decisions. To address these shortcomings, we
              propose a novel framework,  the COMmunicative Multiagent Team Decision Problem
              (COM-MTDP). COM-MTDP is based on the decision-theoretic work in  economic team
              theory, but with significant extensions to introduce dynamics and   interagent
              communication.  As a result,  at its core, COM-MTDP is driven by  communicating
              partially observable markov decision processes (POMDPs). The projected impact
              of the development of COM-MTDP will be a new, general framework for theoretical
               and empirical  analysis of teamwork. Thus, rather than simply providing 
              teamwork heuristics, researchers could analyze the computational complexities
              of the optimal team problem, and analyze the complexity-optimality tradeoffs in
              proposed  team coordination heuristics and implementations. Such analysis would
              lead to improved, robust, general team coordination algorithms that explicitly
              reason about such tradeoffs. Finally, COM-MTDP ideas could potentially be more
              generally applicable (e.g.,  in  analysis of multiagent contracting
              algorithms.) 
