Title       : Extremes of Ocean Biogeochemistry: Focus on the Permian-Triassic Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0208119

Award Number: 0208119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Kump lkump@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Arthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

	Geologic evidence indicates that many periods of biotic and
              environmental crisis coincided with times when the world's oceans were highly
              stratified in their chemical and isotopic composition, with deep waters that
              were devoid of oxygen and likely strongly enriched in carbon dioxide and
              hydrogen sulfide. The Late Permian, notable as the time of the largest mass
              extinction in the fossil record (251 million years ago), is thought to
              represent such an interval. Stagnation of ocean circulation has been invoked to
              explain extreme oceanic conditions of widespread anoxia during this time, and
              reinvigoration of circulation has been suggested as a mechanism to bring toxic
              waters to the ocean's surface in a global Lake Nyos-type event, leading to mass
              extinction. 
The project proposed here will explore the relationship between
              ocean stagnation and chemical stratification, and the mechanisms that sustain
              shallow-water anoxia in the face of wind-driven mixing, using numerical models
              to ensure that the scenarios proposed are consistent with fundamental
              principles of mass, energy, and isotopic balance. Model results will be
              compared with existing isotopic and lithologic data. In addition, new sulfur
              isotopic data will be obtained from one of the most continuous and well-studied
              Permian-Triassic boundary sections in the world, providing an important missing
              piece of biogeochemical information against which to evaluate the models. The
              modeling will also provide motivation and guidance for further data collection
              in specific locales. 
The model will have the unique ability to explore the
              chemistry of an anoxic ocean, and as such, its availability should be of great
              interest to the scientific community. The intuition developed should help to
              guide subsequent formulation of conceptual models concerning the relationship
              between climate, ocean circulation, ocean biogeochemistry, and biological
              response. 

