Title       : RUI: Fluctuating Resources and Mechanisms of Invasibility Along the
               Prairie-Forest Border
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0208125

Award Number: 0208125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Davis davis@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0208125
Davis
It is widely agreed that invasion ecology theory needs to become
              more mechanistic,
quantitative, and predictive and that field experiments and
              better models are required to help
accomplish this goal. The initial goal of
              the proposed project is to test a recent mechanistic
hypothesis of
              invasibility and to develop a quantitative empirical model that can be used
              to
predict the changing invasibility of an environment over time. The
              hypothesis tested proposes
that a mechanistic relationship exists between
              invasibility and resource availability, and that
changes in invasibility are
              often due to changes in the competition intensity from resident
vegetation,
              which in turn result from fluctuations in resource availability. This project
              will be
conducted in a native grass environment located on a Minnesota sand
              plain. Thus, a second goal
of the project is to increase our understanding of
              the invasion dynamics associated with
grasslands and woodland/grassland
              ecotones in semi-arid environments. These goals will be
accomplished in a
              study consisting of three parts.
During the first stage, an empirical model of
              invasibility will be developed using data
from a field experiment in which
              temporal patterns of resource availability (water) will be
manipulated in
              plots being experimentally invaded. During this stage, data from the
              field
experiments will also be used to directly test predictions of the
              fluctuating resource availability
hypothesis. Water was selected as the
              resource to be manipulated because previous studies of
seedling establishment
              at Cedar Creek have shown that establishment success of herbaceous and
plants
              was most strongly correlated with soil water conditions. During the second
              stage, an
existing mechanistic soil water model will be used to produce
              season-long soil water profiles at
the study site under a variety of
              climatological (temperature and rainfall) data sets, including
climatological
              data recorded at the study site during the project, historical climatological
              data for
the region, and various hypothetical temperature and precipitation
              regimes that might occur in
the future if the climate changes. During the
              third stage, the season-long water profiles produced
by the mechanistic model
              will be used as input for the empirical model of invasibility.
              The
invasibility predictions produced by the integration of the empirical and
              mechanistic models will
compared to invasibility data obtained from a separate
              field experiment conducted during the
study. If the integrated model is
              successful in its predictions, then it will be used with the
historical and
              hypothetical climatological data to determine the extent of annual variability
              in
invasibility of native grasslands in the past, and the extent to which
              invasibility may change in
the future if temperature and/or precipitation
              regimes change.
The goals of the proposed study are both to advance ecological
              theory and the ecological
understanding of specific environments. In addition
              to testing a recent mechanistic theory of
invasibility, the study will develop
              a method to model and predict invasibility that is intended to
be transferable
              to other environments. Recent evidence has shown that grasslands and old
              fields
are more responsive to fluctuations in precipitation than other biomes
              and that water limited
environments such as grasslands and savannas are likely
              to be some of the biomes most affected
by future climate change. Thus, by
              testing a specific mechanistic theory of invasibility in the
water limited
              grassland-forest ecotone at Cedar Creek with an experimental study culminating
              in
the development of a model of invasibility, this study will contribute to
              the important pool of
knowledge that will be necessary to predict and prepare
              for the possible ecological consequences
of global environmental change in
              these environments.
