Title       : Collaborative Research: Tests of Postseismic Deformation Models with Continued
               Absolute Gravity and GPS Measurements in Alaska, Phase 1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0208164

Award Number: 0208164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Zumberge mzumberge@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn S. Sasagawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zumberge
EAR-0208164

This project is measuring the absolute value of
              gravity, co-located with GPS measurements, in Alaska.  Proposed explanations
              for the transient deformation after great earthquakes include viscoelastic
              response, aseismic creep and combinations of the two.  Different models of
              postseismic viscoelastic relaxation predict observable gravity changes over
              1000 km length scales, with a complex spatial pattern.  To date, the viscosity
              profile is best determined by postglacial rebound studies.  Gravity and GPS
              measurements offer the opportunity to obtain viscosity profile estimates for
              the Alaskan plate boundary. The area is especially interesting, as the
              viscosity of subduction zone materials may be very different from that beneath
              the centers of continental and oceanic plates.  Aseismic creep is predicted to
              produce deformation of a more limited and markedly different spatial character
              than that of viscoelastic relaxation.  Determining the contribution of aseismic
              creep in postseismic deformation is important in estimating recurrence
              intervals for great earthquakes.

This project is establishing a baseline
              gravity network of fifteen stations in Alaska.  The bulk of the network forms a
              transect perpendicular to the predicted contours of maximum gravity change in
              the far field.  Additional points are located within the deformation near
              field.  Gravity measurements are collocated with existing GPS stations.  These
              initial measurements form the basis for testing different postseismic
              deformation models.  Additional activities include collecting auxiliary data to
              correct the gravity data for signals such as water table variations.  A portion
              of a 1964-1965 relative gravity survey is being repeated as well, in order to
              determine the total gravity change over the Kenai Peninsula since the
              earthquake.  Data are distributed through traditional means and an Internet
              website.
