Title       : Controlled Surfaces through Self-assembly and Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0208825

Award Number: 0208825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Ober cober@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed studies are aimed at developing a fundamental understanding of the
              way in which the self-assembly of fluoropolymers can be harnessed to form
              periodic nm-length scale polymer structures, controlled by a variety of thermal
              and optical methods.  In the proposed research we will synthesize and study the
              surface and bulk properties of semifluorinated (SF) LC-coil block copolymers in
              which the SF group I a monodendron.  The surface will be probed with a variety
              of techniques, but in particular scanning force microscopy (SFM) and near edge
              X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) measurements will be used to examine
              surface topography and composition.  A particular focus of the proposed
              research derives from our recent observation that polymers with SF monodendron
              side groups are capable of forming not only low energy surfaces, but may
              spontaneously organize into arrays with periodic organization on the 20 nm
              length scale that can span regions approaching millimeter dimensions.  The SF
              monodendrons will be produced with selected alkyl to fluorinated segment
              ratios, arm number and end group in order to test the model predicting surface
              curvature.  A photoactive azobenzene group will also be used in mondendron
              synthesis to both alter the packing structure and take advantage of its
              photo-optical properties.  By combining the known trans-cis isomerization
              behavior of the azobenzene chromophore, we also plan to use photoprocessing to
              direct long-range organization of these surface structures.  In the production
              of small-scale patterns needed for nanotechnology, there is no convenient
              process for building structures or modifying surfaces in the 10 to 50 nm length
              regimes.  Structures that appear homogeneous over micron length scales can be
              extremely heterogeneous at these smaller dimensions, thus making issues such as
              the control of surface energy and composition extremely important. 
              Fluoropolymers are ideal materials for exploring many of these factors in
              surface and interface design.  The low surface energy of fluoropolymers has
              attracted interest in such diverse surface control applications as the
              prevention of protein binding to biomedical surfaces, as environmentally
              friendly fouling resistant marine coatings and for self-cleaning architectural
              materials.

The unusual transparency of fluoropolymers at short optical
              wavelengths has lead to their study as next generation photoresists for
              microelectronics manufacture while their low dielectric constant and refractive
              index has made their use in microelectronics and communications widespread. 
              This program will harness self-pattern surfaces.  There exist immense
              possibilities for applications in biotechnology, information science and
              advanced materials if patterning at these length scales can be harnessed while
              simultaneously controlling surface composition.

