Title       : Geochemical Controls on Carbonate Equilibria and Mass Transport in Glaciated
               Mid-Continent Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0208182

Award Number: 0208182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Walter lmwalter@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The continuing emission of CO2 from fossil-fuel burning in the 21st century
              is, volumetrically, earth's most significant environmental pollutant. The
              dissolution of calcite and dolomite is very rapid and solubility is strongly
              CO2-dependent, which forges a close linkage between carbonate weathering and
              organic carbon respiration rates. This will be especially important in near
              surface groundwaters and streams, because these systems will be the first to
              respond to climatic and atmospheric changes due to the short residence time of
              water in these reservoirs. Thus, factors limiting dissolved inorganic carbon
              fluxes from watersheds will be very important in predicting the response of
              earth's surface reservoirs to anticipated changes in biomass and carbon budgets
              in the next few centuries, the timescale of most pressing human and
              environmental concern.
For North America, nearly 90% of the HCO3- flux is
              derived from the mid-continent region, which has a high proportion of
              sedimentary bedrock mantled by carbonate-bearing glacial drift. Importantly,
              the low temperature of these temperate weathering environments maximizes
              carbonate mineral solubility. Indeed, Michigan watersheds have some of the
              highest area-normalized carbon fluxes in the world. This region thus provides
              an ideal field laboratory in which to assess controls on the HCO3- content of
              streams and the shallow groundwaters interacting with them on human timescales.
              Our proposed research program involves field study of the hydrogeochemistry of
              6 endmember watersheds in the Great Lakes region, spanning the upper and lower
              peninsulas of Michigan. The specific field sites were selected on the basis of
              water chemistry, bedrock lithology, drainage basin type, land use and ecosystem
              type, mean annual temperature, and availability of real-time USGS gauging
              stations. 
Our goal is to produce a high quality analytic and theoretical
              characterization of the dissolved inorganic and organic carbon systematics of
              surface waters and groundwaters in the glaciated mid-continent region.  Our
              initial studies demonstrate that surface and groundwater Mg concentrations are
              excellent conservative tracers of carbonate dissolution. As such, the Mg/HCO3
              ratio provides a sensitive indicator of mass balances of carbonate dissolution
              versus precipitation in the streams, wetlands and lakes present within the
              watershed boundaries. The new data set we produce will integrate physical
              factors (type of river basin drainage, discharge, annual cycles) and with
              measured inorganic and organic carbon fluxes.  Identifying equilibrium versus
              kinetic controls on carbonate mass transfer will permit more accurate
              predictions to be made of how earth's landscapes and surface hydrogeochemical
              systems will respond to increasing rates of carbon metabolism and fluxes in an
              elevated CO2 world. 

