Title       : Information acquisition as a factor in improving agent performance in
               negotiation and decision making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0208608

Award Number: 0208608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarit Kraus sarit@umiacs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Wilkenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research contributes to the development of autonomous agents
              capable of operating in real world situations.  Agents in multi-agent
              environments must often choose between maximizing their expected utility
              according to their current knowledge, and trying to learn more about the world
              and thereby increase their gains.  A negotiator may try to obtain information
              about its options by asking outside sources, taking actions, or by making
              offers and counter offers. In order to find the best negotiation strategy,
              agents' decision-making processes will be modeled. This research will lead the
              automated agent to reach more beneficial agreements when negotiating with
              bounded rational agents (human or automated).  Strategies and decision-making
              procedures will be tested in the domains of e-commerce and international
              crises. The significance of the research lies first in the evaluation of
              alternate strategies for the acquisition of information by self-interested
              agents, from the perspective of a fully automated environment, and also by
              evaluating the behavior of automated agents interacting with human actors in
              simulated decision making environments. The dynamics of information acquisition
              in complex decision making structures will be better understood. The research
              will also contribute to the better understanding of decision making when
              automated negotiators interact with bounded rational agents.
