Title       : The Human Condition: Knowledge and Values in the Age of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0208470

Award Number: 0208470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1103443            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barinetta Scott bariscot@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SoundVision Productions
	      2991 Shattuck Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94705    510/486-1185

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SoundVision Productions is developing and distributing a series of ten,
              hour-long public radio documentaries that will explore the turbulent boundary
              between science and the humanities, capturing the present moment of tremendous
              scientific and scholarly ferment with the unique and intimate power of radio. 
              By introducing the radio audience to the thoughts and voices of some of the
              world's most accomplished scientists, in conversations with the counterparts in
              the humanities, the series will look at recent developments in science
              including physics, molecular and cell biology, environmental science, cognitive
              psychology and neuroscience, and the multiple disciplines of the life sciences
              reflecting the increasingly subtle and widespread application of evolutionary
              theory.  In each program, a careful account of new scientific ideas and
              discoveries will be placed within the context of historical and contemporary
              thought about the human and natural worlds.

Barinetta Scott, the Executive
              Producer, has most recently been the Executive Producer for the highly regarded
              NSF funded NPR series, "The DNA Files."  In developing this project, she will
              work closely with an advisory committee that includes:

John Avise, Research
              Professor, Dept. of Genetics, University of Georgia

Samuel Barondes,
              Professor and Director of the University of California San Francisco's Center
              for Neurobiology and Psychiatry

Terrence Deacon, Associate Professor of
              Anthropology, Boston University

Anne Foerst, Professor of Computer Science
              and Theology, St. Bonaventure University

Ursula Goodenough, Dept. of
              Biology, Washington University, St. Louis

William Irons, Professor of
              Anthropology, Northwestern University

Gordon Kane, Professor of Physics,
              University of Michigan

Jim Miller, Senior Program Associate for the AAAS
              Program of Dialogue Between Science and Religion

W. Mark Richardson,
              Episcopal Priest, Associate Professor of Systematic Theology, General
              Theological Seminary

Holmes Rolston, University Distinguished Professor in
              the Department of Philosophy, Colorado State University

Michael Ruse,
              Professor of the Philosophy of Biology and Ethics, at Florida State
              University

Mary Evelyn Tucker, Professor of Religion at Bucknell
              University

Dorothy Wertz, Senior Scientist; Social Science, Ethics, and the
              Law; The Shriver Center.


