Title       : Geometric Pattern Analysis and Mental Task Design for a Brain-Computer Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0208958

Award Number: 0208958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Anderson anderson@cs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop novel electroencephalogram (EEG)
              classification methods that result in a practical, real-time brain-computer
              interfaces (BCI) system.  BCIs are hardware and software systems that sample
              EEG signals from electrodes placed on the scalp and extract patterns from EEG
              that indicate the mental activity being performed by the person.  The long-term
              goal of this line of research is a new mode of communication for victims of
              diseases and injuries resulting in the loss of voluntary muscle control, such
              as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), high-level spinal cord injuries or
              severe cerebral palsy.  The autonomic and intellectual functions of such
              subjects continue to be active.  This can result in a "locked-in" syndrome in
              which a person is unable to communicate to the outside world.  The
              interpretation of information contained in EEG may lead to a new mode of
              communication with which subjects can communicate with their care givers or
              directly control devices such as televisions, wheel chairs, speech synthesizers
              and computers.

The objectives of this project are the design and testing of
              an EEG system for experimentation in real-time EEG pattern analysis constructed
              of off-the-shelf components for under $5,000, development of new techniques for
              a novel approach to studying the cognitive components of mental tasks and how
              they vary in time and across subjects, demonstration that real-time feedback to
              the subject will produce a biofeedback situation in which the subject can learn
              to modify their EEG to increase classification accuracy, proof by demonstration
              that accuracy and classification time will be sufficient for two persons to
              interact over the net in a simple game controlled by two BCI systems. The
              evaluation of the results of this project in light of these objectives will be
              based on the accuracy of EEG classification, the speed with which the
              classification can be performed, and the expense of the EEG system and of its
              maintenance and extendibility.

The most significant impact of this project
              to the disabled community will be an easier to use, affordable BCI system.  The
              inclusion of a wide range of mental tasks will result in a better understanding
              of which mental tasks are easiest for subjects to consistently perform and for
              detection algorithms to reliably identify.  Better BCI systems will also be
              significant for other classes of users who can benefit from augmented
              communication interfaces in applications that require extremely fast commands. 
              The significance of this project to the BCI research community is the
              specification and testing of the inexpensive system for experimentation with
              EEG signal analysis.  The system based on off-the-shelf components and software
              to be developed and made publicly available is expected to allow a number of
              additional research groups to enter the BCI field.  Also, this project's
              results on the analysis of cognitive components in EEG measured during a wide
              range of mental tasks will broaden the set of mental activities available to
              users of BCI systems.


