Title       : BAC Libraries from Diverse Crustacean Taxa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0208364

Award Number: 0208364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Thomas kelley.thomas@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              .0208364
Thomas

One of the fundamental goals of biology is to understand how
              genome structure and function evolves in response to environmental change and
              how genetic constraints limit the natural distribution, abundance, and adaptive
              evolution of species.  Toward these goals, Dr. Thomas is proposing to develop
              Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) libraries for diverse crustacean taxa. 
              These libraries are specifically intended to support both comparative
              developmental studies and investigations into how organisms respond to
              environmental change.  The Crustacea are ideal for comparative developmental
              studies because of their extraordinary morphological diversity, and close
              relationship to the premier developmental model organism, Drosophila
              melanogaster.  Crustacean taxa are also the focus of many ecological studies
              aimed at understanding the fundamental interactions between organisms and their
              environment.  The proposed BAC library resources and their distribution will
              provide critical tools in support of developmental evolution and environmental
              genomics.
	
Dr. Thomas is specifically proposing to develop BAC libraries for
              three taxa representing three crustacean classes.  The Branchiopods are
              represented by the water flea, Daphnia pulex.  The Maxillapoda are represented
              by a copepod Tigriopus californicus, and the class Malacostraca is represented
              by an amphipod, Parhyale hawaiensis.  Daphnia and Parhyale are already the
              subjects of comparative developmental studies in numerous laboratories. 
              
	
This work will take place in collaboration with a set of primary users who
              are actively participating in this proposal by consulting on the appropriate
              taxa, supplying specimens for DNA extraction and helping to make these
              resources available and useful to their taxon- or discipline-specific
              communities.  These collaborators represent disparate fields of biological
              research and represent a broad spectrum of the potential user community.  The
              generation and distribution of each library will take place at the Hubbard
              Center for Genome Studies (HCGS) at the University of New Hampshire under the
              direction of the PI (co-director of the center).  The HCGS has a primary focus
              of comparative and environmental genomics, and in conjunction with this
              proposal will be offering intensive summer workshops in genomic technologies to
              support the use of BAC libraries by students and postdocs.
	
BAC library
              resources from each taxon will be made available to all academic and
              non-academic users in two ways: 1) as complete arrayed copies of the library;
              and 2) arrayed at high density on nylon filters.  The BAC resources and
              associated information will be accessible via the WWW.  The HCGS will maintain
              and distribute these resources for a minimum of five years after the end of the
              granting period.



