Title       : Architecture for Efficient and Trusty Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0208831

Award Number: 0208831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Feron feron@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

Feron, Eric
CCR-0208831

MIT is developing ARETES, an 'Architecture for
              Efficient and Trusty Embedded Systems', which is a unified framework to design
              the critical control and communication infrastructure support for safe and
              efficient embedded systems. ARETES has four components to it: development of a
              mathematical framework for assessing safety and efficiency of the systems of
              interest, design of computationally efficient algorithms, development of the
              necessary software modules, and simulation case studies.

To meet the safety
              and efficiency requirements, ARETES is adopting a control theoretic approach.
              The idea is to use and innovate upon the existing theory via three-faceted
              approach to account for the performance objective and resource constraints
              while safeguarding against uncertainty in the environment, component level
              imperfections, and faults in the inter-component communications. As the first
              facet, the existing multiplier theory will be extended to guarantee the worst
              case performance for resource constrained systems. To give some specific
              examples, the best fit integral quadratic constraint (IQC) characterization
              will be derived for the inherent uncertainties, and for the bandwidth
              saturation and delay constraints imposed by the inter-component coordination.
              As the second facet, a database of elementary blocks to approximate the hybrid
              models of such systems will be compiled. Links between the multiplier theory
              and hybrid systems analysis methods will be established via novel concepts such
              as a 'robust hybrid automaton'. As the third key facet, a set of parameterized
              test problems will be developed to characterize the impact of task scheduling
              and the above mentioned imperfections on the online software complexity and the
              offline software verification process. ARETES aims at deriving analytical
              performance bounds for these canonical models and will develop a library of
              scalable software modules to facilitate the simulation studies.

The
              theoretical advances being pursued in ARETES include robust control theory
              since the best fit IQC characterization facilitates the least conservative
              input-output stability analysis. ARETES will also develop links between the
              input-output hybrid system analysis approach and the multiplier theory
              approach. The canonical models and the associated library of algorithms will be
              directly useful in deriving analytical performance bounds for various scenarios
              of interest. Besides its relevance to research organizations and industry, this
              will have a significant technological value in academia.  

Technology being
              developed in ARETES has immense utility in providing the critical
              infrastructure support necessary in various applications involving coordinated
              agents that are either fully or partially autonomous. Examples of such
              applications include coordinated intrusion alert systems, monitoring of
              hazardous terrains, air traffic control systems, slowdown warning systems for
              intelligent vehicle highways, animation industry applications employing teams
              of coordinated intelligent inanimate objects, coordinated target tracking in
              scientific explorations, and educative projects such as the complex trajectory
              planning of a team of mini-helicopters in a laboratory setting, 

