Title       : Foundation of Multiple Classifier Systems and Active Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0208935

Award Number: 0208935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Kwek kwek@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In concept learning, the learner is typically given a sample of
              instances
labeled according to some unknown target concept. The learner?s task
              is to
construct a hypothesis that is a good approximation of the target in
              a
reasonable amount of time. Building concept learning systems has become
              an
important research area due to the ever-increasing need for analyzing
              huge
amounts of stored data. Although many efficient algorithms were
              constructed for
learning various classes of concepts, these concept classes
              are extremely
simple. Further, numerous hardness results seem to suggest that
              learning more
expressive concept classes is extremely difficult.

Two
              research directions have evolved in an effort to address the difficulty
              of
learning more expressive concepts. One is to construct multiple
              classifier
systems (MCS) and the other is to consider the possibility of
              actively
interacting with the environment (a.k.a. active learning). Currently,
              due to
the success of the Adaboost algorithm, theoretical research on MCS (and
              in fact
machine learning in general) tends to focus rather narrowly on
              ensemble
methods. Similarly, active learning research has been concentrated on
              the use
of membership queries, and to some extent the teaching model. Other
              types of
MCS and active learning that may lead to more intelligent learning
              systems have
not been well studied. A good understanding of how to build more
              sophisticated
MCS and exploit other possibilities of extracting information
              from the
environment will move us one step closer to achieving the original
              intent of
machine learning, which is to automate the knowledge acquisition
              process. This
proposed research will investigate complex multiple classifier
              and active
learning systems so that the learning of difficult concept classes
              becomes more
tractable.


