Title       : Reducing Frequency via Speculation and Fall-Back Recovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0208581

Award Number: 0208581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Mueller mueller@cs.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Rotenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mueller, Frank
CCR-0208581
" Reducing Frequency via Speculation and Fall-Back
              Recovery"

Conserving power is a key issue in embedded computing.  At
              present, significant power is wasted because embedded system designers lack
              detailed knowledge of the processing speed needed by applications.  Naive
              worst-case timing analysis exaggerates the required processor frequency,
              especially as software and hardware complexity increases.

This work puts
              forth a two-tier approach to reduce the processor frequency of complex embedded
              systems.  First, tight worst-case timing analysis reduces the perceived upper
              bound on the number of cycles consumed by tasks.  This reduces the maximum
              frequency, saving power.  Second, architecture simulation and processors with
              dual frequency/voltage modes enable significant additional power savings. 
              Architecture simulation produces an approximate worst-case timing estimate,
              which does not have to be safe and, consequently, is the basis for a very low
              speculative frequency.  A higher recovery frequency is utilized as a fall-back
              mode to ensure safe operation bounded by tight worst-case timing analysis, as
              delivered in the first approach.  These two approaches complement each other. 
              They initially reduce the power requirements by a significant amount when
              compared with the naive approach.  Additionally, they reduce
              power
requirements further by exploiting simulation to accurately 

