Title       : Agile Security for Storing Sensitive and Critical Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0208655

Award Number: 0208655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustaque Ahamad mustaq@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenke Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Blough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H Venkateswaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As computers become pervasive, an increasing number of information rich
              applications are being deployed that create, store and access sensitive and
              critical information. An enabling service that can be used to store and access
              such information must meet both security and performance requirements even when
              some nodes that implement the service are compromised or when some clients
              behave maliciously. This research project focuses on a number of novel
              techniques for building an agile and secure store that can meet the needs of
              future applications. First, a flexible and agile architecture for a distributed
              store is investigated to allow applications to dynamically adapt their desired
              security and performance levels. Second, the agile nature of the store requires
              the detection of potential compromises and malicious activity. New protocols
              that adapt to such suspected attacks are explored. Finally, a variety of
              ubiquitous applications that need to access sensitive information are
              investigated. The characteristics of such applications can help quantify the
              overheads that are inherent when the conflicting goals of security and
              performance have to be reconciled. 

