Title       : Conservation of Total Synaptic Weights by Heterosynaptic Potentiation and
               Depression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0208712

Award Number: 0208712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Pare pare@axon.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
0208712
Denis Pare  

Understanding memory, that is, how the brain stores
              information, is a major challenge of contemporary neuroscience.  Indeed, the
              brain contains an astronomical number of nerve cells that communicate by
              specialized structures called synapses.  Most neurons make synapses on hundreds
              to thousands of other neurons and reciprocally.  Much evidence suggests that
              memory depends on  changes in the strength or efficacy of individual synapses
              distributed across a large population of synapses.  It was shown that when a
              neuron contributes to excite another nerve cell beyond a certain level, the
              synapse between these two cells becomes more efficient (or stronger).  However,
              when synapses with such properties are introduced in computer models of
              neuronal networks, problems of stability develop because the reinforcement of
              synapses increases the likelihood that they will be further reinforced, leading
              the network into unchecked excitation.  Thus, the question is how does the
              brain prevent runaway increases in the strength of synapses?  This proposal
              tests the possibility that when particular synapses are strengthened, other
              synapses to the same cells are depressed. Thus, experience would modify the
              relative strength of synapses, but the total strength of synapses to any given
              neuron would remain stable.  The proposed work will examine the intracellular
              mechanisms that allow the strength of individual synapses to change while
              keeping the total impact of synapses to target cells within normal bounds. 
              This will be achieved by recording neurons in brain slices kept alive in a
              dish.  Understanding how the brain keeps the weight of plastic synapses within
              normal bounds would have important implications for artificial intelligence and
              robotics where adaptable computer programs simulating neuronal networks
              constitute the most promising approach toward progress

