Title       : InSAR Measurements and Theoretical Modeling of Deformation due to Large
               Mid-crustal Magma Bodies: Investigation of the Dynamics and Timescales of
               Crustal Anatexis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0208165

Award Number: 0208165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri Fialko fialko@radar.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Sandwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fialko
EAR-0208165

The proposed models regarding characteristic
              spatiotemporal scales of formation of parental silicic magma bodies in the
              continental crust range from partial melting of the tectonically thickened
              fluid-rich lower crust to magmatic underplating, whereby the heat required to
              produce crustal melting is advected by intrusions of mafic sills (presumably,
              from the mantle source). These models predict very different time scales for
              the production of granitic magma. The pertologically-based model of slow
              equilibrium melting of the lower crust implies that granites are generated on
              "orogenic'' time scales of the order of millions of years. In contrast,
              theoretical models of magmatic underplating predict that anatectic melts are
              produced on quite short timescales of the order of the crystallization time of
              typical mafic underplates (e.g., 100-1000 years for sill intrusions that are a
              few tens to a few hundred meters thick). In principle, the intrusion of mafic
              underplates, the volume changes associated with in situ melting, and the
              subsequent evacuation of the resulting granitoid magmas can each generate
              geodetically observable deformation. Geodetic measurements in areas of
              contemporaneous large active magma bodies may therefore provide critical
              constraints on the timescales and dynamics of crustal anatexis.  This project
              uses Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) observations in regions
              of the ongoing crustal magmatism to constrain typical rates of the large-scale
              melt generation and/or migration, and to test the proposed models of the
              granitic melt production. The primary targets include large mid-crustal magma
              bodies imaged by seismic studies, in particular, the Socorro (New Mexico, USA),
              the Altiplano-Puna (South America), and the Southern Tibet (Asia) magma bodies.
               The observed spatial patterns and average rates of magma-induced deformation
              are combined with theoretical modeling that explicitly includes thermodynamics
              of melting/freezing, realistic variations in the mechanical properties of the
              host rocks, and inelastic deformation, to develop a detailed quantitative
              understanding of the dynamics of crustal anatexis. Independent observables that
              are brought to bear on the model results include constraints on the lateral
              extent and thickness of the mid-crustal magma bodies from seismic imaging,
              inferences about the duration and total amplitude of the magma-induced uplift
              from geomorphologic studies, and structural and geochemical signatures of the
              exhumed ancient magma bodies. Results of this work are relevant to
              interpretations of seismic observations of "bright spots'' in the mid-to-lower
              continental crust, field and theoretical studies of the crustal magmatism, and
              origin and evolution of the continental crust.

