Title       : Construction of BAC Libraries of Metazoans Occupying Key Phylogenetic Positions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0208138

Award Number: 0208138
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Z. Holland lzholland@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Large-insert libraries of genomic DNA are a valuable resource for comparative
              studies in
development evolution and genetics for addressing such fundamental
              questions in biology as
how genomes have evolved and how evolution of genomes
              has resulted in evolution of body
plans. The goal of the proposed research is
              to construct 11 BAC libraries representative of the
breadth of the Metazoa.
              The focus is on animals that occupy phylogenetic positions key to
              an
understanding of animal evolution. Preference is given to organisms with
              demonstrated potential
as developmental model organisms. Therefore, 2
              deuterostomes have been chosen: lamprey,
basal in the craniates and pivotal
              for understanding the pattern of gene and chromosomal
duplications during
              vertebrate evolution, and the cephalochordate amphioxus, the closest
              living
invertebrate relative of the vertebrates. On the basis of molecular
              phylogenetics, the protostomes
have recently been divided into two groups, the
              Ecdysozoa and the Lophotrochozoa. However,
branching patterns of the phyla
              within each of these groups are poorly resolved. Because
representatives of
              the Ecdysozoa, Drosophila and Caenorhabditis have been well-studied, we
have
              not chosen any Ecdysozoan. For the Lophotrochozoa, which have, in general,
              received little
attention in regard to genes, development and evolution, seven
              organisms have been chosen.
These include 2 annelids, one of which, the
              polychaete Platynereis dumerilii, is relatively basal
within the annelids and
              the other of which, the leech Helobdella robusta, is more highly
              derived.
Platynereis is rapidly becoming a lophotrochozoan model developmental
              organism, and while
the leech is quite derived, it has been the object of
              developmental genetic studies for some years.
Two molluscs are included-- one
              bivalve, (Spisula solidissima) and one gastropod (Ilyanassa
obsoleta). The
              other Lophotrochozoans include 1 nemertean (Cerebratulus lacteus), 1
              sipunculid
(Temiste langiformis), and 1 acoel flatworm (Neochildea fusca). The
              phylogenetic position of
the acoels is controversial. On the basis of
              morphology, they were considered basal Bilateria.
However, most, but not all,
              molecular phylogenetic analyses place acoels within the protostomes.
To
              address bilaterian origins, we have chosen a ctenophore (Mnemiopsis leidyi).
              Finally, to
address the origin of the metazoa, a sponge, Callyspongia diffusa,
              a representative of the most
basal Metazoa, was selected. BAC libraries will
              be constructed and distributed by P. de Jong
(Children's Hospital Research
              Institute, Oakland), who has a long track-record in construction of
BAC
              libraries, including making the BAC library for the human genome project. For
              organisms
for which interest is high to sequence the entire genome, 15X
              coverage is proposed. For others,
10X coverage is proposed.
