Title       : PROMISE: A Novel Survivability Framework for High-Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0208331

Award Number: 0208331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chunming Qiao qiao@computer.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at developing a survivability framework called PROMISE, which
              includes procedures for fault recovery for mission critical applications. The
              idea behind this framework is to divide an active path into several, possibly
              overlapping active segments, and then protect each active segment with a detour
              called backup segment. Thus the basic survivability concept is to provide local
              protection against faults impacting localized segments of the active path. The
              following research activities will be particularly pursued. First, the project
              team will investigate how to find the optimal (e.g. most band-width-efficient)
              active path segments and how to reduce the time complexity of the new
              survivability algorithms within the framework. For that purpose, new ILP
              formulations for solving the problems will be used to provide reference data,
              and a comprehensive study comparing the proposed approaches with other existing
              protection/restoration approaches will be conducted. Second, the proposed
              research will include the investigation of the methods to support
              differentiated services within the framework, such as partially survivable,
              unprotected or preemptable connections. Finally, the project will elaborate on
              survivability issues specific to optical networks based on WDM (Wavelength
              Division Multiplexing) and IP under the Generalized Multi-protocol Label
              Switched (G-MPLS) framework, where new algorithms and simulation tools PROMISE
              are expected to be developed. The project will bring together networking
              research and theoretic computer science research, and in addition, by
              incorporating research into educational and training activities will create
              awareness and interest among students on the issues related to survivability in
              next-generation communication networks.
