Title       : Design and Deposition of Electroactive Polymers for LEDs and Photovoltaics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0208786

Award Number: 0208786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Galvin megalvin@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis J. Rothberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on three areas important to the development of polymeric
              light-emitting di-odes (PLEDs), polymer based photovoltaic devices, and to
              elucidation of the structure/property relationships that govern the performance
              of the active polymer layers in these devices. The ap-proach is to develop a
              new layer-by-layer deposition technique that is compatible with deposition of
              polymers or oligomers from organic solvents. This deposition technique combines
              the fine control of device structure now available in LEDs prepared via the
              evaporation of small organic molecules with the mechanical integrity and
              solution processability of polymers. The ability to engineer device structure
              via precise control of several polymeric layers is expected to improve the
              performance of PLEDs and photovoltaics, and aid in the investigation of the
              science that un-derpins their performance. Also, the approach includes
              synthesis of an array of novel polymers and oligomers that will be utilized to
              build PLEDs and photovoltaic devices with the new layer-by-layer deposition
              technique. Additionally, fundamental studies of the role that
              struc-ture/property relationships, such as energetic disorder, play in device
              performance will be pur-sued. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental
              research issues in areas of electronic/photonic materials sci-ence having
              technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the emphasis on
              edu-cation, and the integration of research and education. The available
              resources provide special op-portunities for education and training of graduate
              and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary forefront research.
***  

