Title       : Signals Approaches to Computer Architecture Prediction Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0208596

Award Number: 0208596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Conte conte@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This research is focused on developing a new, symmetric framework for computer
              architecture prediction motivated by the signals approach to data analysis.
              This research uses styles of prediction in two dimensions: periodic vs.
              computational and local history vs. global history. This is built on top of the
              principles of discrete signal analysis. There has been a significant amount of
              work done on prediction mechanisms, especially for branch behavior. The initial
              focus of this new work will be on value prediction because it is the least well
              understood area. However, the framework and methodology are applicable to
              branch prediction, dependence prediction, etc. This research will investigate
              new prediction schemes using two techniques: analogy between local and global
              schemes, and data analysis techniques in the case of a computational predictor.
              Global predictors can lose accuracy due to pipeline delays. This research
              project will investigate methods for avoiding the delay penalty for global
              predictors. The detailed microarchitectural simulation involves a high number
              of tradeoffs. A detailed study of predictors in that context is a significant
              study that is included in this project. There is also considerable work to be
              performed on combining predictors in cost effective and practical ways.

