Title       : Scheduling of Random Processes and Quantum Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0208879

Award Number: 0208879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Gacs gacs@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research addresses problems in two topics: scheduling of random
processes
              and quantum information theory.  Scheduling problems arise in
many areas of
              computer science.  The investigator studies the possibility
of scheduling two
              random sequences of activities in a way that prevents
certain conflicts
              between them.  The methods applied also advance the state
of the art in
              percolation theory (a fundamental area of probability theory
and statistical
              physics).  Quantum information theory extends the questions
concerning
              conditions and methods for reliable transmission of information
to the setting
              of quantum mechanics.  It has applications in cryptography,
and also relates
              to the promising area of quantum computing.  The theory of
description
              complexity has been useful in clarifying concepts of classical
information
              theory.  The research extends description complexity theory in
order to help
              study the much more complex questions of quantum information
theory.

In the
              scheduling problem, given are the sample paths of two or more random
processes
              (like queues) and some condition telling when these processes
``collide''. 
              The task is to introduce delays into each of the processes in
a way that
              avoids collisions.  Reformulation introduces a dependent
percolation model
              with novel convergence properties that aroused much
interest.  The principal
              tool of the solution is renormalization, greatly
refined.  The achieved
              results are qualitative, leaving much quantitative
work to be done.  In the
              application of description complexity to quantum
information theory, a
              universal semicomputable density matrix (``universal
probability'') is taken
              as a starting point, and complexity (an operator)
is defined as its negative
              logarithm.  A number of properties of Kolmogorov
complexity and von Neumann
              entropy extend naturally to the new domain, and
the quantity reflects
              appropriately some of the peculiarities of quantum
information (no cloning). 
              The approach taken unifies other approaches made
by several researchers in
              this direction.

