Title       : Sr Isotopic Evolution of the Mantle: Constraints on Accretion, Recycling, and
               Crustal Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0208671

Award Number: 0208671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105345             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. DePaolo depaolo@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DePaolo
EAR-0208671

The proposed research involves using the isotope
              geochemistry of ancient igneous rocks to evaluate issues related to the early
              evolution of the earth - how long did it take for the Earth to form by
              accretion, how much chemical differentiation did the Earth experience in the
              first few hundred million years, and how did the Earth's continental crust grow
              and change through its history?  The approach is to use the mineral zircon,
              which is common in old rocks and can be precisely dated by U-Pb geochronology,
              to probe the strontium isotopic composition of the Earth's mantle in
              Precambrian time.  The Sr isotopic composition of the Precambrian mantle is
              highly uncertain because it is difficult to find materials that preserve their
              original isotopic composition through later episodes of metamorphism and
              weathering.  Strontium isotopic measurements of zircon offer a possible
              resolution to this problem. Defining the Sr isotopic composition of the Archean
              and Proterozoic mantle would potentially provide clues about the accretion
              history for the Earth, whether early continental crust was mafic, and whether
              ocean floor weathering and subduction zone processes can decouple Sr isotopes
              from Hf and Nd isotopes in the mantle. The work to be done for this project
              includes collecting rock samples from appropriate localities, separating zircon
              and other minerals, and making measurements of the Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, and O isotopic
              composition of the zircons.  Parallel work must also be done to date the
              zircons where the age is not known, and to verify that zircon crystals in a
              particular rock sample have a single age.  The analyses will be done by thermal
              ionization mass spectrometry, laser ablation (for O), and high-resolution ion
              microprobe (SHRIMP).



