Title       : Algorithms for Discrete and Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0208015

Award Number: 0208015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Elman elman@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the development and analysis of efficient
numerical
              algorithms for problems arising in computational modeling,
with emphasis on
              two main topics: algorithms for systems of equations
arising from the
              stochastic finite element method, and algorithms for
algebraic systems arising
              in models of fluid dynamics.  The first of
these addresses the fact that
              models of physical phenomena often
contain parameters or equation coefficients
              whose precise properties
are not well understood.  Examples include
              permeability properties of
media in which quantities (e.g., pollutants in
              groundwater) are
flowing or diffusing, and boundary conditions (e.g., along
              the ocean
bottom).  In the stochastic finite element method, the random
              aspects
of problems are handled in a manner analogous to the introduction
              of
new spatial dimensions.  This methodology appears to have the
potential to
              be more efficient than Monte-Carlo methods, provided
efficient algorithms are
              available for the algebraic systems that are
generated after discretization. 
              Our aim is to study the algorithmic
issues that arise from this approach.  For
              the second project, we will
develop and study efficient algorithms for solving
              systems of
equations arising in models of incompressible flow,
              principally,
methods for eigenvalue problems derived from linear stability
              analysis
of steady solutions, and multigrid algorithms for the
              discrete
convection-diffusion equation.  These are fundamental problems
              arising
throughout fluid dynamics, and their efficient solution is
              critical
for development of effective computational models.

The general aim
              of this project is to enhance the utility and
effectiveness of mathematical
              modeling for understanding scientific
and engineering phenomena.  There are
              useful models for many disparate
physical processes, including blood flows,
              dispersal of environmental
pollutants, performance of aerospace vehicles, and
              atmospheric and
oceanographic phenomena.  Understanding such processes through
              purely
experimental techniques is prohibitively expensive or
              impossible,
whereas the use of modeling and together with algorithmic
              solution
introduces a basic understanding of the physics by
              providing
approximations to quantities such as flow rates and
              pressures.
Accurate solutions are only available, however, if reliable and
              fast
solution algorithms can be used.  Moreover, it is often the case
              that
certain aspects of models, such as the geologic properties
              of
transporting media or the velocities of flows along boundaries, are
not
              known with certainty.  Our goal for this work is to develop fast
solution
              algorithms for mathematical models and to ensure that the
solution strategies
              are able to handle uncertainty and to produce
reliable statistical information
              about solutions at low computational
cost.

