Title       : A Logical Study of Interactive Computational Problems Understood as Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0208816

Award Number: 0208816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giorgi Japaridze giorgi.japaridze@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to elaborate an elegant and comprehensive
              
specification language and semantics for interactive computational 
problems
              and explore the corresponding logic, --- the set of valid 
principles of
              interactive computability expressible in that language. 
Such a logic provides
              us with a powerful tool for systematically 
studying computational tasks and
              automatically generating solutions to 
new problems from known solutions to
              old problems. Other applications 
include the possibility to base on this
              logic knowledge- and resource-
oriented automatic reasoning systems. 

The
              intuitive notion of interactive computational problem is formalized 
as a game
              between two players: the machine and the environment (user). 
Moves of the
              game represent actions/choices by these agents, and 
positions represent
              states/situations that emerge in the course of 
interaction. A game is
              considered winnable (and hence the corresponding 
problem solvable), if there
              is a computer program that wins it against 
any possible environment.  The
              language of the logic of interactive 
computational problems suggested by the
              investigator is a non-disjoint 
union of the languages of classical,
              intuitionistic and linear logics, 
with logical operators interpreted as
              certain, --- most basic and 
natural, --- operations on games. Validity of a
              formula is understood 
as winnability for every game/problem interpretation of
              its atoms. The 
restriction of winnability to the classical fragment of the
              language 
turns out to be equivalent to the classical concept of truth, which
              
makes classical logic a natural syntactic fragment of the logic of
              
interactive computational problems. The same is conjectured to be the 
case
              for the intuitionistic logic and (a version of) linear logic. This 
way, the
              logic of interactive computational problems can unify, within 
the framework
              of one general semantics, the classical, intuitionistic 
and linear logics,
              with their seemingly unrelated or even antagonistic 
philosophies. Verifying
              this conjecture, along with finding an 
axiomatization for the logic of
              interactive computational problems, is 
among the main technical objectives of
              this research. 


