Title       : Adaptive Protocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0208352

Award Number: 0208352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Navidi wnavidi@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy K. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns the development of methods to allow a variety of
              uni-cast, multicast, geocast and location-based mobile ad-hoc routing protocols
              to adapt. It addresses specifically the ad-hoc routing protocol design related
              to quantification of the mobility by specific metrics, in particular mobility,
              which are used to solve various routing tasks. In this three-year project, the
              following research activities will be particularly pursued. The research team
              will address the development of local mobility metrics that are specific to
              individual nodes. For that purpose, a generic feedback agent that resides on a
              mobile node will be developed, which gathers the information required to
              compute the value of the mobility metrics, and present the information to an
              arbitrary type of protocol. The simulation studies under a wide variety of
              network conditions will be con-ducted to determine appropriate trade-offs
              between active and passive monitor-ing and optimal sampling times for
              estimating metrics such as node speed, link change rate, link duration, etc.
              The project activities will also include the devel-opment of example adaptive
              routing protocols utilizing the feedback agent. For example, the research team
              will explore a protocol that will combine location-based routing with localized
              flooding in an effort to enable successful packet delivery in times of extreme
              network mobility (low link duration times). Finally, the development of new
              mobility models that are more realistic will be consid-ered. For example, the
              networks in which node speeds vary among different parts of the network will be
              studied, e.g. for the case of regions where the mobil-ity dynamics vary widely
              throughout the network. In addition to the above ac-tivities the research team
              also plans to address a variety of other metrics such as link change rate and
              passive and active traffic monitoring metrics.


