Title       : Trusted Peer-To-Peer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0208683

Award Number: 0208683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Garcia-Molina hector@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop techniques for trusted systems that can provide
              correct information and take correct actions when needed and where needed.  The
              focus will be on peer-to-peer (P2P) systems, where computers or nodes operate
              autonomously, without any central control.  In a P2P system, each node provides
              storage and compute resources. It connects to other neighbor nodes, and the
              community provides services like file sharing, document archiving, or data
              analysis.

P2P systems are especially well suited as the "backbone" of a
              trusted system because nodes operate independently, without reliance on
              particular network connections or on nodes with a fixed functionality.  Thus, a
              P2P system can adapt to a changing environment, and with the proper mechanisms,
              can isolate or ignore malicious nodes.

As part of the project, several
              important problems will be addressed such as: 

Denial of Service (DoS): How
              does one protect against malicious sites that generate excess load to prevent
              others from receiving resources or service?

Searching: How does one
              efficiently find information without using centralized index facilities, and in
              a dynamically changing environment?

Information Authenticity: How does one
              verify the authenticity of documents or information?

Preservation: How does
              one preserve information past the lifetime of the originating node?

The
              proposed research is high risk, but there is also the potential for a large
              payoff.  The research is high risk because the problems faced are difficult:
              Building a trusted community out of building blocks that may be transient and
              malicious, is not an easy task.  However, the only way to build a trusted
              system is, as proposed, by making as few assumptions as possible about the
              trustworthiness of its components. The techniques to be developed, if
              successful, will provide a solid foundation for building truly reliable,
              secure, and trusted systems for electronic commerce, military applications,
              healthcare, and many other applications.
