Title       : Developments and Applications of Self-Consistent Models of Crystal-Melt
               Interaction in Molten and Partially Molten Silicates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0208141

Award Number: 0208141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Liang Yan_Liang@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Liang
EAR-0208141

During their migration towards the surface or subsurface
              storage areas, magmas generated deep in the Earth interior will inevitably
              react with the wallrocks and their host porous crystalline matrices. The
              proposed research is a combined laboratory and numerical study of the kinetic
              of crystal-melt and rock-melt reaction in the Earth upper mantle and lower
              crust. The laboratory part of the project involves dissolution studies of
              mantle rocks and minerals (olivine, pyroxenes and garnet) in molten silicates
              of andesitic to picritic compositions. Theoretical and numerical studies of
              crystal-melt interaction will focus on two length scales: grain scale and
              continuum scale. Once coupled with laboratory experiments, studies of grain
              scale processes will help us to identify crystal-melt reaction mechanisms,
              parameterize reaction rates, and improve experimental design. Continuum scale
              reactive flow models using laboratory calibrated reaction rates and
              thermodynamic phase relationships will allow us to better constrain melt
              transport and melt-rock reaction in the upper mantle and lower crust. A
              combined laboratory and theoretical study of crystal-melt interaction will also
              allow us to develop new methods that can be used to estimate magma ascent rate
              and diffusion coefficients in the crystals and melts. A database for chemical
              diffusion in silicate melts and crystals of mafic compositions will be
              constructed. This database will be integrated into the graduate and
              undergraduate geology courses that are taught by the PI at Brown University.
              


