Title       : Earthscope: A New View of Earth and Earth Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0208457

Award Number: 0208457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hall-Wallace hall@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry C. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1741,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EarthScope has the potential to change the way the public views Earth Science. 
              The excitement of a continental scale experiment utilizing cutting-edge
              technology can change the image of 'geology' from a descriptive discipline
              focusing on a static Earth to one driven by physical and chemical models,
              dynamic processss and advanced technology.  Scientists envision real-time data
              streams, automated analyses that convert the real-time data into products
              useful for the broad Earth science community, and development of community
              models that represent the integrated thinking of geophysicists, geochemists and
              geologists.  This technology and data rich initiative provides a spectacular
              opportunity to engage the public and students of all ages in exploring the
              dynamic Earth and its impact on our lives.  EarthScope will revolutionize how
              we do science; with a corresponding education and outreach effort, EarthScope
              will change how we communicate with a diverse American public, and how
              Americans perceive and use Earth science information.  We propose to develop
              and maintain web and traditional print resources that educate a broad audience
              about the activities, discoveries, and societal impact of EarthScope.  These
              resources will include (l) public relations information such as news items,
              notes on program activities, fact sheets, and presentation materials; (2)
              educational resources about our dynamic continent and the tools we use to
              discover it.  These will be appropriate for the classroom, newsroom and
              boardroom; and (3) access to real-time data seismic data streams and
              visualization tools for the public.  Much of the material will be organized
              under a cascading web site.  Print materials for public relations will include
              an EarthScope poster to be distributed to K-12 educators and scientists at
              national meetings.  We may also develop EarthScope fact sheets, bookmarks and
              other promotional materials or print versions of key Did You Know and In the
              News articles.  The proposed activities and resources will provide a seamless
              interface to the multiple components of EarthScope for audiences ranging from
              policy makers, public, K-16 educators and the Earth science community.
