Title       : Statistical Theory and Algorithms for Signal Authentication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0208809

Award Number: 0208809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Moulin moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Moulin, Pierre
U of Ill Urbana- Champaign

The enormous growth in electronic
              commerce has led to an urgent need for the protection and
authentication of
              information, which now is stored and transmitted in massive amounts. There is
              a
multitude of applications where a signal (typically audio, image or video)
              is to be communicated to
a receiver, along with information such as ownership
              identification or a timestamp authenticating
the signal. The communication
              channel on which the signal is transmitted may be insecure, i.e.,
an adversary
              may modify the signal in such a way that it can no longer be reliably
              authenticated.
In some applications (e.g., wireless video transmission) the
              channel is considered to be insecure
not due to the presence of an adversary,
              but because of the significant degradations introduced
by the transmission
              medium. A secret message necessary for authentication may be embedded
in the
              signal (watermarking-based authentication) or transmitted on a separate channel
              (hashing-
based authentication). In watermarking, the host data set is
              intentionally corrupted, but in a covert
way, designed to be imperceptible to
              a casual analysis. Hashing does not require the signal to be
modified, but
              requires the transmission of side information about the signal (authentication
              tag)
on a separate channel.
Signal authentication encompasses applications
              such as forgery detection and analysis, copyright
protection for digital
              media, copy control, fingerprinting (traitor tracing), and database query
              and
retrieval [1]|[30]. Watermarking and authentication are now major
              activities in audio, image, and
video processing, and standardization efforts
              for JPEG-2000, MPEG-4, and Digital Video Disks
are well underway. Commercial
              products are being developed. Annual International Workshops
on information
              hiding have been held in 1996, and every year since 1998. Special issues of
              major
technical journals have recently been recently devoted to information
              protection [31, 32, 33, 34],
and comprehensive surveys of image and multimedia
              watermarking techniques are available from
[35, 36].
