Title       : Radiation of Teleseismic Body Waves from Dynamic Faults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0208494

Award Number: 0208494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Heaton heatont@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thomas H. Heaton
EAR-0208494

This project is examining the effects of fault
              opacity (the tendency of reflected phases to be trapped in the hanging wall of
              the fault) on radiated energy by constructing models of P and SH body waves
              from shallow thrust fault earthquakes at teleseismic distances.
              Three-dimensional finite-element models are used to calculate rupture history
              assuming a variety of friction models. These slip histories are used to
              calculate the teleseismic body waves that results from the different friction
              models. Systematic differences are determined between these dynamic models and
              traditional dislocation models that are commonly used for determining seismic
              moments.  

The main goal is to quantify how teleseismic P and SH body waves
              from dipping faults are affected by near-source interactions between the
              seismic waves and a dynamically slipping fault. It has been common practice to
              estimate seismic moments by modeling these teleseismic waveforms using
              double-couple source representations. In these models, the medium is modeled as
              an elastic continuum with displacement jumps caused by distributions of
              double-couple body forces. While these models satisfy all boundary conditions
              within a continuous medium, they are not necessarily compatible with the
              frictional stress boundary conditions on the slipping fault (a discontinuous
              medium). In particular, shear waves that reflect off of the Earth's surface are
              generally allowed to propagate back through the slipping fault without
              reflection; this is sometimes referred to as a transparent fault. There is a
              long-standing question about whether or not systematic errors in determining
              earthquake sizes have been introduced by using transparent fault models. This
              study should provide quantitative estimates of the importance of this effect.
