Title       : Quality of Service (QoS) Provisioning in InfiniBand Architecture for System Area
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0208734

Award Number: 0208734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chita R. Das das@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The InfiniBand Architecture (IBA) is envisioned to be the default communication
              infrastructure for
future System Area Networks (SANs) or clusters. The first
              release of the IBA specification outlines the importance of QoS provisioning in
              IBA to support real-time applications. 

The proposed research addresses five
              intertwined issues for designing QoS-capable IBA fabrics.
First, we will
              perform design and analysis of switches/routers, network interface cards, and
              various network topologies to provide high and predictable performance in SANs.
               Second, we will propose efficient congestion avoidance techniques to handle
              network saturation.  Next, efficient multicasting mechanisms for IBA switches
              will be investigated.   Fourth, we will implement fault-tolerant techniques to
              make the QoS support robust to link and switch failures.  Finally, a
              comprehensive simulation testbed for IBA SANs will be developed integrating
              these designs.

The research, planned to be conducted in collaboration with
              Intel, will have the following contributions:
(i) Efficient switched network
              architectures and NIC designs will be proposed to implement QoS-capable IBA
              fabrics; (ii) Research in the above five areas will provide novel solutions to
              satisfy end-to-end QoS requirements and will foster new ideas; and (iii) The
              simulation platform can be used as an effective
tool for conducting future
              research on IBA.  

