Title       : Exact Controllability and Observation of Structural Acoustics and Thermoelastic
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0208121

Award Number: 0208121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117901             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Avalos gavalos@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0208121
Avalos

This project is concerned with studying exact boundary
              controllability 
properties of those systems of coupled partial differential
              equations 
(PDE's) which govern structural acoustic flow within a chamber.
              Exact 
and null boundary controllability problems for two-dimensional systems
              
of thermoelasticity will also be studied. In part, the work will entail a
              
study of the dual problem; namely, the attainment of related observability
              
inequalities for solutions of homogeneous adjoint equations. In line with
              
the intended engineering applications, the focus will be on situations
              
which allow control of the structural acoustic dynamics on as small a
              
(boundary) control region as possible. Moreover, this project is aimed at
              
finding conditions on the geometry and prescribed controls so that, with
              
control implemented on the flexible portion of the acoustic chamber only,
              
one will have exact controllability of the acoustic flow, for arbitrary
              initial 
data of finite energy. It is anticipated that key ingredients in the
              work will 
include the following: (i) sharp trace regularity for the wave
              equation in 
the absence of the so-called Lopatinski condition (intrinsic to
              the wave 
equation under Neumann boundary conditions); (ii) microlocal
              analytical 
estimates which will allow the absorption of tangential wave
              traces by 
time derivatives on the boundary; and (iii) recent results
              involving 
Carleman's estimates for the wave equation with controlled Neumann
              part 
of the boundary. In addition, the project will focus on problems of
              linear 
and (globally) nonlinear exact controllability for thermoelastic
              systems. In 
particular, thermoelastic PDE's will be considered which have
              their 
associated (non-Lipschitz) nonlinearities in place; e.g., the von
              Karman 
bracket and the quasilinearities which appear in the modeling of
              extensible 
plates. This work will attempt to use, in an essential way, the
              now-known 
analyticity of linearized thermoelastic models and our recent
              stability 
work for uncontrolled (but fully nonlinear) thermoelastic
              systems.
 
Examples of coupled partial differential equations (PDE's), such
              as those 
to be investigated, have long existed in the literature. However,
              recent 
innovations in smart material technology, and the potential
              applications of 
these innovations within the context of control engineering
              design, have 
greatly increased the interest in these PDE models. The project
              is aimed at 
obtaining information about certain qualitative properties of
              these 
equations, which in turn can be used to design effective control laws
              for 
the structures/interactions that these equations govern. For example,
              
structural acoustic PDE's are used to model the interaction of an aircraft
              
cabin's interior acoustic field with the surrounding walls of the cabin. For
              
the benefit of the passengers, it is desirable to negate or control pressure
              
disturbances that act directly on the interior acoustic field. These
              
disturbances typically emanate from outside the cabin environment; e.g.,
              
vibrations due to aircraft engine and propeller noise, or effects due to
              
weather turbulence. In practice, engineers attempt to control this external
              
noise by placing piezoelectric actuators/sensors on a portion of the cabin
              
wall, these devices to act in such a way so as to remove, or at least lessen,
              
the harmful acoustic pressure effects. However, the efficacy of this
              
technology is profoundly sensitive to the shape of the cabin, as well as to
              
the particular region of the cabin walls where the actuators are placed. The
              
goals of this project include: (i) the precise mathematical characterization
              
of those cabin geometries for which active control design by piezoelectric
              
actuation is indeed possible; and (ii) when such control design is
              
practicable, the construction of a reliable method to prescribe the amount
              
and region of control actuation which will be necessary to maintain a calm
              
acoustic field within the cabin.

