Title       : Data Structures and Algorithms for Maintaining Data Locality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0208670

Award Number: 0208670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bender bender@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As modern memory architectures grow in complexity, it is becoming
increasingly
              important to design algorithms with high data locality.
Standard approaches
              parameterize algorithms by aspects of the memory
hierarchy, such as the size
              and block size of each memory level.
Unfortunately, this parameterization
              often leads to complex algorithms
that are tuned to particular architectures. 
              A promising new line of
research is to develop memory-hierarchy-sensitive
              algorithms that avoid
any memory-specific parameterization. Such
              platform-independent algorithms
are said to be "cache-oblivious."  If a
              cache-oblivious algorithm works
optimally on a two-level hierarchy, then it
              works optimally on all levels
of a multilevel memory hierarchy;
              cache-oblivious algorithms automatically
tune to arbitrary memory
              architectures.

This research involves maintaining data locality in irregular
              and dynamic
settings, where the data flow is continually changing and
              unpredictable.
The investigator will design cache-oblivious solutions for a
              variety of
fundamental algorithms and data-structures problems.  New
              algorithmic
models of aspects of the memory hierarchy will be proposed and
              integrated.
The investigator will emphasize solutions that are simple and
              elegant
enough to implement.  Two verification tools under development at
              Stony
Brook will provide testbeds for the project's empirical component.


