Title       : A Paradigm for Scalable Open Real-Time Computing Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0208769

Award Number: 0208769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarek F. Abdelzaher zaher@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Stankovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abdelzaher 
CCR-0208769
" A Paradigm for Scalable Open Real-Time Computing
              Under Uncertainty"

A key challenge for embedded real-time computing is that
              of providing temporal performance guarantees. Unfortunately, the wealth of
              knowledge developed to date in the area of performance assurances in
              embedded
systems has been confined to a somewhat restrictive application
              domain where detailed knowledge is assumed of both the available resource
              capacity in the system and the resource requirements of individual tasks. These
              restrictions prevent many previous research results from being applied to a
              wider scope of mainstream applications and services where QoS guarantees are
              required, yet load and resource models are unavailable. This research seeks a
              solution to the problem of providing performance guarantees in the absence of
              detailed load and resource knowledge.  The goal is to establish that
              fine-grained guarantees are achievable with real-time system performance even
              in the absence of fine-grained models of system load and resource capacity.
              

This is approached through new foundations for performance guarantees in
              embedded real-time systems operating under uncertainty. The research  centers
              on a new calculus aimed to counter fundamental limitations on robustness and
              scalability in current approaches for performance guarantees.  There are two
              main elements: 

1) A theory for robust schedulability analysis based on
              feasible regions:  A feasible region is a set of aggregate system states in
              which all timing constraints are guaranteed to be met. This research is
              developing methods for deriving multi-dimensional feasible regions in a
              continuous state space, where the dimensions represent aggregate measurable
              quantities such as the overall utilization of different system resources. 
              Maintaining a system within feasible region boundaries guarantees temporal
              correctness based on aggregates only. These mechanisms will be more scalable
              and suitable for systems where detailed information about the load and
              resources is unavailable. 

2) Middleware components that enforce conformance
              of a run-time system to its feasible region. The theoretical framework being
              developed is incorporated into a middleware framework based on control theory,
              which executes run-time performance monitoring and feedback control mechanisms
              to ensure that system state converges to a feasible region. This condition is
              enforced using admission control and QoS adaptation.

These two elements
              maintain guarantees on real-time behavior by linking applications with the
              middleware, specifying desired QoS guarantees, and leveraging run-time feasible
              region enforcement mechanisms to provide correct temporal behavior in in open
              real-time systems.  This increases the scope of embedded computing from
              predominantly closed custom-designed systems to large distributed open systems
              composed of commercial off-the-shelf components such as web servers, mainstream
              operating systems, and standard protocols such as TCP/IP, where accurate load
              and resource knowledge is unavailable. High impact is expected through the
              ability to achieve predictable behavior in many important systems ranging from
              large Web server farms and Internet routers to ubiquitous computing systems,
              and smart spaces.

