Title       : System-Level Approaches to Reducing Energy Consumption in Real-Time Embedded
               System Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0208992

Award Number: 0208992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaobo S. Hu shu@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Danny Z. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Hu, Xiaobo
CCR-0208992
Title: System-Level Approaches to Reducing Energy
              Consumption 
	in Real-Time Embedded System Design 

Power-manageable
              hardware devices are essential for reducing system energy
consumption.  In
              order to benefit maximally from such devices, new and innovative approaches
              must be developed to fully exploit the dynamically adjustable power v.s. delay
              characteristics.  The proposed research aims at developing techniques employed
              at the system level to reduce energy consumption in battery-powered real-time
              embedded systems composed of power-manageable hardware resources.   This
              project strives to obtain a fundamental understanding on the effect of
              power-manageable resources on both performance and energy consumption during
              the execution of real-time tasks. Non-ideal features of real-world
              power-manageable devices will be considered.  

The major activities include
              i) devising high-level  allocation and scheduling schemes for systems composed
              of  power-manageable devices, ii) designing and analyzing voltage scheduling
              algorithms for variable-voltage  processors, and iii) developing techniques to
              predict power/energy consumed by hardware resources at the micro-architectural
              level.   Training students to prepare them for energy-conscious design
              challenges is also a major component of the project, which will be achieved
              through course development and active involvements of both undergraduate and
              graduate students in the research.

