Title       : Studies of Weakly Adsorbed Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0208520

Award Number: 0208520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renee D. Diehl rdiehl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton W. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collaborative study employing both experimental and
              theoretical methods to study fundamental questions about forces at surfaces and
              their implications for the structure and dynamics of thin films.  Key problems
              to be addressed include when and why many adsorption systems exhibit
              low-coordination adsorption sites, and whether the existing theory adequately
              describes the ultra-weak adsorption of simple gases.  These studies will extend
              the groups' previous research, which has established a partial empirical and
              theoretical base for understanding weak adsorption phenomena.  The techniques
              to be employed are low-energy electron diffraction, He-atom scattering,
              computer simulations and state-of-the-art theoretical methods.  The importance
              of these studies is that they will provide a fundamental understanding of
              adsorption phenomena that will be applicable to many different fields,
              including nano-patterning, self-assembled monolayers, coatings technology,
              tribology and chip fabrication.  Students and postdoctoral scholars will be
              trained in fundamental methods, which are applicable to the aforementioned
              technologies.

Surface science is of importance as a subject of both
              fundamental interest and potential application to many technologies. This
              project addresses a number of basic scientific questions in this area.
              Principal problems that will be explored include the structure of films that
              are just one molecule thick.  A focus of this research is the determination of
              where individual molecules sit in relation to the underlying supporting
              surface. A second major topic is the question of how strongly these films are
              bound to the surface as well as their dynamics. In some cases, such films are
              bound to the surface at high temperature, but not at low temperature. In other
              cases, the reverse situation is observed to be the case. These phenomena, and
              many others, will be explored with diverse experimental, theoretical and
              computational methods. The principal experimental techniques are electron and
              atom beam scattering from surfaces. Theory and simulation are to be carried
              out, using state-of-the-art modeling methods, some of which will be further
              improved as part of the research. The research will benefit from the
              combination of techniques being applied.  Students will be trained in
              fundamental methods which are applicable to industrial concerns such as the
              development and fabrication of coatings, lubricants, and computer chips.

