Title       : Sequential Architectures for Quantum Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0208959

Award Number: 0208959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Markov imarkov@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              During the last decade, a revolutionary new computer paradigm has emerged that,
              unlike conventional ones such as the von Neumann model, is based on quantum
              mechanics rather than classical physics. Quantum computers can, in principle,
              solve some hitherto intractable problems including factorization of large
              numbers, a central issue in secure data encryption. The quantum unit of
              information is the qubit and n qubits can store 2^n binary numbers
              simultaneously thus facilitating a type of massive parallelism. Qubits support
              powerful forms of interaction such as entanglement that have no counterpart in
              classical computers. On the other hand, quantum states are fragile, nanoscale
              entities, whose measurement is inherently nondeterministic and does not
              retrieve all 2^n stored numbers simultaneously. As a result, quantum and
              classical computers pose fundamentally different design problems. Although
              several promising physical technologies for quantum computers have been
              demonstrated, they can handle only a small number of qubits and their
              scalabilty is severely limited. The logic circuits they employ are essentially
              combinational quantum circuits, which function as a kind of co-processor within
              an otherwise classical computer. Once quantum computers with 15 -20 qubits can
              be built, quantum architectures that fully exploit their computational
              capabilities and also meet practical design and implementation constraints will
              be needed. These issues motivate the research proposed here, as well as related
              problems in classical computers that are implemented using nanoscale
              technologies such as molecular architectures.

The overall goal of this
              proposal is to develop practical methods to design sequential quantum circuits
              that require much less hardware than current quantum circuits and can be more
              easily interfaced with classical architectures. The time-space trade-off
              achievable in classical logic design by using sequential rather than
              combinational methods is well-known. In the quantum domain, however, it is not
              obvious that such a trade-off is even possible, since the act of measuring a
              register's state can destroy its contents. As a result, little or no research
              has been directed at sequential design methods. However, recent theoretical
              work on quantum automata by Ambianis et al. demonstrates the feasibility of
              such methods and points to the possibility of substantial cost savings over
              conventional approaches. We propose to study the design of quantum sequential
              circuits starting with exponentially more efficient counters and culminating
              with application-specific processor designs that realize important applications
              such as Grover's search algorithm. We will pursue multiobjective optimization,
              including minimization of the number of qubits, the number of gates, or the
              circuit depth. We will also take into account the constraints imposed by the
              most promising physical technologies. Moreover, we will study ways to combine
              small quantum circuits with large classical circuits to obtain scalable hybrid
              architectures. Both quantum performance speed-up and conventional scalability
              then become possible. Novel hybrid designs of this type are expected to play a
              central role in interfacing quantum processors with classical computers, both
              conventional and nanoscale. As in traditional computer architecture studies,
              simulation and other computer-aided design (CAD) methods will, along with the
              appropriate analytic methods, serve as our principal research tools.


