Title       : PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0208484

Award Number: 0208484
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane G. Watson dgwatson@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D, Watson
	      Room 437
	      Cambridge, MA  021934307    617/452-2474

NSF Program : 1157      Minority Postdoc Rsrch Flw-New
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Social and Behavioral Sciences Post-Doctoral Fellowship research program
              focuses on the relationship between information structure and prosodic
              structure in language. This work has two objectives. The first is to understand
              how the information status of words (e.g. their newness, oldness, or focus
              status) influences intonational phrasing in language production. The second
              goal is to understand how listeners interpret intonational phrase boundaries
              and pitch accents in on-line language comprehension. This research program also
              has two primarily methodological goals. The first goal is to test a new
              paradigm for eliciting spontaneous speech from participants in the lab. The
              second goal is to use an eye-tracking paradigm to explore the interpretation of
              prosodic information in language comprehension. The researcher will pursue a
              set of experiments will explore the relationship between information structure
              and prosodic structure. The experiments are as follows: Production Experiments:
              the first set of experiments explores the effects of discourse status on
              intonational boundary placement in reading. The second set of experiments
              explores the affects of discourse status on intonational boundary placement in
              spontaneous speech. Comprehension Experiments:  the third set of experiments
              investigates the points at which intonational boundary information is used in
              the interpretation of an utterance. The fourth set of experiments use the
              eye-tracking paradigm to determine the point at which pitch accents are
              interpreted. Differences in the semantic interpretation of pitch accents are
              also investigated. The PI, Dr. Duane Watson, will be under the mentorship of
              Dr. Michael K. Tanenhaus at the University of Rochester Department of Brain and
              Cognitive Sciences.

