Title       : A New Approach for Securing Systems Using Automated Adaptive Intrusion Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0208877

Award Number: 0208877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289923             (Estimated)
Investigator: R C. Sekar sekar@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Networked information systems play an increasingly important role in critical
              infrastructures such as power generation and distribution, transportation,
              commerce, and national security. The continuing spate of security incidents
              reported by organizations such as CERT Coordination Center demonstrates that in
              spite of best efforts in securing systems, "hacker" attacks will penetrate even
              the best defense mechanisms. To cope with such attacks, new techniques need to
              be developed that can detect and respond to such attacks. Unfortunately,
              existing approaches focus primarily on after-the-fact detection of such
              attacks. Moreover, intrusion response relies primarily on human involvement.
              These two factors mean that fast-progressing attacks (e.g., programmed attacks)
              can effect significant damage before any protective response is launched.
              Recovery from such damage is labor-intensive, and will render the target system
              unavailable for hours if not days. This project will develop new approach that
              automates intrusion responses so that the target system can defend itself from
              serious damage due to attacks. It will build on the proposer's successful
              research in specification-based intrusion detection. Key technical components
              of this project include: specification language enhancements to express
              response actions, techniques for isolating compromised processes so that they
              do not interfere with the rest of the system, and deception techniques that can
              provide an illusion of success to attacker while protecting the target the
              system.
