Title       : Acquisition of relational concepts: Pathway to proficient thinking in
               mathematics and science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0208103

Award Number: 0208103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1302516            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Sloutsky sloutsky.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron S. Yarlas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project is located in the second quadrant of the ROLE description
              with links to the third and fourth quadrants.  It focuses on acquisition,
              representation, processing, learning and transfer of relational concepts.  The
              study of relational concepts is important because relational concepts are
              ubiquitous in mathematics and science: ratio, proportion, and function,
              velocity, acceleration, and density, mutation, evolution and growth rate,
              probability and statistical interaction, and correlation and contingency are
              just a few examples.  The study will be guided by our hypotheses about
              representation, processing, learning, and transfer of relational concepts
              across ages and knowledge domains.  The proposed project aims to answer several
              fundamental questions.  What are the basic cognitive mechanisms underlying
              acquisition of relational concepts, and how are relational concepts represented
              in the cognitive system?  How do these mechanisms and representations change in
              the course of development?  Do these mechanisms differ across knowledge
              domains? And how can we facilitate learning and transfer of relational concepts
              within and across domains of mathematics and science?  To pursue these
              questions, we propose a three-year-long research project that will be conducted
              by a team of researchers collaborating through the Ohio State University
              Learning Research Initiative and interested in cognition, cognitive
              development, and the learning of biology, physics, and mathematics.  The
              project would be a systematic empirical study of conceptual development across
              several knowledge domains.  The team will use a wide variety of methods and
              tasks, ranging from simple tasks allowing participation of young children to
              relatively complex tasks requiring sophisticated knowledge.  The project will
              generate new basic knowledge increasing our understanding of acquisition and
              processing of relations, as well as our understanding of learning and transfer
              of relational concepts in mathematics and science.  The proposed project will
              be an important step towards better understanding of conceptual development and
              of learning of important concepts in mathematics, physics, and biology, and it
              will inform practice of teaching of mathematics and science.   


