Title       : Collaborative Research: Mesoproterozoic Tectonics of Inboard Laurentia: Insight
               Into Assembly and Configuration of Rodinia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0208160

Award Number: 0208160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74378              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Williams Mlw@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is investigating Mesoproterozoic (1300-1000 Ma) sedimentary rocks
              in the western U.S. to test aspects of the controversial Rodinia hypotheses.
              The hypothesis being tested is that the inboard record of sedimentation and
              tectonics in southwestern Laurentia, preserved in well-exposed sedimentary
              successions, can be used for understanding stresses at the surrounding plate
              margins, nature of drainage patterns and basins in southwestern Laurentia, and
              the age of possible outboard sources of detritus.  The research involves
              structural, petrologic, and geochronologic study aimed at correlation of, and
              characterizing provenance for, several key areas and units. These areas
              represent preserved remnants of once more extensive sedimentary successions;
              they are well exposed, but widely separated, and correlations have been
              hampered by a lack of reliable geochronology. The study concentrates on the
              Apache Group (Arizona), Unkar Group (Grand Canyon), Crystal Spring Formation
              (Death Valley), and Lanora Formation (Texas). The researchers are
              reconstructing the regional intracratonic basinal and tectonic patterns and
              searching for a "fingerprint" of possible outboard sources of detritus. The
              geochronological studies involve: dating ash beds using precise U-Pb
              geochronology, U-Pb dating of detrital zircons, new in situ U-Pb microprobe
              dating of monazite grains, and Ar-Ar laser dating of mica grains.
              Sedimentary-tectonic studies are evaluating which faults were active during
              deposition by looking for facies changes across faults and relationships to
              syntectonic magmatism. Petrologic studies are emphasizing provenance of
              siliciclastic rocks using standard petrologic techniques. Detailed regional
              tests involving geochronology linked to sedimentary tectonics are providing
              better understanding of the tectonic setting of western Laurentia and hence the
              most likely adjacent outboard continental masses that collided with Laurentia
              from 1.3-1.0 Ga.
