Title       : Knickpoint Migration: Processes, Rates, and Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0208312

Award Number: 0208312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelin X. Whipple kxw@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knickpoint migration has long been recognized as a primary mechanism of river
              response to sudden base-level fall.   As base-level fall can be triggered by
              tectonic upheaval, climatic change, sea-level fall or river capture, knickpoint
              migration is an important aspect of channel incision and landscape evolution in
              a wide range of geological, tectonic, and climatic settings.  Following a
              sudden base-level fall, the distribution of actively migrating knickpoints
              within a watershed sets the boundary between landforms that have adjusted to
              the new base level and those that have not, and therefore retain their relict,
              pre-incision form.  Consequently, the time scale of landscape response and the
              timing of sediment deliver to basins following a change in tectonic or climatic
              conditions is strong influenced by the rate and style of upstream knickpoint
              migration.

Despite the critical importance of knickpoints in landscape
              evolution, little is known quantitatively about the controls on the rates and
              styles of knickpoint migration.  We propose to exploit a natural experiment in
              knickpoint migration that has been running for 18 ka in the Waipaoa drainage
              basin on the East Cape of New Zealand's North Island.  Over on hundred
              knickpoints demarcate the headward advance of a wave of incision initiated
              along the Waipaoa trunk stream at about 18ka, as recorded in tephra
              stratigraphy in alluvial fills on abandoned strath terraces.  Preliminary map
              and aerial photography investigation indicates that both knickpoint migration
              rate and form (diffuse, steep/discrete, waterfall) show considerable
              variability within the drainage basin.  Significant new data on the processes,
              rates, and styles of knickpoint migration as a function of upstream drainage
              area (discharge and sediment flux), substrate lithology, and distance of
              knickpoint migration will be gathered, analyzed, and disseminated.  As the
              Waipaoa is a dramatic example of how dynamic the landscape we live in is, and
              how susceptible it can be to human disturbance, we are committed to the
              development of educational modules at all levels, including K-12 instruction.

