Title       : Organized Turbulence over Forested Landscapes: Theoretical Basis for a
               Low-Dimensional Transport Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0208258

Award Number: 0208258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403498             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Albertson john.albertson@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriel G. Katul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0208258
Albertson

The need to understand the coupling between forested
              landscapes and turbulent fluxes of energy, water, and carbon has become a
              national priority, as evidenced by both the
USGCRP's Water and Carbon Cycle
              Science Plans.  Here, a conceptual model is proposed to describe turbulent
              transport of mass and energy between forest canopies and the atmosphere in
              terms of two end-member flow types: mixing layer (over dense vegetation) and
              rough walled boundary layer.  Regions with varying degrees of sparse vegetation
              are represented as a superposition of the two end member regimes.  The
              overarching goal is the development of a similarity theory for canopy sublayer
              (CSL) transport, where vertical transport phenomena are described by coupling
              high resolution surface features (that are readily observed remotely) and
              coarse resolution atmospheric fields (as both observed and modeled).  The
              project is structured to test three hypotheses regarding the underpinnings of
              the conceptual model.  The focus is on the interplay between canopy morphology
              and organized turbulent transport.  Analysis of Field data is combined with
              Large, Eddy Simulation (LES) - with the data providing observations of field
              conditions and the LES providing a full view of the evolving structure of
              turbulence under controlled boundary conditions.  The LES results will be used
              to identify the essential dynamics and to formulate signatures of the coherent
              structures that will be used to guide subsequent analysis of the field data
              sets.  Multi-scale decompositions of the turbulence fields are to be used in
              concert with nonlinear time series analysis tools to begin the development of
              the low-dimensional model.  This approach will provide a unique training
              experience for a graduate student and post-doc.  The PI's will continue
              recruiting/training under-represented candidates.



