Title       : Genesis of the Western Slope of the Altiplano Plateau and Atacama Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0208130

Award Number: 0208130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa E. Jordan tej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan L. Isacks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The common association of thrust belts with the slopes of the great mountain
              belts has resulted in the common assumption that topographic relief and surface
              shortening are intrinsically linked. For example, many of the world's great
              mountain belts are doubly vergent, with well-developed thrust belts facing away
              from the interior of the orogen. However, in some key cases, significant
              topographic relief has developed in the absence of major faulting. These
              orogenic scale monoclines and their along-strike discontinuities have the
              potential to elucidate crustal mechanical and rheological controls on
              continental orogenesis.  An exceptional example of an orogenic-scale monocline
              occurs along the western border of the Altiplano-Puna plateau of the central
              Andes. Although climate, and in particular precipitation, has a strong
              influence on the morphology of a mountain belt, in this region the climatic
              input is minimized because it is one of the driest places on Earth. The
              profound lack of precipitation causes the landscape to evolve extremely slowly
              and extend the preservation potential of landforms and surfaces from the
              thousands of years typical of mountain belts into millions of years. Therefore,
              the western edge of the plateau's morphology reflects a nearly pure tectonic
              signal, making it the most logical starting point for studies aimed at
              improving our understanding of continental plateau formation and orogenesis. A
              chronologic framework for the Miocene to present uplift of the Andean monocline
              will be derived from investigation of: 1) the geometric relationships between
              strata accumulating in sedimentary basins at the toe of the monocline, and 2)
              estimations of the degree of rotation of stream paleo-gradients in a set of
              drainages which are deeply incised into the monocline surface. Paleo-gradients
              will be determined by correlation and high accuracy surveying of terrace
              surfaces preserved in stream valleys. Extensive volcanism and large-volume
              ignimbrite eruptions are well distributed throughout the Neogene rock record,
              so that existing chronologic constraints can be improved upon by identification
              and collection of volcanic material for dating. The Atacama and Tamarugal
              Basins are ideal field areas in which to conduct the stratigraphic research in
              both outcrop and seismic. Both basins lie at the foot of the monocline and are
              hydrologically closed. Therefore, they preserve complete Neogene depositional
              histories. The Atacama Basin contains an especially valuable record because it
              lies within the largest along-strike anomaly in the monocline. Determining if a
              genetic link exists between the basin and the deflection of the monocline
              (temporally and spatially) will be an important research focus, as it may yield
              insight into processes fundamental to plateau uplift. This study is extremely
              timely and has the potential to be an excellent contribution to the
              understanding of surface processes, orogenesis and plateau uplift. The outcomes
              of this work will advance the present state of knowledge concerning the causes
              of plateau uplift by testing whether monocline warping is synchronous with
              deformation on the opposite side of the orogen, as expressed in the Sub-Andean
              belt and Eastern Cordillera. It will also test the significance of large
              topographic anomalies in otherwise continuous mountain-fronts. This study will
              explore the feasibility of plateau-derived groundwater as a substantial factor
              in landform genesis. The results of this study will contain many parallels to
              research on the Tibetan Plateau, where performing similar studies would be
              hampered by exposure problems. This research will have educational and human
              resource impacts. At Cornell University, results from this study will become
              components of undergraduate courses in geomorphology, geophysics and basin
              analysis. All results will be cataloged in GIS software and available to the
              public via the internet. This research will also serve as thesis components for
              two Cornell graduate students.

