Title       : In-situ X-ray Studies of Surface Structure during Plasma Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0208011

Award Number: 0208011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Ludwig ludwig@buphy.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project address fundamental issues associated with surface structure and
              its relationship to the plasma environment in plasma-based processing of
              electronic materials. The approach is to use real-time, in-situ, synchrotron-
              based x-ray diffraction to investigate the surface and near-surface structure
              of silicon and compound semiconductors (GaAs and GaN) undergoing chlorine-based
              plasma processing. After gaining experience using real-time x-ray scattering to
              understand silicon surface structure during processing, compound
              semiconductors, GaAs(100)/(110) and GaN(0001) (i.e. polar surface vs. non-polar
              surfaces) will be addressed. The atomic structure of the surfaces will be
              examined during exposure to the plasma, including questions of the extent to
              which surface reconstruction remains in the compound semiconductors in this
              environment. The evolution of the surface morphology during plasma processing
              will be investigated using grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering
              (GISAXS). The evolution of step structure (bunching vs. anti-bunching) on the
              compound semiconductor surfaces during exposure to the plasma will be studied
              as a function of substrate miscut size and direction. In addition, regimes of
              layer-by-layer removal vs. step retraction will be examined to better
              understand their relationship to the surface structure. The evolution of the
              GaAs surface stoichiometry will be followed in real time with x-ray
              fluorescence. In silicon, the density and depth of the damaged chlorinated
              surface layer will be studied and compared with existing simulations. The
              results of experiments performed in the x-ray portion of the proposed work will
              be correlated to independent characterization efforts performed at BU and NRL.
              Post- processing surface morphology will be examined with AFM. Surface damage
              will also be characterized ex-situ using C-V measurements, transmission line
              measurements of contact resistances to processed surfaces and photoreflectance
              spectroscopy. The proposed research program focuses on the fundamental
              questions of the relation between plasma processing conditions and atomic
              surface structure and is expected to serve as a stimulus for further
              development of theory and simulation. The new knowledge gained will be
              important for future rational development of new processing techniques,
              especially in novel materials.
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental
              research issues in areas of electronic materials science having technological
              relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on
              education, and the integration of research and education. The research program
              provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of
              sophisticated scientific equipment. The broad resources, and collaborative
              aspects, provide special opportunities for education and training of graduate
              and undergraduate students involved in interdisciplinary forefront research.
              
***  

