Title       : SGER- Annotated Checklists for Fishes and Preparation of the Official List of
               Names in Ichthyology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0208690

Award Number: 0208690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74884              (Estimated)
Investigator: William N. Eschmeyer weschmeyer@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The field of Ichthyology (fishes) through previous NSF funding has
              accumulated a database of fish names and related information as the Catalog of
              Fishes (published in 1998 and on-line at http:www.calacademy.org/research); it
              is the most comprehensive informational database for any animal group. This
              database summarizes the information known for about 50,000 described species of
              fishes (more than all other vertebrates combined), of which about 30,000 are
              valid species. However, there are still many described species for which we do
              not know the status (valid species or a synonym or duplicate name), and new
              species of fishes continue to be described at a rate of about 300 per year.  
              Ichthyology is changing, and many of the scientists of the 1950s-1980s are
              nearing the end of active careers.  They have much information in files and
              accumulated unpublished data that can be published in annotated checklists - a
              summary of the knowledge for the groups of fishes that they have spent their
              career studying.  Also, the naming of animal groups is directed by a "Code" to
              which all scientists worldwide use, and a new edition of the code taking effect
              in 2000 allows for the creation of a list of available names for a discipline
              and the purging of other names from further consideration.  The present project
              has two goals: it will allow the Catalog of Fishes staff to work directly with
              specialists so that they can author annotated checklists for the groups for
              which they are the world specialist, and these will be published by the
              California Academy of Sciences and place on the www.  Following this, the List
              of Available Names in Fishes will be assembled and placed on the www, and steps
              will be taken to have this list approved by the International Commission on
              Zoological Nomenclature.  The Catalog of Fishes staff will prepare the
              manuscripts for the specialists - the specialist's role will primarily be to
              edit and add information.

     The primary way information about animals and
              plants is organized is around scientific names provided by taxonomists. 
              Traditional taxonomists, the monographers and revisers responsible for the
              major taxonomic advances over the past half-century are an aged group, many
              over 60 years of age.  Many of them harbor a wealth of information in their
              heads and personal files on status of species, on type specimens (the original
              specimens used by the first author to describe the species), and related
              information.  This project is therefore opportunistic. A preliminary survey of
              specialists revealed a strong and enthusiastic willingness to participate.  The
              present project will be the first test cast of preparing a "List of Available
              Names" under provisions of the Code.  Such lists will add stability to names. 
              The checklists will consolidate our level of knowledge and at the same time
              reveal taxonomic and geographic areas in need of further investigation.  This
              information on fishes is important for biodiversity studies, for molecular
              studies, for conservation needs, for commerce, and for a framework to house the
              accumulated knowledge about fishes.

