Title       : GPS Study of the Kinematics of the Intersection of the Tarim, Tien Shan, and
               Pamir
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0208303

Award Number: 0208303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradford H. Hager brad@chandler.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Herring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High quality results from a dense GPS network spanning the Central Tien Shan,
              from
Kazakhstan, through Kyrgyzstan, and into China, reveal a relatively
              simple kinematic picture to the east of the Talas-Ferghana fault.  GPS
              velocities from several independent studies agree that there is ~20 mm/yr
              convergence between the Tarim Basin and the Kazakh platform, about half the
              total convergence between the Indian and Eurasian plates.  GPS velocities from
              the PI's dense network show that convergence is localized on a handful of
              structures.  Slip rates on these structures inferred from both geologic studies
              and geodetic studies agree remarkably well.  The PI's have used this new
              geodetic data, in conjunction with a simple block model that accounts for
              elastic strain accumulation, to invert for the motions of crustal blocks in the
              region.  Notable results include much less right-lateral motion on the
              Talas-Ferghana fault than the previous geological estimate, rotation of the
              Ferghana Valley at ~0.8 degree/myr (a fraction of the long-term geologic rate
              from paleomag), and convergence across the Alay valley between the Pamir and
              Southern Tien Shan of ~20 mm/yr, comparable to previous estimates. However,
              existing geodetic coverage in the west, across the Talas-Ferghana fault into
              the Ferghana basin, and south across the Alay valley and South Tien Shan and
              into the Pamir, is both more sparse and less accurate than that in the Central
              Tien Shan.  These rates of strike-slip motion on the Talas Ferghana fault,
              rotation of the Ferghana basin,and convergence across the Alay valley are not
              well constrained.  For example, the inferred rate of rotation of the Ferghana
              basin differs by a factor of two depending upon which GPS results are used to
              constrain the model.  Clearly, more observations are needed to obtain results
              in this area comparable in usefulness to those obtained to the east.  In
              addition, the proposed joint analysis of the PI's raw GPS data with that taken
              by others (GFZ and CSB) will provide a combined solution with improved
              accuracy. In collaboration with colleagues at the Russian Institute for High
              Temperature Physics (known as IVTRAN)in Kyrgyzstan, the PI's propose to install
              20 new sites in western Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan.  The Chinese Seismological
              Bureau (CSB)in Wuhan, China, will work with us to install additional sites in
              northwestern Xinjiang Province in China (exact number and locations to be
              determined after a visit to the field). The PI's collaborators will survey
              these sites, as well as existing sites that GFZ, IVTRAN, and CSB previously
              installed in the region, in order to unravel the kinematics of the area where
              the Tien Shan, Ferghana Basin, Pamir, and Tarim Basin intersect.  In addition
              to analyzing the GPS data, they will also use simple continuum mechanics-based
              models to interpret the GPS velocities that they obtain in terms of geologic
              motions.
