Title       : Toward a Unified Approach to Diffuse Wave Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0208548

Award Number: 0208548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Miller elmiller@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Misha Kilmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Miller, Eric
Northeastern U

The objective of this work is the creation of a
              unified approach to characterizing the internal structure of a medium given
              diffuse wavefield data collected at the boundaries.  Diffusive inverse problems
              are found in a
number of areas including (1) medical imaging for breast cancer
              detection using diffuse optical tomography (DOT); (2) non-destructive
              evaluation (NDE) in the steel and semi-conductor industries with photo-thermal
              methods; and (3) monitoring of environmental cleanup processes via electrical
              resistance
tomography (ERT). Despite the ubiquity of these problems,
              researchers have typically treated them in application-specific ways due to
              differences in the physical scale, materials under consideration, and sensing
              systems.  Here, a unified approach to solving this class of inverse problems is
              constructed by exploiting the underlying similarities in the physics and
              processing objectives of each of these problems.

The investigators focus on
              three fundamental difficulties.  First, they design regularization techniques
              to overcome the ill-posedness of these inverse problems.  Specifically they
              explore the use of adaptive, geometric, low-order models for the unknown and
              reconstruct the relatively small number of descriptive parameters in these
              models.  Second, they design inversion methods that, unlike traditional
              approaches, do not require precise knowledge of the background structure of the
              medium.  Solving these nonlinear inverse problems is extremely computationally
              intensive, in part because a three-dimensional forward problem must be solved
              thousands of times.  Therefore, a third focus of the research is the
              development of
computationally efficient inversion techniques by exploiting
              the relationships among the forward problems.  The resulting theory and
              algorithms will be validated using real sensor data from the three
application
              areas described in the first paragraph: DOT, photo-thermal NDE, and ERT.


