Title       : Path Creation with Digital Technologies: Networks of Innovation in Architectural
               Design and Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0208963

Award Number: 0208963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Boland Boland@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Youngjin Yoo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kalle Lyytinen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Increased computing power allows for three dimensional models to be represented
              as digital images, which can be manipulated quite easily. Such advanced
              computer imaging affects many professions, and is expected to result in
              fundamental changes in the way those professions organize and conduct their
              work. This research will study the way that Frank O. Gehry and his firm of
              architects uses three-dimensional computer modeling in the design of buildings
              and the changes that it creates in his architectural practice and in the
              construction companies that participate with him in his building projects. It
              will study both the Frank Gehry firm, Gehry Partners, as well as key
              contractors, consultants and subcontractors involved in the construction of
              several of his most innovative building designs. The objective is to understand
              how innovation in work practices, technology use and organizational structures
              accompany the use of advanced three-dimensional computer imaging in both the
              Gehry Partners' firm as well as the contractors, consultants and subcontractors
              associated with his projects. The objective is to determine whether or not his
              innovative designs serve as a path creating event for his firm and companies
              working on his projects. 

Path creating events are building projects that
              require a firm to break from the standard routines established in its industry
              and develop new approaches to doing its work. An hypothesis to be explored in
              this research is that the designs by Gehry Partners require innovation in work
              practices, technology use, and organization structures by those associated with
              his building projects. Another hypothesis is that the path-creating behaviors
              developed for work on his projects is carried over by the construction firms
              into other subsequent projects that they work on, including those designed by
              other architects. This is a different approach to the study of innovation,
              since most prior studies have either followed the invention and development of
              a particular technology over time, or have followed how a given technology is
              adopted by a population of firms. Here, innovation is conceptualized as a
              cascading wake that is initiated by path creating designs and is carried over
              in multiple forms to other aspects of an industry (in this case the
              construction industry). The benefit is a better understanding of how innovation
              takes place across firms and the network of innovation that is spawned by the
              adoption of advanced computer technologies in a profession such as
              architecture.



