Title       : BAC Libraries for Fundamental Studies in Lepidoptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0208388

Award Number: 0208388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marian R. Goldsmith mki101@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0208388
Goldsmith

The goal of this proposal is to build a public facility
              for distribution of BAC libraries for accelerated research in development and
              evolution for a set of well-established lepidopteran insect models in two key
              areas: 1) developmental and functional neurobiology and 2) the genetic and
              developmental basis of adaptation. Readily available BAC libraries for these
              species will accelerate research into the genetic mechanisms underlying
              lepidopteran development, behavior, morphology, and evolution. 

Specific
              objectives of the research and how they will be achieved are: 

1. To produce
              6 high-quality BAC libraries for three different experimentally important
              lepidopteran species. In order to achieve complementary overlaps and deep
              genome coverage, two BAC libraries equivalent to 10X genome coverage will be
              made for each species by partial digestion of high molecular weight DNA using
              one of two enzymes that recognizes different base composition restriction sites
              and arrayed in 384-well microplates. 
2. To characterize each library for
              percentage of insert-empty clones, average insert size, insert size
              distribution, clone stability, and cytoplasmic contamination to ensure high
              library quality. 
3. To assess true genome coverage and provide preliminary
              comparative genome data by screening each library with a set of well-conserved
              gene sequences. 
4. To maintain, archive and disseminate the libraries to the
              public on a cost-recovery basis through the Texas A and M University GENEfinder
              Genomic Resources, one of the largest genomic resource centers in the world.
              

The species were chosen primarily for their centrality as experimental
              models for a wide range of research problems. They are: 
1. a Sphingid moth,
              the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, which is a model for developmental
              mechanisms, neurobiology, cell biology, physiology, chemical communication, and
              hostplant selection studied by a large international community
2. a Noctuid
              moth, the tobacco budworm, Heliothis virescens, a genetically tractable member
              of a widespread group of largely agricultural pests used as a model for
              investigating genes that change under differential selection, such as
              resistance to chemical and biological pesticides
3. a Heliconid butterfly,
              Heliconius erato, which is a classic model for mullerian mimicry and convergent
              evolutionary change. 

The first fruits of the BAC libraries proposed here
              will be to provide a set of conserved anchor loci that will serve as a
              framework to unify genetic studies in the Lepidoptera and to investigate
              phylogenetic relationships, which are still largely unresolved for most of the
              clade. For the long term, the construction of a set of lepidopteran BAC
              libraries will provide critically important tools for every aspect of insect
              science, especially for comparative genomics and future sequencing of model
              genomes. It will also provide new insights into long-held questions such as 1)
              how development constrains evolution, 2) the extent to which patterning loci
              are reused in evolution, and 3) what kinds of developmental changes are
              preferred by evolution, as well as how they vary across diverse butterfly
              lineages and different selective landscapes. 

