Title       : Effect of Transient Hydrologic Events on Biogeochemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0208386

Award Number: 0208386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron L. Mills amills@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet S. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Hornberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0208386
Mills
In field studies of groundwater in a range of hydrogeological
              settings, the rates of microbially mediated geochemical reactions have been
              shown to be far faster than hydrological transport rates. These relative rates
              lead to large changes in concentration of a variety of redox-sensitive chemical
              species over short distances within aquifers. In some systems, however,
              transient hydrological events (e.g., heavy precipitation on dry soil or floods
              in streams) can rapidly alter the geochemical environment in which the microbes
              exist. In that circumstance, the time constants associated with the physical
              events approach those of the microbially mediated processes. The proposed
              research addresses the question: How do hydrological processes and
              biogeochemical processes interact in the riparian-hyporheic zone of streams
              where time scales of the various processes are on the same order - hours to
              weeks? The proposed research will examine the effect of bank-storage events on
              reductive microbiological processes occurring in the riparian-hyporheic zone of
              a low-relief coastal plain stream. In particular, the concentration of
              nitrate-N in the groundwater feeding the stream is about 15 mg/liter, but the
              stream-water concentrations average only 1.6 mg/liter, suggesting high
              denitrification activity in the riparian- hyporheic zone. We envision the
              disruption of anaerobic processes during rain events in which rapid
              infiltration raises the water table and "flushes" chemicals (viz., nitrate) in
              the pore water out into the stream and perfuses the area with oxygenated water.
               We expect a similar disruption without flushing during storms in which a rapid
              rise in stream level pushes oxygenated water into the stream banks, thereby
              transiently extending the hyporheic zone.  We will also examine the effect of
              flushing or bank-storage events on the denitrification and will document the
              rate of return of the functional abilities of the microbial communities to the
              pre-disturbance levels.  Because these transient events have the potential to
              affect release of chemicals like nitrate from the groundwater into the
              surrounding surface waters, we will investigate how transient conditions in
              riparian soils affect the overall budget of biologically active chemicals. The
              proposed work includes detailed field observations, field manipulation
              experiments, laboratory batch and "mesocosm" experiments and mathematical
              modeling.   We anticipate that we will learn how microbially mediated
              geochemical reactions and transient hydrological processes with time scales on
              the same order are linked. We will develop quantitative descriptions of these
              processes and investigate how frequently biogeochemical processes are "reset"
              by different hydrological events the synoptic data that we  will examine how
              the transient effects of local processes influence regional nutrient fluxes.

