Title       : Mobile Agent Security Through Multi-Agent Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0208640

Award Number: 0208640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Tate srt@cs.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An increasingly promising and widespread topic of research in distributed
              computing is the mobile agent paradigm: code which travels in an autonomous or
              semi-autonomous fashion between hosts, carrying computation state with the
              agent and performing computations on the remote hosts.  The objective of this
              project is to explore the problem of protecting agents from malicious hosts
              using multi-agent protocols. Potential advantages of the multi-agent approach
              over previous approaches, such as using a trusted third party, include reducing
              assumptions of trust; addition of fault tolerance and protection from denial of
              service and collusion; and reduction of communication and space overhead by
              distributed data and circuit re-encryption.

The specific methods employed in
              this project will be both theoretical and experimental.  In the theoretical
              realm, the project explores advanced multi-agent protocol design, with the goal
              of achieving provable security in the aggregate even though individual hosts
              may be untrustworthy.  The experimental part of the project involves setting up
              a small cluster to simulate a setting of remote hosts, which can then be
              instrumented to test and measure communication and computational overhead for
              sample applications.

The amount of work currently being done on topics
              related to mobile agents makes it likely that agents will play an important
              role in future technologies.  The very nature of mobile agent computation makes
              security a prime concern, so the impact of the work in this proposed project
              could be great.

