Title       : Hydraulic and Geomorphic Controls on the Evolution of Cluster Bedforms in
               Gravel-Bed Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0208358

Award Number: 0208358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thanos Papanicolaou apapanic@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0208358
Papanicolaou

Small-scale cluster bedforms are prevalent in
              gravel-bed rivers.  An understanding of their mechanics is needed for better
              understanding of river processes, as well as the development of accurate
              predictions of bed roughness characteristics, stage-discharge relations,
              bedload transport, and implementation of restoration plans.  Cluster microforms
              are one component of the nonlinear system of gravel-bed rivers.  Flow structure
              and entrainable sediment produce clusters; once developed, they in turn
              influence sediment transport and the surrounding flow field.

Clusters add to
              bed stability and delay of sediment motion.  Self-organized clusters have been
              called a "product of stochastic encounters among individual grains." In natural
              streams, cluster bedforms are thought to form during recession of flow events
              great enough to create selective mobilization of bed sediment.  Some think that
              clusters form in quasi-stable equilibrium so as to maximize flow resistance,
              producing a wavelength to particle diameter ratio of 20.  Still others suggest
              that clusters are a "kinematic wave" or migratory, rather than stable
              structure.

The project entails extensive laboratory flume experiments to
              understand the evolution of cluster microforms.  A major- goal is to define the
              near bed turbulence structure to improve the understanding of the coupling
              between near-bed turbulence and sediment transport when clusters are present. 
              A series of experiments will be conducted for non-unisized spheres to examine
              the cluster geometry, the flow ranges under which clusters form, remain stable,
              and disintegrate, and the interaction between near-bed hydraulic parameters and
              clusters bedforms.  The reduced number of variables in the laboratory
              experiments will allow specific relations between the hydraulic parameters,
              sediment supply, and resulting particle clusters to be isolated and quantified.
               Recent advances in high-resolution cameras and acoustic sensors for measuring
              turbulence around clusters, combined with the development of hardware for image
              analysis and bed scanning will allow simultaneous measurements of local
              sediment transport and adjacent near-bed flow at turbulence-resolving
              frequencies without disturbing the flow.

