Title       : Reactive convection cells: A mechanism for transport and precipitation of salt
               in fractures under evaporative conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0208384

Award Number: 0208384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Dragila maria.dragila@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Noam Weisbrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Guenther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Vadose zone fractures are known to play a significant role in groundwater
              recharge in desert areas.  This project will evaluate the hypothesis that
              evaporation from fracture surfaces in the upper vadose zone triggers capillary
              forces within the matrix that drive pore-water and solutes from the matrix
              toward the fracture faces.  Evaporation results in salt crust formation on the
              fracture walls.  Subsequent rain events move water through the fractures
              dissolving salt crusts and transporting them to the water table.  Furthermore,
              under desert conditions, nighttime cold temperatures may result in the
              formation of thermal convection cells within fracture voids, dramatically
              enhancing evaporation rates.  The project will: 
1. Test the concept of
              accelerated night-time convection at a fractured-rock field study site. 
2.
              Investigate salt crust formation rate in the laboratory for two rocks
              permeabilities to determine: (a) time rate of change and strength of the
              evaporation rate; (b) rate and extent of the salt crust formation; and (c)
              ratio of nighttime (convection driven) to daytime (diffusion driven)
              evaporation rates.
3. Develop a field scale numerical model to analyze the
              significance of this mechanism under a range of climatic, fracture and matrix
              conditions.  Parameters will include fracture aperture, rock permeability and
              extent of thermal inversion.
This study will provide a better understanding of
              the mechanism for salt accumulation and transport.  It will provide a valuable
              tool for exploring the importance of this mechanism on a global scale as it
              relates to salt loading of groundwater resources and bypass toxic solutes in
              already contaminated sites.  

