Title       : Practice-Oriented Provable Security for Higher-Layer Protocols: Models, Analyses
               and Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0208842

Award Number: 0208842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Rogaway rogaway@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is about using the "provable-security approach" in the design and
              analysis of high-level cryptographic protocols.  The aim is to gain assurance
              for practical cryptographic schemes by finding the right definitions, and then
              using modern techniques (reductions and their concrete-security analysis) to
              analyze selected schemes.  

Specific problems to be investigated include:
              (1) Storing a user's private information on an untrusted server.  Here one
              wants to store user data in such a way that the user can recover it by
              presenting a password, but an adversary must invest an amount of interaction
              proportional to the guessing-complexity of the password.  (2) The
              authenticated-encryption scheme in SSH.  Though the method used by SSH is not,
              in general, correct, the situation for SSH itself is far from clear.  (3)
              Delegation of authority to a secondary signature key by a primary one.  A
              well-known approach in security practice, the problem that this solution aims
              to solve is without any provable-security treatment.  (4) Relating the
              "prescriptive" approach to formalizing authenticated key exchange and the
              simulation-based approach.  (5) Moving to an enriched model of computation, an
              envelope model, to investigate authenticated key exchange. (6) A systematic
              investigation of the "game walking" approach to analyzing cryptographic
              scenarios. Here two adversarial views are compared by writing out a sequence of
              pseudocode "games" each of which may set some Boolean flag. One bounds the
              difference in adversarial views by bounding the probability that the flag gets
              set. 

