Title       : Collaborative Research: Efficient Data Distribution Schemes for Secure and
               Reliable Networked Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0208975

Award Number: 0208975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lihao Xu lihao@cse.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rise of ubiquitous computing has prompted the need for a change in the way
              we store and access information. It calls for the study of data storage systems
              that distribute information over wide area networks, enabling users to store
              and access critical data in a continuously available and highly trustable
              fashion. The problem of data distribution, i.e.,  storing data in networked
              storage systems while achieving data reliability, confidentiality and
              performance is studied.

Data distribution schemes based on (n,k) error
              correcting codes are investigated. The research will focus on two key
              questions: 1) how to achieve strong and computationally efficient data
              encryption while storing data over a distributed networked environment? and 2)
              how to place encoded data segments in networked systems, while considering the
              structure of the network topology, to enable high performance and reliable data
              retrieval? 

Insights and results from this research program will provide
              guidelines for efficient, secure and reliable data distribution schemes for
              wired and wireless networks, as well as make significant contributions to
              related theory study, such as cryptography, coding theory, graph theory and
              combinatorics. In addition, efforts will be made to integrate this research
              program into educational activities. 









