Title       : Next-Generation Load-Value Predictors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0208567

Award Number: 0208567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Burtscher burtscher@csl.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current high-end microprocessors incorporate a variety of predictors to improve
              performance.  Future CPUs will likely include even more predictors, in
              particular load-value predictors.  Load-value predictors provide predicted
              values to instructions that need the result of a load, thereby allowing these
              instructions to proceed without waiting for the load's slow memory access to
              complete.  Thus, the program execution time is reduced.

Recent work on
              load-value prediction proposes sophisticated hybrid predictors with confidence
              estimators.  While these predictors are quite effective, their complexity and
              size negatively affect performance parameters such as critical-path length,
              cycle time, chip area, power consumption, and heat dissipation.

The goal of
              this research is to reduce the size of value predictors without decreasing
              performance, to improve the prediction accuracy and coverage, and to develop
              new predictors and confidence estimators.  A systematic search will find novel
              predictors that exploit additional value locality and will identify better
              confidence estimators that reduce costly mispredictions.  Moreover, techniques
              that repair malformed predictions and inhibit wrong predictions will be
              investigated.  Finally, schemes to enhance the predictor utilization and
              approaches to speed up predictor accesses will be researched.  While the
              proposed ideas are already beneficial in today's systems, they will become even
              more important as increasing numbers of CPU cycles are wasted due to growing
              load latencies.




