Title       : Collaborative Research: Deformation Rates and Kinematics of Ancient and Active
               Displacement Transfer, Central Walker Lane, Western Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0208219

Award Number: 0208219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166127             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Oldow oldow@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. McClelland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Late Cenozoic deformation is broadly distributed across the North American
              plate margin of the conterminous western United States and stretches from the
              San Andreas fault system eastward across the Mojave Desert and into the Basin
              and Range. The eastern California shear zone and Walker Lane of the western
              Great Basin form an active belt of structures accommodating about 25% of the
              relative motion between North America and the Pacific plate.
From the Mojave
              Desert, the displacement is carried north, east of the southern Sierra Nevada,
              in a narrow zone of deformation bound on the west and east by the Owens Valley
              and Furnace Creek fault systems. North from the latitude of the central Sierra
              Nevada, the zone of deformation broadens to include the Walker Lane and central
              Nevada seismic belt in the northwestern Great Basin. The Sierra Nevada behaves
              as a coherent tectonic block with a northwest-directed motion of 10-14 mm/yr
              and forms the western boundary of the zone of distributed deformation in the
              Great Basin. A complex pattern of active structures underlies west-central
              Nevada where displacement is transferred from the eastern California shear zone
              to the Walker Lane and the central Nevada seismic belt. Integrated geologic,
              seismological, and GPS geodetic results indicate that the central Walker Lane
              (CWL) serves as an displacement transfer system linking stepped
              northwest-trending transcurrent faults. The displacement transfer system
              evolved over a period of ~13 Ma and carried at least 50 km right-lateral motion
              from the Furnace Creek fault system of eastern California to the right-lateral
              faults of the CWL. Ancient displacement transfer was accompanied by exhumation
              of mid-crustal rocks in the extensional stepover between transcurrent
              structures and was accompanied by vertical axis rotation and tilt of both
              upper- and lower-plate assemblages. The transfer system is still active and
              underlies a region 50 by 120 km immediately northwest of the ancient
              structures. Based on existing work, the comparison of a geodetically determined
              velocity field for the CWL is not easily reconciled with the current
              understanding of fault displacements in the region and points out the
              difficulty in comparing geodetic and geologic displacement fields. Furthermore,
              the continued activity of the displacement transfer system since inception at
              ~13 Ma offers presents the opportunity to assess ancient and active rates of
              deformation using geologic and geodetic techniques.
The PI's propose an
              integrated geodetic and geologic investigation of the central Walker Lane to
              address two questions: (1) What is the three-dimensional geometry and
              displacement history of extensional transfer developed within a transcurrent
              fault system stepover?, and (2) Are displacement rate and kinematic estimates
              comparable between geodetic, seismological, and geologic investigation of
              ancient and active structures within the transfer system? The central Walker
              Lane is ideally suited for this study for several reasons: (1) the region is
              seismically active and well defined earthquake focal mechanisms exist for the
              displacement transfer fault system, (2) the faults are well exposed and have
              produced preliminary fault-slip estimates of deformation kinematics, (3) a
              complex present-day displacement field with ~10 mm/yr of differential slip is
              recorded by a GPS geodetic network, (4) the geologic evolution of the
              displacement transfer system is preserved in the exhumation history of
              well-exposed extensional turtleback structures, (5) synorogenic volcanic and
              sedimentary rocks in the upper-plate assemblage of the extensional complex
              record a history of progressive tilt associated with fault displacement, (6)
              regionally extensive domains of differential tilt and vertical axis rotation
              associated with displacement transfer are recognized in preliminary
              paleomagnetic investigation, and (7) regional geologic compilation of the
              region is mature and provides excellent control for displacement-history
              reconstruction. These elements will allow characterization of the kinematics of
              displacement transfer and offer the opportunity to directly compare deformation
              kinematics and rates over geologic and geodetic time intervals. The PI's will
              address the tasks listed above with an integrated study utilizing detailed
              geologic mapping, structural analysis, GPS geodesy, paleomagnetic analysis,
              geochronology, and thermobarometric investigation. The research team (Oldow,
              Geissman, McClelland, McIntosh, and Selverstone) have the expertise to address
              the various research topics and two of the researchers (Oldow and Geissman)
              have substantial experience working in the area. By building on previous
              studies, this integrated investigation will establish the areal limits of the
              transtensional fault system, document variable geometric relations between
              major and secondary fault systems, define the kinematic history of fault block
              motion, and develop first-order estimates of recent and ancient displacement.
              

