Title       : Optimization with PDE Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0208449

Award Number: 0208449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Gill pgill@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Li-Tien Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Holst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph E. Bank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator and his colleagues focus on several
fundamental
              computational issues involved in the parallel
implicit solution of
              optimization problems with partial
differential equation  The goal of the
              research is to advance the
state of the art in four fundamental topics: (1)
              the formulation
and analysis of algorithms for large-scale optimization;
              (2)
adaptive mesh generation for partial differential equations;
              (3)
multilevel partial differential equation solvers; and (4)
parallel
              computation.  Although each of these topics can be
investigated in isolation,
              the exploitation of their interactions
is crucial for the creation of
              effective global algorithms.  The
investigators are members of a Scientific
              Computation Group that
offers a program of instruction and research
              emphasizing the role
of scientific computation in the formulation, modeling,
              and
solution of problems from diverse and changing areas.  A major
part of
              the project involves the development of software and its
dissemination within
              the manufacturing, engineering, and
scientific community.  Software developed
              as part of the project
provides an effective method of technology transfer and
              extends
the scope and effectiveness of the existing codes PLTMG, MC,
              and
SNOPT developed by the investigators.
     Because partial differential
              equations conveniently
characterize the physical laws of many complex systems
              occurring
in science and engineering, they also lie at the heart of
              the
mathematical models used to simulate and predict the behavior of
these
              systems.  The need to optimize the performance of such
systems is the common
              feature of practical applications that
range over such diverse areas as the
              optimal design of the hull
of an America's Cup yacht, the cleanup of toxic
              waste sites, the
construction of bioartificial arteries in tissue engineering,
              and
the management of stock portfolios and hedge funds.  Software
developed
              in this project provides engineers and scientists with
instant access to
              state-of-the-art methods for the modeling and
optimization of complex systems
              involving partial differential
equation constraints.  The resulting
              improvements in the
efficiency, accuracy and robustness of these models have
              a
substantial impact in areas of manufacturing and engineering that
are vital
              to US global competitiveness.

