Title       : 3-D geometry of the Moine thrust and its implications for 3-D strain
               distribution and thrust sheet kinematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0208001

Award Number: 0208001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gautam Mitra mitr@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most thrust fault traces are arcuate in nature and are comprised of a series
              of
salients and recesses suggesting that thrust faults are, in general,
              non-planar.  Such three-
dimensional complexities in the thrust surface
              geometry may be an important factor
controlling the thrust fault kinematics.
              Consider the analogy of glacial ice flowing over
an irregular substrate.  The
              major resistance to movement is not due to the friction
between the two
              materials (which is greatly reduced by pressure-melt water that coats
              the
surface) but due to the distortion of the ice as it flows past surface
              irregularities. Thrust
sheets may behave in a similar manner.  Fault rocks are
              considerably weaker than the
host rock and, therefore, the continued
              deformation of such rocks may not be the factor in
large-scale thrust sheet
              emplacement.  The PI suggests that three-dimension irregularities in
thrust
              surface geometry play a major role in thrust sheet kinematics.  If this is the
              case,
one should expect that the strain patterns observed along strike of a
              given thrust fault will
reflect the thrust fault geometry.  Preliminary
              studies have shown that both c-axes
patterns and relict grain shapes vary
              along the strike of the fault most likely due to the
fault geometry effects.
              Initial data suggest that deformation is nearly plane strain
within a
              prominent salient; but along the margins of the salient there is a
              stronger
component of flattening strains. However, further examination of the
              strains in this
region are needed to truly resolve this pattern. 
              Three-dimensional finite strain geometries
have been determined in this region
              by measuring relict quartz grain shapes and
examining quartz c-axes fabrics. 
              Moreover, it may also be useful to measure final stage
incremental strains by
              determining three-dimensional recrystallized quartz grain shapes
and
              three-dimensional quartz overgrowth geometries.  It is only through
              examining
incremental strain histories that the PI can fully understand the
              kinematics of thrust faults.
Nevertheless, current mechanical models do not
              take into account the existence of
non-plane strains and therefore only
              predict realistic fold-thrust belt behavior to a first-
order.  In order to
              make more realistic models for the evolution of fold-and-thrust belts
we must
              start to incorporate the non-plane strain elements of geometrically
              complex
thrust faults.	
