Title       : Architectural Solutions for Preventing Distributed Denial of Service Attacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0208946

Award Number: 0208946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruby Lee rblee@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Denial of service attacks flood a web-site with so many requests that it can no
              longer respond. Computers connected to the Internet are vulnerable to being
              used unwittingly in mounting a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack on a
              victim web-site.  Past countermeasures based on software patches or
              re-compilation are often ignored by users, leaving many systems vulnerable. 
              This research first proposes a classification of the various denial of service
              attacks and countermeasures, then defines architectural solutions in the core
              (non-optional) hardware and software of future machines.  

The
              vulnerabilities of computers, which allow DDoS attack networks to be set up,
              are studied.  Low overhead architectural features in the core hardware of
              computers are investigated which hinder attack networks from being set up in
              the first place, or detect and prevent the execution of potentially hostile
              code.   Malicious parties often employ buffer overflow attacks to gain entry to
              a computer by corrupting procedure return addresses.  This research
              investigates features like a secure return address stack (SRAS) in the
              processor architecture as a new defense against such buffer overflow exploits. 
              The proposed research approach is unique in providing defenses in the client
              platforms rather than only in the servers or routers, and in building more
              trusted architecture in the core hardware, rather than only in software layers.
               Since application code need not be changed nor re-compiled, both legacy and
              future software can enjoy the security benefits of hardware architectural
              solutions.  Since DDoS attacks pose a serious threat to the availability of
              critical Internet services, this research can contribute to the overall
              security of the Internet while increasing the trust that owners may have in
              their interconnected information appliances.

