Title       : ROLE: Story Listening Technologies for Emergent Writing Literacy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0208287

Award Number: 0208287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1060685            (Estimated)
Investigator: Justine M. Cassell justine@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While multiple, and technological literacies have become the topic of
              considerable research, reading and writing literacy remain the basis of
              education, and the prerequisites to science, mathematics, and technology
              fluency.  Reading and writing do not start in school, however.  Children
              prepare themselves for later literacy long before first grade.  And preparation
              for literacy consists of more than becoming aware of text.  Children learn to
              treat language as an object (metalinguistic awareness), and to create and
              maintain cohesive text (decontextualized language) first in oral language. 
              Many of these emergent literacy skills are acquired in language play and in
              storytelling among peers.  In general, however, very few technologies are
              available for supporting children's storytelling and story writing in
              sociocultural context for later literacy, despite its importance in children's
              cognitive, communicative, and linguistic development as a whole. 
 
This
              project lays out a program of research designed to address a specific need of
              young children -- to learn how to write -- based on one specific ability of
              young children -- the ability to tell stories. Current views of the
              relationship between oral and written literacy hold that the development of
              children's written literacy is intertwined with the development of their oral
              literacy skills. We believe that technology, and particularly tangible
              non-screen-and-keyboard based technology, can play a unique role in supporting
              the emergence of writing literacy by building on one particular aspect of oral
              literacy, children's story telling. We propose that Story Listening Systems
              that actually listen to children's stories and interact with them about the
              stories not only support the development of emergent oral literacy skills but
              also foster writing skills and the transition from oral to written literacy. 
              The model behind the Story Listening System embodies four essential traits that
              enable it to effectively scaffold written literacy. The four traits are to (a)
              depend on children's oral storytelling skills to bootstrap literacy, (b)
              introduce peers as playmates in the system or with the system, (c) invite the
              kind of embodied play away from the desktop that is most comfortable for young
              children, (d) allow children to construct their own personally meaningful
              content.    

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of these systems,
              children between the ages of 4 and 7 will engage with Story Listening Systems
              and we will assess changes in three crucial predictors of written literacy: (i)
              use of decontextualized language (language removed from its original context,
              and reworked for a new audience), (ii) metalinguistic awareness, (iii)
              collaboration with peers to make meaning.  We will also evaluate an additional
              implication of the SLS: that support for emergent literacy can be made
              culture-inclusive and therefore can be used to invite more children into
              emergent writing literacy because the language forms with which they are
              familiar are embedded in the system.  
 
The outcome of the proposed work
              will be four-fold: (i) a suite of story listening literacy technologies, (ii) a
              substantive body of data evaluating the role of these technologies in
              children's writing, (iii) a fuller understanding of the general mechanisms
              underlying children's development of literacy skills, (iv) a generalized set of
              design principles that link features of technology with features of children's
              written literacy acquisition.  The design principles will be for two audiences:
              the design community creating children's digital technologies (e.g. everyone
              from mainstream toy industries making physical artifacts to game designers to
              traditional educational/learning software designers) and those actively
              studying and teaching written literacy (e.g. developmental psychologists,
              educators).  This work has implications, then, for the communities of
              academics, educators, technologists, and policy organizations concerned with
              placing technology in school contexts.
