Title       : ROLE: Closing the Race Gap in Math and Science Achievement through Improving
               Parental Involvement in the Course Selection and Placement Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0208290

Award Number: 0208290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1042677            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roslyn A. Mickelson rmicklsn@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linwood Cousins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to enhance African American parental involvement
              with high school student children by developing skills and strategies for
              effectively managing the educational careers of their children.  It would
              create a capacity for collaborations with the schools that service African
              American children by developing the social and organizational infrastructure
              for continued parental involvement in educational careers.  It seeks to
              increase enrollment and success of Black students in higher-level mathematics
              and science courses to diminish the race gap in math and science track
              placements.  It uses a quasi-experimental design to implement a series of
              community workshops designed to enhance knowledge, skills, and strategies for
              managing placements of children in science and math tracks.

The research
              would create an intervention designed to change the outcome of students.  It
              would conduct ethnographic work to map successful pathways to enrollment in
              higher-level math courses.  It would use findings from these studies to
              implement workships within the Black communities, and conduct statistical
              analysis of the growth in achievement as a result of the reduction in course
              taking.


