Title       : Age and Lithogeochemistry of Volcanic-hosted Massive Sulfide Deposits of the
               Ambler District, Southern Brooks Range, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0208162

Award Number: 0208162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131293             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McClelland wmcclell@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McClelland
EAR-0208162

Modern examples of volcanic-hosted massive sulfide
              (VMS) deposits suggest that hydrothermal activity associated with formation of
              these deposits is a steady-state process. In contrast, ancient examples
              typically define distinct age groups and recent genetic models relate VMS
              mineralization to specific tectonic events such as incipient intra-arc rifting.
              Distinction between steady state and punctual models for VMS mineralization
              requires high precision geochronologic data to establish the duration of
              magmatism at the scale of individual deposits and to establish correlation,
              distinction, or migration of magmatism observed at the regional scale. The
              widespread occurrence of Devonian to Mississippian VMS deposits in the northern
              North American Cordillera provides an ideal setting to examine this issue. U-Pb
              geochronology and Nd-Sr isotope geochemistry combined with major, trace, and
              REE geochemistry of felsic and mafic rocks associated with mineralization and
              hydrothermal alteration will establish the age and tectonic setting of VMS
              mineralization in the Ambler district, southern Brooks Range, Alaska. The
              resulting database will serve as a basis for comparison with and evaluation of
              broadly age equivalent VMS deposits in the Yukon-Tanana terrane as well as
              sediment-hosted deposits within adjacent terranes and the Cordilleran
              miogeocline. The results of this project will provide valuable insight into the
              temporal and tectonic setting of VMS mineralization throughout the northern
              Cordillera. This insight will potentially lead to the generation of new genetic
              models for the evolution and preservation of VMS deposits in additional
              settings. The project will also address the long-standing question of the
              tectonic setting of mid-Paleozoic magmatism in the Cordillera. 

