Title       : Radiated Seismic Energy from Very Small and Very Large Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0208499

Award Number: 0208499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory C. Beroza beroza@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For short wavelengths, which carry the most information for very small
              earthquakes, the complexity of wave propagation in the Earth's crust makes it
              difficult to discern effects due to the earthquake source.  Multiple empirical
              Green's function analysis, a method that uses extremely small earthquakes to
              correct for complicated wave propagation effects for somewhat larger
              earthquakes, when used for these very small events shows that unanticipated
              wave propagation effects are present even in deep borehole recordings.  This
              may have led to incorrect conclusions about the energetics of very small
              (magnitude less than 2.0) earthquakes in past studies.  This technique is being
              applied to an extensive data set in order to see if these conclusions
              generalize to earthquakes in diverse environments: viz. the San Andreas fault
              system in southern California and the deforming crust of Japan. This is a
              particularly timely study because propagation effects in borehole recordings
              may affect measurements obtained from ongoing and planned large-scale downhole
              experiments in Japan and in California. 

The technique developed by Satoshi
              Ide (University of Tokyo) is being used for large earthquakes, to determine the
              spatial distribution of radiated seismic energy from strong motion models of
              the earthquake.  Studies of a set of three earthquakes, including the 1995
              Kobe, Japan earthquake, shows that most of the seismic energy was radiated near
              the hypocenter, suggesting that the rest of the faulting process was largely
              dissipative.  This method is being applied to a much larger available catalog
              of extended-source models in an attempt to improve understanding how the energy
              balance during faulting controls the size of an earthquake.
