Title       : Innovative Programming Technology for Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0208536

Award Number: 0208536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Constable rc@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Bickford  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Innovative Programming Technology for Embedded Systems


This is a proposal
              to provide innovative programming technology for
designing and implementing
              reliable distributed embedded systems.  The proposal
addresses a critical
              generic problem and a major opportunity.  The generic
problem is that the
              research community does not know how to scale logical
methods that are known
              to improve programs and small systems to the task of
improving larger systems.
               The opportunity is that new methods of factoring are
possible for embedded
              systems, and new kinds of specifications are important.
This project
              approaches the problem/opportunity by creating advanced logical
methods and
              tools to structure embedded systems in a new way and to draw on
relevant
              formal knowledge about them to accelerate both the design and coding
process
              and to improve the quality of the system code and its documentation.


The
              project will add extensive formal knowledge to a logical
              programming
environment (LPE) and use it to generate system components that
              are correct by
construction and to combine components based on semantic
              methods.  The
semantics supports formal classes and aspect-oriented
              programming.  One test
case for the new methods is a particular distributed
              embedded system called
MediaNet -- a system for processing various media
              (audio, video, text) over a
distributed computing network to adaptively
              respond to quality of service
constraints.

The project will use
              mathematical knowledge about media streams and transition
systems to precisely
              formulate design requirements and component functionality.
Quality of service
              constraints will be incrementally added to the functional
specifications and
              used to automatically modify the proof and the extracted
code so that these
              requirements are met.  This is a very high level example of
formal
              aspect-oriented programming and proof reuse.

The library of formal knowledge
              about the system will be organized as a
mathematical theory.  That
              organization draws on concepts about stream
transformers, the distributed
              network of machines, quality of service
properties and communication services.
               An expressive logic will be used to
state properties of the system and keep
              track of logical dependencies among
system components.

The project team has
              considerable experience working together building and
supporting distributed
              communications systems by specifying and verifying
communication protocols and
              optimizing them using formal methods.

