Title       : BAC Library: Diversity of Teleost Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0208343

Award Number: 0208343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Kocher Tom.Kocher@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,1619,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0208343
Kocher

Teleost fishes are dominant components of aquatic ecosystems
              around the world, and are of tremendous commercial importance as a major source
              of animal protein.  Teleosts have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation
              over the last 200MY.  The 25,000 species of teleost represent more than half of
              all living vertebrate taxa. Fishes are important model systems across the
              spectrum of biological research, from ecology, evolution and development to
              biomedicine.
 
The genomic tools developed to sequence the human genome are
              now finding applications across many taxa.  The genomes of three fish species
              (Danio, Fugu and Tetraodon) are being completely sequenced. Genetic maps have
              been constructed for a dozen other species, and physical maps are under
              construction for a few of these.  BAC 
libraries for additional species will
              further research aimed at discovering the phylogenetic relationships among
              species, the genetic basis for adaptive differences among taxa, and the
              patterns and processes that regulate genome evolution.
 
This project aims to
              further stimulate comparative genomic studies of fishes by constructing and
              distributing large-insert genomic DNA (BAC) libraries for two species
              representing major teleost lineages. They are the blind cavefish (Astyanax
              mexicanus), and the Lake Malawi zebra (Metriaclima zebra).  These BAC libraries
              will permanently 
archived and distributed through the UNH Hubbard Center for
              Genome Studies, a new genome center focused on comparative and environmental
              genomics.  Each library will be distributed as clones in 384-well plates and
              gridded filters suitable for hybridization screening. Extensive quality control
              measures will ensure that each derived product (replica plate or filter) can be
              traced back to the original clone.
 
The Hubbard Center is committed to the
              development of comparative genomic resources for fishes.  This proposal is the
              first step in a program to generate genomic and cDNA libraries, genetic and
              physical maps, and comparative mapping databases for fishes.  The libraries
              proposed here will serve as a foundation for future research in phylogenetics,
              genome evolution, development, evolution, environmental biology and
              aquaculture.
__


