Title       : End-to-end Integrity and Confidentiality for Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0208642

Award Number: 0208642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Myers myers@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Providing assurance of security and privacy is becoming more difficult with
              current trends towards building computing infrastructure out of distributed
              components connected by networks, including untrusted client machines.
              Important to this assurance are the confidentiality and integrity properties of
              distributed systems that serve principals whose trust in each other is
              incomplete. This description encompasses, among others, clinical information
              systems, joint military information
systems, and financial information
              systems.

A new security mechanism, secure program partitioning, can provide
              stronger, end-to-end assurance that data remains confidential.  In this
              approach, programs are transformed according to strong security
policies,
              resulting in secure distributed systems.  This is an attractive way to specify
              and enforce confidentiality and integrity in environments that include
              untrusted, possibly malicious host machines.

Because the integrity of
              distributed computations and data is difficult to maintain in the presence of
              untrusted hosts, this research investigates an extension of secure program
              partitioning to use
redundant computation to preserve integrity.  In addition,
              new models of information flow in concurrent systems are being explored because
              the current theory and practice of security for concurrent systems
              is
restrictive, yet also unsound. This is especially important because
              distributed systems are naturally concurrent.  Solutions to these problems are
              being implemented as part of the Jif language system.

