Title       : Last Passage Percolation and Random Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0208557

Award Number: 0208557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinho Baik jbaik@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Jinho Baik, Princeton University
DMS-0208557

This project is about the
              longest increasing subsequence problems in
combinatorics, which can also be
              interpreted as last passage percolation problems in
probability/statistical
              mechanics. We consider a maximal passage time in a 2-dimensional lattice with a
              random time assigned at each lattice site. The basic interest is the
              
probabilistic properties of the maximal passage time as the size of lattice
              becomes large. Other equivalent forms of questions include a card game, random
              growth models in 2-dimension, interacting particle systems, queuing theory,
              directed polymers
and so-called ``vicious'' random walks. Recent progresses
              show that there are
interesting connections of this field to the random matrix
              theory. Random matrix theory has been an active field of research in both
              mathematics and physics for last 50 years. We would like to understand more on
              this connection and also investigate further relations between these seemingly
              different fields. This project is a further work in this direction.


From a
              greater framework, the subject of this project can be regarded as a work on the
              basic properties of a maximization process in a random environment when the
              size of system becomes large. Such process could be growth of crystal, shape of
              fire front of paper burning, or fastest passage in a computer or cellular
              network. These problems are also subjects in statistics, statistical physics,
              and engineering. One of the main goal of this project is an investigation of
              various universal properties, which are independent of the microstructure of
              the models, of a class of systems when the size of model becomes large.


