Title       : Collaborative Research: Ge/Si as a Tracer of Terrestrial Silica Cycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0208336

Award Number: 0208336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Kurtz kurtz@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Weathering of silicate minerals on continents is a major source of
              silicon (Si) for formation of secondary silicate minerals in soil, opal
              phytoliths in plants and ultimately for diatoms in the oceans. Even though Si
              is a significant element in the biogeochemistry of Earth, it does not have a
              well developed tracer to provide a clear understanding of how organic and
              inorganic processes affect Si behavior and the pathways that Si follows as it
              moves from rock to clay or water or organism. Germanium (Ge) and Si behave
              chemically in a similar fashion and have been treated as a pseudo-isotopic
              tracer of the behavior of Si in the surficial environment. We have conducted
              preliminary research that demonstrates clear and logical changes in the Ge/Si
              ratio in response to soil and plant processes. Here we propose a systematic
              analysis of Ge fractionation from Si during: 1) incongruent weathering and the
              formation of secondary alumino-silicate clay minerals, 2) formation of iron
              oxides in soil, and 3) plant uptake and opal biosynthesis leading to formation
              of phytoliths.

We propose a field-based project where we quantify the Ge/Si
              ratios of rock minerals, soil minerals, soil water and plant phytoliths in
              soils forming on extrusive volcanic rock and on intrusive plutonic rocks in a
              humid tropical weathering environment. Ge/Si ratios will be determined on fresh
              parent materials and soils from a series of well-studied tropical soil sites in
              Hawaii (basaltic substrate) and Luquillo, Puerto Rico (granitoid substrate).
              Pore waters and mineral separates (where applicable) from the same horizons as
              the soil samples will be analyzed. We will also analyze plant phytoliths from
              dominant vegetation. We will use the data to test specific hypotheses about
              processes that control Ge/Si fractionation in the weathering environment. The
              proposed research will compare and contrast the behavior of the Ge/Si system in
              aphanitic basaltic environments with plutonic granitoid environments, where we
              expect that the mechanisms of fractionation will differ because of the
              differences in chemical composition, mineralogy, and crystallinity. It will
              also specifically investigate the role of plant uptake of Si and the biogenic
              silica cycle in soil systems. The results of this study will provide the basic
              data needed to develop Ge/Si ratios as a quantitative tracer of silica during
              weathering, plant cycling, and in surface waters.

