Title       : Human Activity Scripts and Queries for Video Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0208300

Award Number: 0208300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jezekiel Ben-Arie benarie@ece.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on developing methods for analysis and retrieval of
              human activities in video databases that also can facilitate efficient means
              for highly compressed storage. For this purpose, it is proposed to develop a
              novel representation method for human activities. Such a representation is
              termed as action script and it includes a detailed sequence of human actions
              that fully describe the 3D motions of all the major body parts. Action scripts
              can be extended to describe actions of multiple persons as well and could also
              become an innovative means for highly efficient summarization, retrieval and
              recognition of complex human activities in video databases.

Another
              objective of this proposal is to develop innovative querying tools that
              facilitate efficient definition and retrieval of single/multi person activities
              in video databases. The approach proposed is founded on an extension of an
              innovative method, recently developed by the PI, for
Recognition of human
              activity by Indexing and Sequencing (RISq). The RISq requires only few video
              samples and provides fast and robust recognition even in conditions of partial
              occlusion and varying speeds. It is proposed to further extend the RISq method
              for the proposed generation and recognition of action scripts of individuals
              and groups. This is an entirely unexplored domain that could lead to
              significant scientific contributions in analysis and management of video
              databases.



