Title       : Magnetic Hysteresis in Magnetite: Are Synthetic Samples Stressed?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0208446

Award Number: 0208446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Newell newell@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Newell
EAR-0208446

Measurements of the magnetic properties of rocks can
              provide information on properties of magnetic minerals that reflect
              environmental changes and affect the reliability of paleointensity methods.
              Recent technology allows us to measure magnetic hysteresis rapidly and
              represent the full complexity of it using phenomenological models such as
              Preisach or FORC diagrams. To interpret these diagrams, we need a good physical
              model for the magnetic particles. The goals in this proposal are to develop a
              quantitative model for hysteresis in some well characterized synthetic
              magnetite samples, and to test it rigorously using hysteresis measurements at
              several temperatures combined with detailed particle size distributions. Recent
              micromagnetic models for the size dependence of hysteresis are much closer than
              previous models, but their predictions are still somewhat low. The investigator
              will test the hypothesis that stress anisotropy has an important effect on
              hysteresis even in the smallest particles.  A numerical micromagnetic model
              will be used to calculate the magnetic hysteresis. Because magnetic properties
              depend strongly on the method of synthesis, the PI will concentrate on two sets
              of samples, aqueous precipitates and glass ceramics, with sizes below 0.4
              microns. These samples have been intensively studied, are small enough for
              accurate micromagnetic modeling, and are analogues of natural systems.  This
              work should either produce a realistic model for the magnetic properties or
              eliminate some models from consideration. A successful model could be used to
              interpret Preisach and FORC diagrams. It would also be the basis for future
              work on other magnetic phenomena such as thermoremanent magnetization.

