Title       : Algorithms for Simulating Flows of Complex Fluids: Fluid-Solid Mixtures and
               Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0208586

Award Number: 0208586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel J. Walkington noelw@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project considers the construction and analysis of algorithms for the
              simulating fluid systems where microstructural properties influence the
              macroscopic flow. Liquid crystals are an important class of such fluids, and in
              this instance the microstructural properties reflecting the geometry of the
              molecules are usually incorporated into a continuum model. Another example is
              flows containing visco-elastic particles. If the passages through which the
              fluid flows are of comparable dimension to the particles, it is necessary to
              explicitly compute the motion of the particles in order to determine the
              stresses they experience. If the particles are small and numerous continuum
              models must account for their elasticity.

The research proposed here was
              motivated by collaborative work with engineers who wish to determine the
              distribution of and damage to damage red blood cells in the small clearances
              within mechanical heart assist devices.  This specific project considers the
              development and analysis of computer algorithms for the simulating fluid
              systems where microstructural properties influence the physical flow. The
              microstructural properties may be due the presence of elastic particles, (such
              as red blood cells) or molecular structure (such as long polymer chains). If
              the passages through which the fluid flows are of comparable dimension to the
              particles or molecules, it is necessary to explicitly compute their motion in
              order to determine the stresses they experience.  If the particles are small
              and numerous continuum models must account for their elasticity.

