Title       : RUI: Intensive Collecting of Fossils from an Earliest Wasatachian (Wa0) Locality
               in the Southeastern Bighorn Basin, Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0208281

Award Number: 0208281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne G. Strait   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The Paleocene-Eocene boundary is marked by substantial global warming.  The
              beginning of the Eocene (55 million years ago) in North America included the
              first immigration of many modern mammalian orders that dispersed during this
              warm interval.  The objectives of this project are to collect and identify
              mammalian fossils from an earliest Eocene (Wa0) locality.  A new Wa0 locality,
              "Castle Gardens", was discovered by the PI in the southeastern Bighorn Basin of
              Wyoming.  Preliminary fieldwork indicates that it is the richest North American
              fossil vertebrate site of this age; over 300 specimens have been found
              including at least two new species and twelve other taxa unknown from other
              earliest Eocene localities.  The recovered specimens will be documented in a
              detailed and interactive electronic database.  All diagnostic specimens and
              appropriate comparative material will be scanned using a 3-D laser digitizer. 
              Three-dimensional images will be created and published.  The images will be
              able to be rotated, quantified, and downloaded by any Web user.  		
The
              broader significance of this study is threefold.  Firstly, with this new
              collection of earliest Eocene mammals, it will then be possible to use this
              fauna to contribute to studies of community structure, biodiversity,
              biostratigraphy, and faunal succession during this critical time period. The
              documented global changes in climate and resultant faunal turnover can provide
              insights to the possible effects of rapid climatic change today.  Recent
              studies have suggested that the great transient shift in the stable
              carbon-isotope ratio near the Paleocene/Eocene boundary is similar to that
              currently being induced by humans today.  Studies of the effects of ancient
              "green-house" warming can be used to model potential environmental outcomes of
              modern human activities. Secondly, the approach used to make the interactive
              database is unique. This database formation will serve as a model for other
              researchers and institutions that wish to make their collections easily and
              usefully accessible.  Thirdly, this study will include substantial
              undergraduate participation (a minimum of 22 students).  Students will be
              exposed to modern field methods and high-end state of the art technology and
              software.

