Title       : Space-Time Coding for Optical MIMO Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0208763

Award Number: 0208763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Wilson sgw@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maite Brandt-Pearce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Space-Time Coding for Optical MIMO ChannelsStephen G. Wilson and Maite
              Brandt-PearceDept. of Electrical and Computer EngineeringUniversity of
              Virginia, Charlottesville, VA  22906Phone: (434) 924-6091,
              (sgw,mb-p)@virginia.eduAbstract:

Free-space optical links are an emerging
              technology for wideband access to networks because of the tremendous bandwidth
              potential they offer.  Outdoor atmospheric channels are hampered by signal
              fading effects due to particulate scattering in a line-of-sight path, clear-air
              turbulence, or merely static index-of-refraction inhomogeneities.  Similarly,
              indoor IR systems are faced with fading arising from the intrinsic multipath
              environment.  One powerful method of improving the performance of wireless
              communication systems is through the use of transmit and receive antennas,
              creating a so-called multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) channel.  MIMO
              channel models, provided by transmit and receive antenna arrays, have attracted
              enormous attention for RF wireless systems in the past five years, owing to the
              very large potential throughput in bits/second/Hertz and increased protection
              against fading associated with single antenna designs.  

This research
              addresses the design and performance analysis of space-time codes that can be
              applied to MIMO channels for application to the wireless optical communications
              environment. The research focuses on several aspects of this problem:
              

--development of relevant MIMO models for outdoor line-of-sight optical
              channels, with particular attention to modeling of source and detector physics;
               --examination of the information-theoretic potential of this channel,
              particularly in the context of growing array size, and the analysis of bounding
              techniques on error probability to aid in the development of code design rules;
               --formulation and evaluation of space-time coding approaches for the optical
              free-space regime that are efficient in the channel capacity sense;
              
--block-coded, trellis-coded, and concatenated approaches.  

Also, the
              application of space-time codes to the indoor wireless infrared channel and the
              examination of their performance are addressed.

