Title       : Preconditioned Algorithms for Large Eigenvalue Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0208773

Award Number: 0208773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Knyazev Andrew.Knyazev@cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knyazev 
0208773 
     In many application areas, there is a pressing and
              increasing need for novel numerical techniques for solving very large algebraic
              eigenvalue problems. They arise naturally as discretization of continuous
              models described by systems of partial differential equations and pose new
              numerical challenges. The problem matrix may be available only implicitly
              through a function that computes the corresponding vector-matrix product for a
              given vector, which thus calls for 
matrix-free eigenvalue solvers. The growth
              of the problem size often leads to badly conditioned problems, which require
              improved algorithm stability and new tools to estimate the accuracy of computed
              eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Classical eigenvalue solvers that do not scale
              linearly with the problem size are very expensive for modern practical
              problems. The focus of the present project is on an alternative technique,
              called preconditioning. While the mainstream research in the area introduces
              preconditioning for eigenvalue problems by using preconditioned inner
              iterations for solving linear systems with 
shift-and-invert matrices, the
              approach of the present project is to incorporate preconditioning directly into
              Krylov-based solvers such as the locally optimal block preconditioned conjugate
              gradient method. The preconditioned iterative methods of this kind are
              specially designed for large-scale ill-conditioned matrix-free problems and can
              be effective and parallelizable. The investigator studies preconditioning for 
              singular values computations, an adaptation of the preconditioned eigensolvers
              to some problems with nonlinear dependence on the spectral parameter, and an
              efficient solution of eigenproblems resuling from partial differential
              equations with large jumps in coefficients.
     The investigator develops
              fast, reliable methods to solve very large eigenvalue problems. Numerical
              simulations are performed on modern parallel computing systems, e.g., on a
              Beowulf cluster. The targeted applications for a joint investigation with
              engineers include structural dynamics finite element models associated with
              re-entry vehicles and their complex aerospace and electronic systems, and
              evolution of the error covariances in Kalman filter equations for
              chemistry-transport atmospheric models. 

