Title       : USArray and the Great Plains: A Pre EARTHSCOPE Workshop Proposal (February 2003)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0208378

Award Number: 0208378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33623              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary S. Hubbard Mhub@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly H. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen S. Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles G. Oviatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0208378
Hubbard

EarthScope is a major earth science research initiative that
              will integrate scientific information derived from seismology (US Array),
              geodesy (Plate boundary Observatory), subsurface sampling and measurement
              (SAFOD), remote sensing (InSAR), and complementary geology and geophysics to
              understand continental scale plate deformation and evolution. Funding for the
              EarthScope initiative is currently being discussed in Congress as part of NSF's
              FY 2003 budget.  The Division of Earth Sciences has made FY 2002 funds
              available for projects that qualify as pre-EarthScope activity, i.e. activities
              that will facilitate or enable the construction, fabrication, installation or
              operation of EarthScope once it is funded under the MREFC (Major Research
              Equipment Facilities and Construction) account.  Such activities include
              meetings and workshops, prototype development, site selection or
              characterization.

This award will support a planning workshop to discuss
              scientific objectives related to the Great Plains coverage of the USArray
              component of EarthScope.  The Great Plains region has had a geologic history
              that includes continental rifting, marine and non-marine sedimentation,
              localized basin formation and deformation, tilting and incision of Tertiary
              sedimentary units in the west, mantle activity resulting in contrasting seismic
              anisotropy between eastern and western regions, and earthquake activity.  To
              date, much of the research has been done within disciplines and on individual
              aspects of the geologic history.  Clearly there are relationships between past
              events, and bringing workers together will foster discussion about topics
              ranging from mantle activity to the Earth's surface and from the Precambrian to
              the present.  The workshop participants will discuss possible multidisciplinary
              future collaborations to address identified questions and can interface these
              collaborations with the USArray coverage in the region.  The goal of the
              workshop is to foster interdisciplinary discussion that is aimed at maximizing
              the scientific gain from the USArray initiative in the Great Plains
              region.
***
