Title       : Dynamic Modeling, Analysis, and Synthesis of Embedded Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0208799

Award Number: 0208799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gautam Biswas biswas@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabor Karsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherif Abdelwahed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Biswas, Gautam
CCR-0208799

Embedded systems, which include software
              components integrated into physical processes, are per-vading all aspects of
              our daily lives from home appliances to safety-critical systems, such as
              aircraft and nuclear plants.  The widespread use necessitates the development
              of new engineering tech-niques that can ensure their timely and assured
              development, accurate monitoring during operation, and robust control, to
              ensure safety and reliability. This project develops an integrated model-based
              approach to embedded system development that includes the plant, its
              environment, and the embed-ded computing system. The models provide a common
              framework for design and run-time analyses of system stability, liveliness,
              safety, security, and real-time supervisory control. Models can also form the
              basis for generating the hardware and software components of the embedded
              systems, and de-fining their run-time configurations. This generative aspect of
              modeling is a very relevant and distin-guishing property of the model-based
              development process. Further, the ability to analyze system behavior at
              run-time forms the basis for methodologies designed to accommodate deviations
              caused by disturbances and unexpected changes in the environment. The goal is
              to ensure that the system and its surroundings are not harmed when aberrant
              situations occur.

The project will develop technologies for run-time
              analysis of embedded systems that alleviate some of the complexities of
              modeling and analysis of systems with large mode spaces. Specifically,
              effec-tive methodologies that address run-time dynamic analysis issues are
              addressed. This includes three primary tasks:
Developing a new concept called
              the dynamic hybrid automaton (DHA) for embedded sys-tems models with large mode
              spaces. A DHA is simply a hybrid automaton, which can be constructed
              incrementally, on-the-fly, at run-time, as system behavior evolves. It is based
              on formal compositional modeling techniques in the hybrid automata framework
              that ensure model construction grows linearly (as opposed to exponentially) as
              a function of the number of switching elements in the hybrid model.
 Tracking
              system behavior using hybrid observers developed from the hybrid automata
              mod-els. This involves techniques for updating the models of the observer
              on-line when a mode change is detected while tracking the plant behavior.
              Research challenges focus on model and tracking procedures that minimize
              mistracking at mode transition boundaries, and devel-oping code generation
              systems that allow for incremental recalculation of the observer mod-els while
              satisfying hard time bounds on the generation process, and
 Synthesizing
              supervisory controllers on-line in response to mode changes, some of which may
              be attributed to disturbances and unexpected changes in the environment. A new
              con-cept, the Active Controller Model (ACM), is proposed. The ACM is a dynamic
              data structure that explicitly represents the currently active supervisory
              controller (SVC), together with its generator and actuator. The SVC can be
              implemented as a generic procedure that uses the ACM as its "knowledge base" to
              compute what control actions to take. When the plant model changes, the ACM is
              updated to address the new situation. This will involve a number of in-novative
              research tasks, such as developing an expressive language to describe control
              ob-jectives, definition and incremental update procedures for the ACM models,
              and "anytime" re-source-bound algorithms for synthesizing supervisory
              controller code on-line. Robust super-visory controllers will extend the
              concept of adaptive control into the hybrid-systems domain, and adjust to
              configuration changes in the plant and environment. 

The success of all
              three components of this project is very heavily dependent on handling
              computa-tional complexity issues in incremental model generation, code
              generation for the hybrid observer, and on-line supervisory controller
              synthesis based on desired objectives for the plant. Therefore, complexity
              studies of the synthesis and code generation algorithms is an important
              component of the project. The goals are ambitious, but the success of these
              methods will offer new flexibility in embed-ded applications while addressing
              issues of reliability and safety during run-time operation. 

