Title       : Tracking Practices, Opportunity to Learn, and Achievement in Mathematics: An
               International Perspective from TIMSS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0208402

Award Number: 0208402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marguerite Clarke clarkemd@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin D. Gregory  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this 25-month project is to provide a cross-national perspective on
              tracking practices in mathematics as they relate to opportunity to learn and
              achievement using data from TIMSS and TIMSS-R.  More specifically, the
              questions to study are: Prevalence and Trends -- How prevalent is the practice
              of tracking in mathematics? What are the trends over time and across grades?
              Profiling Tracked and Untracked Math Classes - Within each country, what
              indicators are statistically associated with tracked and untracked mathematics
              classes?  Tracking, Opportunity to Learn, and Achievement - Within each
              country, how does the use or non-use of tracking practices in mathematics
              relate to opportunity to learn and achievement, both overall and for particular
              student groups (e.g., gender, race)?  Implications for the US - What are the
              implications of results for policy makers and educators in relation to OTL and
              issues on equity?  School data files on tracking will be linked to the student
              data file.  A classroom-tracking index will be created to identify within
              school tracking classrooms.  The Mathematics Teachers Questionnaire will be
              used to explore issues on OTL.  The number of mathematics topics listed in the
              questionnaire will be used to test OTL differences between tracked and
              non-tracked classes.
