Title       : Docatorate Data Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0208765

Award Number: 0208765
Award Instr.: BOA/Task Order                               
Prgm Manager: Mary J. Golladay                        
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 5,  2001   
Expires     : December 5,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Knable   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 8807      HUMAN RESOURCES STATISTICS PGM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract- Doctorate Data Project
0208765

The purpose of this acquisition is
              to procure a data collection, file maintenance, and analysis/ methodological
              research capability to collect information on persons receiving research
              doctorate awards from United States universities and to monitor their
              subsequent experiences in the labor force. 

The Federal agency with the lead
              responsibility for this contract is the National Science Foundation (NSF),
              which is authorized to identify and assess the numbers and characteristics of
              scientists and engineers in the United States. Other Federal agencies which
              have related responsibilities for collecting and reporting on persons in other
              disciplines participate jointly in aspects of this project, so that the total
              population of individuals of interest is all persons receiving research
              doctorates, in all fields, for the Survey of Earned Doctorates. 

Several
              interrelated activities address the purposes of this acquisition, which is
              intended to provide comprehensive services for a performance period of 5
              years/cycles. Central to the project is the conduct of two major ongoing survey
              systems, one of which supplies the universe from which the sample for the
              second survey is drawn. Data from these surveys will be merged with the
              historical, comprehensive data bases for each survey and also merged with other
              data bases to provide information on the nation's human resources. 

The
              annual census Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) entails the collection of
              information on every individual receiving a research doctorate from a United
              States university. Results from the survey are added to the Doctorate Records
              File (DRF). The SED provides the universe from which a sample is drawn for the
              Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR), a biennial survey collecting information
              on the post-graduation employment related characteristics of doctorate-holders
              in science and engineering. Results from the SDR are combined with other
              component surveys of the SESTAT data system. 

The resulting data bases are
              actively used by the NSF and the other Federal sponsors and numerous other
              users inside and outside of government. The contractor will also support the
              dissemination activities of the restricted data files to academic researchers
              and other government agencies through a licensing agreement. The information
              collected and maintained through this project constitutes a major national
              resource, offering the only source of information on this important population.
              Its accessibility and dissemination are therefore critical. 
 
This project
              will be monitored by the Division of Science Resources Statistics (SRS) as the
              contract technical representative for NSF and the other Federal agencies that
              sponsor the SED and the SDR. For the SED, other Federal sponsors as of FY2001
              are the U.S. Department of Education (ED), the National Institutes of Health
              (NIH), the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), the National
              Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA), and the U.S. Department of
              Agriculture (USDA). For the SDR, the NIH is also a sponsor. In the past, SDR
              federal sponsors included the Department of Energy (DOE) and the NEH. During
              the course of the contract, the participation of Federal sponsors may change
              and necessitate modifications to the coverage of disciplines, distribution of
              communications, materials, or products related to the project. 

