Title       : High-Performance Adaptive Receivers for Broadband Multi-User Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0208573

Award Number: 0208573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Sayed sayed@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              High-Performance Adaptive Receivers for Broadband Multi-User 
              Communications

High speed communications over wireless channels has emerged
              as a key feature of future communications systems due in part to the explosive
              interest in information technology applications,  including wireless sensor
              networks, mobile wearable systems, mobile computing, wireless location (E911),
              high-speed mobile
internet, and video transmission over wireless channels. The
               demand for higher information capacity in these applications has motivated the
              use of broadband wireless channels in order to provide wider bandwidth and
              higher data rates. This demand has  also motivated the development of 
              multi-user communication
schemes in order to allow users to share the same
              physical channel; thereby contributing to even higher data rates. A key
              challenge that limits the performance of such multi-user communications systems
              is the distortion introduced by the coupled communication channels, by the
              interference among users and by the
channel fading conditions. This research
              aims at studying and  developing adaptive receivers that can combat such
              distortions by adapting their performance in accordance to the communications
              environment.
The research studies and develops efficient adaptive receivers
              for broadband multi-user communications by exploiting spatial, data, and model
              structures in order to reduce computational complexity and increase performance
              level. In so doing, it is expected that  the resulting schemes will help
              increase data rates, lower
overhead due to training, lower bit-error-rate,
              improve signal-to-noise ratio, and help mitigate the ombined effects of
              inter-symbol interference, inter-user interference, and noise.
Such schemes
              would increase the capacity of broadband wireless networks by allowing multiple
              users to share the same time slot and frequency band in an efficient manner.
              This study focuses on
both time-domain and frequency-domain equalization
              techniques, with the latter receiving increasing attention since it has been
              accepted as IEEE 802.16 Standard for Wireless Metropolitan Area
Networks. The
              research is also relevant to other wireless applications such as wireless
              location (E911), which has emerged as an essential public safety component of
              future cellular systems. This is because this work enables the development of
              enhanced adaptive techniques that are robust to fast channel
fading, low
              signal-to-noise ratio conditions, and severe multipath propagation situations,
              all of which are characteristic of the  E911 environment
