Title       : Micro-Analysis of Transfer in the Project-Based Science Classroom: The Influence
               of Classroom Practices and Culture on Scientific Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0208059

Award Number: 0208059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1448764            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Kolodner jlk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacquelyn Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The science education community and the published American standards about
              science literacy call for students to learn important science concepts and the
              skills involved in scientific reasoning in ways that allow them to apply what
              they are learning in new situations. The science education literature has
              identified classroom practices that seem essential to such deep and
              transferable learning. Several approaches to inquiry-driven project-based
              science have been designed based on these recommendations, and results show
              that when carried out by masterful teachers, both science content and practices
              are well learned. But we don't know the developmental course of scientific
              reasoning skills when they are learned in a classroom context engineered for
              their transferable learning. Nor do we know the conditions that need to be in
              place to allow teachers and students to make best use of project-based
              learning's affordances.
For the past five years, the Learning by Design group
              at Georgia Tech has been designing an inquiry-oriented project-based approach
              to middle-school science learning informed by research on how people learn. Our
              team has designed sequences of classroom practices that, as a system, promote
              deep understanding and lasting and reusable learning. The trends in our data
              suggest that science learning in our LBD classrooms is more comprehensive and
              more likely to transfer than the learning in more standard inquiry-oriented
              science classrooms.
We propose to use the infrastructure of LBD, our local LBD
              classrooms, and our cross-disciplinary team to investigate issues with respect
              to promoting transfer using a project-based inquiry approach, focusing
              especially on the learning of scientific reasoning skills and practices. Our
              Quadrant 2 questions ask about the development of scientific reasoning skills
              in a project-based science classroom, aiming to provide a bridge from basic
              research in cognitive science on transfer, scientific reasoning, and learning
              to the pragmatics of transfer and learning in the real world of the classroom.
              Our Quadrant 3 questions ask about conditions that need to be in place in the
              classroom for learning and transfer of science practices to occur.
Scientific
              reasoning skills are difficult to measure, but we have had some success in
              showing the acquisition of these skills by the students in our LBD classrooms.
              The challenge we take on here is to explore the development of this type of
              reasoning in middle school children at a fine-grained level. We will use a
              combination of design experiments and micro-genetic analysis.
We are aiming to
              use our LBD classrooms to find out more about the cognitive and socio-cognitive
              processes involved in learning science practices with several goals in mind:
              (i) better understanding of the processes involved in learning to reason
              scientifically; (ii) better understanding of classroom practices that will
              promote transferable learning; and (iii) the generation of guidelines for
              project-based science classrooms, about how to promote transferable learning of
              science practices.

