Title       : Formal Verification of Hybrid Systems Using Global Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0208956

Award Number: 0208956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul I. Barton pib@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: 0208956
Title:  Formal Verification of Hybrid Systems Using
              Global Optimization


The embedding of logic-based controllers in modern
              technological systems such as automobiles, air and spacecraft, oil refineries
              and chemical processes, power generation plants and distribution networks,
              etc., is ubiquitous. Such systems are characterized by a coupling between
              continuous state dynamics and the discrete state dynamics of the logic based
              controllers, which are simultaneously responsible for interlock, sequencing and
              safety functionality. As performance and safety demands on technological
              systems increase, the design of logic based controllers encompassing all these
              functionalities simultaneously is increasingly complex. Once a design has been
              proposed, it is highly desirable to verify formally that the design does indeed
              implement all the desired functionalities. Ideally this verification step
              should take into account the continuous dynamics of the underlying
              technological system. This project is developing formal verification
              technologies that can accommodate such hybrid systems.

Formal verification
              problems for hybrid systems can in principle be formulated and solved as
              mixed-integer optimization problems. However, for formal verification purposes,
              it is essential to guarantee that the global solution of the optimization
              problem is found in a finite number of iterations. This project is developing
              novel deterministic global optimization algorithms for hybrid systems in the
              continuous time domain that can provide such guarantees.

