Title       : Computational Optimization Problems in Local Access Networks, SONET Rings and
               Lightwave
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9301751

Award Number: 9301751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Bienstock dano@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9301751  Bienstock       The purpose of this research is to develop, implement,
              and  test practical algorithms for optimization problems in various  areas of
              telecommunications.  The problems to be studied arise in  concrete settings and
              have the common feature of being extremely  intractable from a computational
              viewpoint; the focus will be on  building experimentally practical and
              theoretically sound  algorithms.       The first area of interest concerns
              capacity expansion  problems in local access networks.  The resulting
              optimization  problems turn out to be rather intractable from the point of view
               of integer programming.  However,  we have recently developed a  fast and
              accurate heuristic for a variant of this problem used by  Bellcore in its
              planning;  we plan to extend the analysis and the  heuristic to handle more
              complex and detailed models.       The second problem area is that of SONET
              rings.  This is an  emerging field which will be for increasing importance in
              the near  future, and there are many important optimization problems that 
              arise in this context (for example, the assignment of capacity to  a given ring
              sa as to handle traffic requests between the nodes in  the ring).       The
              last problem area concerns lightwave networks.  A problem  that has received
              some attention is that of assigning frequencies  to the transmitters and
              receivers in a network, and then to route  traffic requests in the resulting
              logical network, sa as to achieve  minimum congestion over all possible
              frequency assignments and  routings.  This is an extremely intractable
              optimization problem;   nevertheless, preliminary experience with a
              special-purpose  algorithm has been encouraging.       The approach for
              studying these problems will encompass both  the theoretical analysis needed to
              develop new tools, and ,  building upon successful recent work, the
              implementation  of  resulting algorithms, with added emphasis on speed and
              practicality  of the resulting code.  ***
