Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular and Boundary Control of Multidimensional
               Diffusion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9301200

Award Number: 9301200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Taksar taksar@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The proposed research lies within the area of optimal                    
              stochastic control. It deals with optimal control of diffusion                 
              processes by means of a free boundary, as well as optimal control              
              at a reflection boundary of the stochastic process. This type of               
              control naturally appears in problems in which there is no                     
              natural restriction on the rates of control and the optimal                    
              control rate id infinite. The optimal policy is then to reflect                
              the process from the a priori unknown boundary. Such type of                   
              action arises in problems with additive control, where there are               
              no a priori limits on the control rates. It is intended to                     
              develop of the related partial differential equations with                     
              gradient constraints, to study optimal reflection barriers in                  
              multi-dimensional cases and to investigate other problems                      
              pertinent to singular control in queuing, inventory and flexible               
              manufacturing models.                                                          
                   The proposed research lies within the area of optimal                     
              stochastic control. This type of control problem arises in models              
              involving automatic cruise control of an airplane subject to                   
              uncertain wind conditions, of a space vehicle subject to small                 
              perturbations in mechanical units. The solution to this problem                
              suggests the optimal timing of the correction of the course of                 
              the airplane of the space vehicle. Singular control also appears               
              in queuing/production/manufacturing models. In a typical model of              
              a flexible manufacturing system one seeks the optimal scheduling               
              of turning on and off the production unit, the timing of buying                
              new equipment or increasing the capacity of the existing unit,                 
              finding optimal levels of inventory stocked for supply, etc. In                
              many cases when the production process faces uncertainties due to              
              fluctuation of demand or due to unreliability in the process                   
              itself, it is possible to use the theory of singular control to                
              address the questions posed above.
