Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: The Dependence of Probability
               Judgement on Working Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9301081

Award Number: 9301081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek J. Koehler koehler@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Derek J.                                    
              Koehler to the Medical Research Council -                                      
              Applied Psychology Unit, Cambridge, to work                                    
              with Dr. Alan Baddeley.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Their research topic is the relationship                                       
              between the active set of hypotheses in working                                
              memory and the judged probability of these                                     
              hypotheses.  They will investigate how the                                     
              processes of hypothesis generation and                                         
              probability judgement fit into the well-                                       
              established framework of working memory                                        
              developed by Dr. Baddeley and his colleagues.                                  
              Recent studies show that people's probability                                  
              judgements are nonextensional, not constrained                                 
              by rules of set inclusion.  This implies that                                  
              any descriptive model of subjective probability                                
              must account for such judgements in terms of                                   
              the individual's representation of the events                                  
              or possibilities under consideration.  Dr.                                     
              Baddeley's working memory model suggests a                                     
              potential research program for the empirical                                   
              study of subjective probability and provides a                                 
              larger context in which to frame the problem.                                  
              Such research will allow empirical testing of                                  
              the theory that people normalize or adjust                                     
              their probability estimates only with respect                                  
              to the evidential support received by those                                    
              hypotheses that are active in working memory.                                  
              This approach should also yield insight into                                   
              the more general issue of how people generate                                  
              and evaluate novel hypotheses under conditions                                 
              of uncertainty.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
