Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Differential Equations, Vector Field
               Approximations and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9301039

Award Number: 9301039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Hermes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this research is the development of a coherent               
              program to determine the stabilizability of nonlinear control                  
              systems. Understanding stabilizability is important; almost all                
              issues in both systems theory and systems practice eventually                  
              reduce to some version of the stabilization problem.  The                      
              importance of linear systems theory rests more on the ease of                  
              testing a linear systems for stabilization than on its linearity               
              per se.  Earlier work concentrated on the question of short time               
              local controllability, a necessary condition for stabilizability.              
              viewed as stabilization by open loop controls while the latter                 
              is stabilization by closed loop controls. As a result of the                   
              prior work, one now has computational criteria for deciding STLC.              
              Work has turned to approximations of nonlinear systems by simpler              
              ones such as nilpotent systems and systems which are homogeneous               
              with respect to a dilation.  This work holds promise for a                     
              relatively comprehensive theory of nonlinear stabilizability.  In              
              the present project, a new concept of vector fields which are                  
              stable with respect to measurement are introduced.  The concept                
              is closely related to the shadowing ideas of nonlinear dynamics.               
              It has been shown already that if Brockett's locally onto                      
              conditions not satisfied then a nonlinear system is not                        
              locally stabilizable to a vector field which is stable with                    
              respect to measurement.  Work will also be done using homogeneous              
              approximations and homogeneous Lagrangians to construct                        
              dynamic asymptotically stabilizing feedbacks for systems which                 
              don't satisfy Brockett's locally onto condition using                          
              approximate feedback linearization and optimal control.                        
                   The combination of mathematical power and                                 
              engineering applications has long made control theory one of the               
              healthiest sources of new mathematical themes.  The bridges built              
              between mathematicians and engineers have provided for                         
              dynamic interchanges leading to the advancement of both fields.                
              This project takes up the problem of what one can do when some of              
              the traditional tests for stabilizing state feedback control are               
              not present.  In many important problems, including                            
              mechanical systems with nonholonomic constraints and the inverted              
              pendulum in a gravity free environment, efforts are to be made                 
              to construct discontinuous state feedback controls.
