Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference: Signal Transduction in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1993      
File        : a9301372

Award Number: 9301372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Lamb   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence A. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              9301372  Lamb    This grant will support a new FASEB Summer Research Conference
              on  Signal Transduction in Plants to be held at Copper Mountain,  Colorado,
              August 1-6, 1993.  The contributed talks and discussion  sessions will
              highlight recent progress in signal transduction  mechanisms in plants, and
              will bring together scientists  approaching this key topic from genetic,
              molecular, biochemical and  cellular physiology approaches.  Specific sessions
              include: (1)  Perception and transduction of light signals, (2,3) Stress 
              signaling (two sessions), (4) Hormonal signaling, (5) Pattern  signaling, (6)
              Cell:cell communication, (7) Protein kinase systems,  (8) Signaling the cell
              cycle, (9) Novel signal systems and  experimental approaches.  The conference
              will be attended by 150  scientists chosen to represent a cross-section of
              those interested  in the subject.  The focus on signal transduction in plants
              in the  context of a FASEB Summer Research conference format will provide  a
              unique forum for sustained, focused, in-depth discussions of  emerging topics
              that are critical to our understanding of the  underlying mechanisms
              controlling plant growth, development and  environmental responses.  This
              conference will bring together  scientists approaching plant signal
              transduction from different,  complementary, conceptual and technical
              approaches and hence  generate an interdisciplinary synthesis in this fast
              moving topic.   It is anticipated that this conference will be the first in a 
              biennial series focusing on Signal Transduction in plants,  alternating with
              the established Plant Genetics/Gene Expression  FASEB Conference.  %%%  This
              conference will focus on signal transduction in plants.  The  FASEB Summer
              Research Conference format will provide a unique forum  for sustained, focused,
              in-depth discussions of emerging topics  that are critical to our understanding
              of the underlying mechanisms  controlling plant growth, development and
              environmental responses.  ***
