Title       : Inter- and Intramolecular Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9301381

Award Number: 9301381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $634000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick D. Lewis lewis@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The photochemistry and photophysics of inter- and intra-molecular              
              reactions of amines with styrenes and stilbenes will be studied in             
              order to determine the mechanistic details of these reactions. The             
              intramolecular addition reactions will also provide an attractive              
              synthetic route to medium-ring nitrogen-containing heterocyclic                
              molecules. The structure of the products in these reactions are                
              dependent upon both the structure of the reactant(s) and the method            
              of photochemical excitation (direct vs. electron-transfer                      
              sensitized irradiation). In order to understand the mechanism of               
              these reactions, the reactants, intermediates, and products will be            
              characterized by modern spectroscopic and computational methods.               
              The study will include a characterization of styrene                           
              photoisomerization processes, intermolecular styrene-amine                     
              exciplexes, both styrene and stilbene intramolecular exciplexes,               
              and electron-transfer sensitized intramolecular photoamination.                
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Frederick D. Lewis at Northwestern                
              University. Amines, which are one of the important classes of                  
              nitrogen-containing organic molecules, undergo diverse reactions               
              with compounds containing a carbon-carbon double bond by                       
              irradiation with ultraviolet light. This study will unravel the                
              details of these reactions, where the amine is part of the molecule            
              which contains the carbon-carbon double bond and where the amine is            
              a separate molecule. In the former reaction, the potential for the             
              synthesis of cyclic compounds containing nitrogen will be                      
              evaluated. There is considerable interest in these nitrogen                    
              heterocycles, since they are prevalent in biological systems and in            
              plants.
