Title       : Components for Decentralized Process-Centered Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9301092

Award Number: 9301092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail E. Kaiser kaiser@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               A process is a partially ordered set of steps to be  followed  in developing a
              software system.  Processes may  vary across organizations and  systems.  A
              process-centered  environment provides computer-aided support for a  range of 
              project-specific processes.  The general goals of research  in 
              process-centered environments are to devise useful  notations for specifying 
              processes and to investigate ways  in which environments may assist users in 
              carrying out  processes.  The Marvel process-centered environment is  tailored
              by  a rule-based process model, where each rule  defines a process step and
              states  the condition for  initiating the step and the result of finishing the
              step.  The permitted sequencing among steps is implicit in their  conditions
              and  results.  The environment enforces the  specified process and assists
              users in  satisfying the  conditions of steps. Recent work has concentrated on 
              concurrency control for teams of users, and on evolution of  processes while 
              they are in progress. Both are  prerequisites for scaling up process-centered 
              environments.    This project addresses four problems; (1)  translation of
              higher-level process modeling  formalisms into rules for  execution, (2) formal
              notations for coordination modeling and the  interaction of corresponding
              concurrency control algorithms  with process  assistance mechanisms, (3)
              requirements placed on environment frameworks  by  process and coordination,
              and possible protocols for  interfacing process  and coordination components to
              a range  of existing classes of frameworks, and  (4) decentralized environment
              architectures that permits  a degree of site  autonomy for different process
              and  coordination needs.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
