Title       : Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9301402

Award Number: 9301402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis H. Froes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis J. Geist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarit B. Bhaduri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sixteen UI engineering and physical science research faculty and               
              their coworkers, united under the interdisciplinary research                   
              umbrella of the Institute for Materials and Advanced Processes                 
              (IMAP), share common interests in the preparation,                             
              characterization, and behavior of metallic and ceramic materials.              
              Reliable, rapid and locally available analyses for the                         
              identification and structural characterization of experimental                 
              products are critical to the continued success of established                  
              research programs.  Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) is recognized               
              as the most reliable, expeditious analytical method generally                  
              available for the determination of the structures of these                     
              noncrystalline materials.  In addition, other details revealed by              
              XRD analyses often suggest new areas of investigation.  Access to              
              this powder X-ray diffractometer will promote significant                      
              competitive research in materials science, geology, and                        
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              IMAP engineers and scientists and members of their research                    
              groups have been identified as immediate users of the powder XRD.              
              Additionally, the diffractometer is expected to be used for                    
              future collaboration between these faculty and nearly a dozen of               
              their engineer/scientist colleagues across campus during                       
              multidisciplinary research sponsored by IMAP and by other UI                   
              research institutes/centers and external agencies.  Five                       
              proposals from six IMAP investigators follow.
