Title       : Collaborative Research: Hf and Pb Isotope Ratios in Seawater: Indicators of
               Paleo-Hydrothermal Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9301822

Award Number: 9301822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161697             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. White white@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Collaborative Research: Hf and Pb Isotope Ratios in Seawater:                  
              Indicators of Paleo-Hydrothermal Activity                                      
                                                                                             
              This study is to investigate the behavior of Hf and Pb in seawater             
              and hydrothermal systems with the goal of using the isotope ratios             
              of these elements in marine sediments as indicators of the past                
              rates of volcanism. The isotopic compositions of marine Hf and Pb              
              indicate that large proportions of the oceanic inventory of these              
              elements are derived from 'mantle' sources: young volcanic rocks of            
              subduction/.orogenic zones and mid-ocean ridges.  Hf and Pb are                
              complementary because of their different oceanic residence times.              
              Hf has a residence time in the oceans similar to ocean mixing                  
              times, making it relatively isotopically homogeneous throughout the            
              oceans. New analytical developments make it now possible to measure            
              the concentration and isotopic composition of Hf in reasonable                 
              volumes of natural waters.  Its marine chemistry can now be better             
              defined.  Pb has a short residence time in seawater, and the                   
              hydrothermal flux from mid-ocean ridges locally dominates its                  
              isotopic composition, thus allowing regional variations in this                
              flux to be determined.  Models of mantle flux variations will be               
              based on isotope systematics that allow the proportion of mantle Hf            
              and Pb to the oceans to be determined unequivocally.  Combination              
              of Pb and Hf with Sr flux models will make it possible to define               
              past changes in mantle fluxes to the oceans more accurately than               
              has been possible by using Sr alone.  It will then be possible to              
              test the hypothesis that faster spreading rates, volcanism rates,              
              and increased mantle fluxes to the oceans are synonymous by                    
              comparison with other measures of spreading rate variations. This              
              in turn will allow a refinement of models of global geochemical                
              cycles of other elements, such as carbon.
