Title       : Ecosystem Information System Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1993       
File        : a9301760

Award Number: 9301760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond F. Ford ford@cs.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roland Redmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Running  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramakrishna R. Nemani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              The effectiveness of ecosystem modeling at regional and                        
              larger scales hinges on both the quality of the science                        
              underlying model formulation and the quality of the                            
              information system.  This award will support the development                   
              of an object-oriented Ecosystem Information System (EIS)                       
              that addresses four key problems that plague large modeling                    
              efforts:  (1) separation of the logical attribute of data                      
              sources from their implementation detail: (2) identification                   
              of key similarities and differences between different                          
              sources; (3) maintenance of numerous, large data set                           
              instances from various sources; and (4) maintenance of                         
              consistency in data set usage by simulation systems that                       
              combine inputs from a variety of sources.  EIS development                     
              will included the active participation of both information                     
              systems and ecosystem modeling specialists.  EIS will                          
              include two major components:  a software support system and                   
              a collection of ecosystem research components implemented in                   
              (i.e., converted to) the object-oriented paradigm.  The EIS                    
              software will be a robust distributed system that provides                     
              users in separate laboratories access to a common                              
              information resource.  The research components to be                           
              implemented within EIS include important "public" data                         
              layers (e.g. soils, elevation, remote-sensed imagery),                         
              unique data layers derived through our research (e.g.,                         
              climate hydrology, land cover), and locally developed                          
              simulation components that produce and analyze various data                    
              layers.  The object-oriented paradigm supported by EIS will                    
              be readily extensible, allowing users to easily add new data                   
              sources (object classes), data set design and implementation                   
              will provide not only an example of how to build information                   
              systems to facilitate user access, but also permit                             
              researchers in a variety of biological disciplines to access                   
              an important collection of ecosystem components.  This award                   
              is jointly supported by the Database Activities in the                         
              Biological Sciences and Ecological Studies programs.
