Title       : Structural Studies of Alkali Metals on Silicon and Germanium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9301309

Award Number: 9301309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piero A. Pianetta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Kendelewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9301309  Pianetta  This proposal describes experiments designed to
              quantitatively  determine the atomic structure of alkali metals on surfaces of 
              silicon and germanium.  Experimentally, emphasis will be placed on  the soft
              x-ray standing wave (XSW) technique performed in  conjunction with surface
              extended x-ray adsorption fine structure  (SEXAFS).  This will be followed with
              scanning tunneling microscopy  (STM) to aid in the final structural
              determination.  XSW provides  the perpendicular distances between the substrate
              planes and the  overlayer, while SEXAFS allows precise bond length
              determinations.   Together these techniques can determine adsorption angles and
              hence  interfacial geometries of complex metal-semiconductor systems.  In 
              combination with STM, these techniques form a very complimentary  set of probes
              for the complete structural determination at an  interface.  The main goals of
              this proposal are to achieve an in-  depth understanding of the interfacial
              atomic structure alkali  metal overlayers and to correlate the information with
              their  electronic properties.  In addition, this structural and electronic 
              information will test and further develop state-of-the-art  theoretical
              calculations.  %%%  Novel electronic properties of interfaces have enormous
              commercial  applications in electronics.  The simplest such interface, used as 
              a building block of most practical devices, is a junction between  a metal and
              a semiconductor.  In this proposal, the microscopic  (atomic) structure of
              single layers of alkali metals (such as  sodium, potassium) deposited on
              silicon and germanium will be  studied.  These layers display a unique ability
              to substantially  lower the potential barrier for election escape from the 
              semiconductor and, because of that, are used in infrared detectors  and
              photocathodes.  This investigation will use several techniques  based on
              synchrotron radiation.  In particular, a newly developed  standing wave method
              which allows precise location of foreign atoms  on surfa ces will be utilized. 
              The results will be of fundamental  interest and have potential to aid
              development of new materials for  technological applications.  ***
