Title       : Photonic Band Structures for Optoelectronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1994   
File        : a9301075

Award Number: 9301075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William H. Carter                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Haus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sami H. Sozuer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
               WPC                2           B     V   P     Z                 Courier 10cpi 
                   ? x x x ,       N  x   6 X      @   8  ; X @                              
                   HP LaserJet Series II                HPLASEII.PRS   x            @       
              ,     t 0  OpX @ #| x                2       W   C                             
                                                                                             
                         #| x                     9301075 Haus We propose to carry out
              theoretical investigators regarding the fundamental physics and applications of
              photonic bandgap structures (PBSs).  We briefly describe the proposed research
              directions: 1. Design and refinement of photonic bandgap materials: 
              Considerable progress has been made in the past two years in the design of
              PBSs. So far, only  lossless two  component dielectric composites have been
              investigated for use as photonic bandgap materials.  The research has focused
              on finding the structure with the right geometry.  We will address the
              following topics in our research: The effects of realistic considerations, such
              as losses finite size effects, frequency dependence of the dielectric constant,
              imperfect periodicity, etc., on the photonic band structure and the eigenmodes.
              Possibility of using alternate materials, such as superconductors, materials
              with strong magnetic or piezoelectric properties, and nonlinear dielectric
              materials, to name a few.  The electromagnetic response of these materials can
              be controlled to varying degrees, making possible the design of PBSs with
              optical properties that can be controlled by means of an applied electric or
              magnetic field, or by elastic deformations or by other means. 2. QED:  An
              important motivation for the calculation of the eigenmodes of a PBS is for
              possible use in cavity QED calculations.  The atom field interaction is not
              only through the density of photon states, but also through the spatial
              distribution of electromagnetic fields associated with the mode.  Another
              source of atom field interaction is  through an additional term that represents
              the interaction of the atom with the induced polarization charges in the     
              h)          0*0*0*         medium.  A thorough understanding of these
              mechanisms is essential in designing optoelectronic devices with PBSs. 
              Periodic superconducting structures can be expected to yield novel QED effects
              that are not observed or are insignificant in experiments with atoms in a
              single cavity.  By controlling the position of the band edge, we expect that
              the radiation properties of the atoms can be controlled altered.  This will
              give provide a new means of investigating cavity QED; the system could be used
              as a Q swithch for generating pulses of coherent radiation. ***
