Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multi-dimensional Statistical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9301366

Award Number: 9301366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99027              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingram Olkin IOLKIN@STAT.STANFORD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The large number of univariate distributions that have been thoroughly studied 
              sometimes have been developed for use in statistical analyses of data; other 
              distribution arise from natural probabilistic or physical considerations, from 
              statistical properties or as limiting distributions.  Most of the well-known 
              distributions arise in more than one way.  Although univariate distributions
              provide information about individual  measurements, they cannot facilitate
              studies of relationships between  measurements.  In many situations in the
              physical, biological, economic sciences  it is just these relationships that
              are of interest, for which multivariate  distributions are required.  The goal
              of this proposal is to contribute to the understanding of multivariate 
              versions of the well-known univariate theory.  This subject is particularly 
              timely because recent increases in computational and computer graphics 
              capabilities have made the use of multivariate distributions much more broadly 
              practical.  Multivariate models are now particularly understood in terms of 
              underlying structures that unite many multivariate families into cohesive
              units.   Meaningful derivations of multivariate distributions can shed light on
              which  models to use in different applications.  A consequence of this research
              is that  flexible models useful in describing multivariate data will become
              available.
