Title       : Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Chemoautotrophic
               Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9301374

Award Number: 9301374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Childress childres@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1319,9117,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9301374  CHILDRESS         The animals associated with deep-sea hydrothermal
              vents  represent an ancient fauna of global distribution within the  oceans.
              The very existence of these communities depends upon the  ability of a few
              invertebrate/bacterial symbiotic associations to  oxidize the reduced chemical
              species (sulfide or methane) from the  hydrothermal vents using oxidants (such
              as oxygen or nitrate) from  the surrounding deep-sea water to power primary
              production in this  environment. The capacity for interaction of the symbiotic 
              association with the chemical properties of the vent environments  is
              fundamental to the primary production which supports these  ecosystems.       
              The central objective of this project is the determination of  the importance
              of the concentration of carbon dioxide (PCO2) as an  environmental factor
              affecting the rates of primary production by  hydrothermal vent
              chemoautotrophic symbioses. This project is  composed of there components, each
              with its own objectives: 1. A  survey of diverse vent and seep environments to
              determine the  extent to which chemoautotrophic symbioses in these habitats are
               exposed to elevated carbon dioxide and have high concentrations of  carbon
              dioxide in their bodies. 2. Shipboard studies of the  physiology supporting
              primary productivity in symbiotic vent  animals in order to evaluate whether
              the concentration of carbon  dioxided is a variable which limits primary
              production by the  symbiotic associations. 3. The observation and measurement
              of  temporal changes at a station located at 13oN in order to describe  the
              niches of the symbioses over long time scales to assess long  term rates of
              primary productivity in these environments.        This project will greatly
              increase our understanding of the  nature of the interactions between the vent
              animals and their  chemical environment, in particular the interactions with pH
              and  inorganic carbon, contributing to our understanding of the  functioning of
              the vent and other chemoautotrophic ally supported  ecosystems.        ***
