Title       : Controls on the Isotopic Compositions of Individual Compoundin Photosynthethetic
               Autotrophs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9301204

Award Number: 9301204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian N. Popp popp@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Laws  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Bidigare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1670,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this proposal is to investigate the importance of                  
              environmental variables on the isotopic composition of major                   
              component biochemicals in phytoplankton.  Specifically, the                    
              objective is to better understand how nutrient and light-                      
              limitations affects distributions and isotopic compositions of                 
              individual organic compounds in photosynthetic autotrophs. The                 
              study will assess the affects of nutrient limitation and                       
              representative species of the major algal biomarkers. To accomplish            
              this, representative species of the major algal classes (i.e.,                 
              Bacillariophyceace, Prymnesiophyceae, Cyanophyceae and Dinophyceae)            
              will live chemostat growth chambers under a variety of conditions              
              and their isotopic is to determine the effect of zooplankton                   
              grazing on the structure and isotopic compositions of lipids and               
              pigments.  This will be accomplished by allowing phytoplankton                 
              feedstock from one chemostat growth chamber to flow under                      
              controlled conditions into a second chamber containing zooplankton.            
              Composition of algal biochemical will be compared with those of the            
              zooplankton to investigate microbial chain interactions.  The study            
              includes degradation effects on isotopic compositions of algal                 
              biomarkers. Since herbivory is the most important 'sink' for                   
              autotrophic production, knowledge of structural/isotopic                       
              alterations during this process is critical for interpreting the               
              distributions and isotopic compositions of algal degradation                   
              products in sinking and sedimentary organic matter.  The baseline              
              information provided by this research is needed to better interpret            
              distributions of isotopic composition of lipids and pigments in                
              particulate and sedimentary organic matter.  Such information will             
              ultimately make it possible to determine the source organisms for              
              numerous biochemicals and to make significant advances in                      
              identifying processes driving recycling of organic carbon in the               
              ocean.
