Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytic and Geometric Problems in Several Complex
               Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9301088

Award Number: 9301088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Epstein cle@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will focus on several areas of mathematical                  
              research in the area of several complex variables.  Work will                  
              continue on the problem of embeddability of three dimensional                  
              CR-manifolds, exploring connections between this problem and the               
              Kuranishi construction of versal deformations for surface                      
              singularities. An integral part of this investigation is the                   
              development of computer software which facilitates the                         
              computation of these spaces.  The ultimate goal is the                         
              construction of normal forms for CR-structures on three                        
              dimensional manifolds and the characteristics of embeddable                    
              structures.  In addition, work will be done to apply                           
              pseudodifferential and blow-up methods to study the d-bar                      
              operator on domains with singular metrics.  The applications                   
              include index theorems for Bergman type metrics and infinitesimal              
              versions of the Runge theorem.                                                 
                   Several complex variables arose at the beginning of the                   
              century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of one                  
              complex variable.  It became clear early on that the theory                    
              differed widely from it predecessor.  The underlying geometry was              
              far more difficult to grasp and the function theory had far more               
              affinity with partial differential operators of first order.  It               
              thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep characteristics                   
              of differential geometry and differential equations.  Many of                  
              the fundamental structures were defined in the last three                      
              decades. Current studies still concentrate on understanding these              
              basic mathematical forms.
