Title       : IHETS Data Network, Phase 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9301802

Award Number: 9301802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Priscilla Jane Huston                   
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Lindeman lindeman@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
                   The Indiana Higher Education Telecommunication System (IHETS)             
              on behalf of its member institutions, is encouraging participation             
              in the data network for all higher education institutions in                   
              Indiana and their constituents, including public libraries,                    
              hospitals, governmental agencies, extension centers, and business              
              with research and educational needs for connectivity.                          
              Additionally, IHETS is working with the Indiana Department of                  
              Education to provide experimentation opportunities for schools via             
              linkage with the Department's dial-access system. IDEAnet.                     
                   This proposal requests partial funding for participation in               
              NSFNET through a connection with CICNET, the regional network                  
              attaching to NSFNET in the Indiana Area as well as partial start-up            
              funds for the necessary routers, circuits, and operating support to            
              facilitate the fullest possible participation.  The educational                
              institutions that will participate include:  Grace College,                    
              Huntington College, Indiana Vocational Technical College, Indiana              
              Wesleyan University, Purdue University North Central, and Taylor               
              University-Fort Wayne.                                                         
                   The network initially consists of a redundant T1 backbone                 
              linking nodes at four of the larger campuses, 56 kbs DDS end nodes,            
              and connection to CICNET and NSFNET via Indiana University.  Phase             
              2 will extend the backbone and add the six new colleges mentioned              
              above.  The network is beginning with the vendor-independent TCP/IP            
              standard, with the expectation of future migrations to the OSI                 
              protocol when appropriate.  The network will extend throughout                 
              Indiana to provide affordable access to Internet resources and                 
              enhance the state's information infrastructure, particularly                   
              important in small towns and rural communities.
