Title       : CEDAR: Vertical Velocity Measurements in the Mesosphere: Biases and Possible
               Solutions Using Spatial Interferometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9301108

Award Number: 9301108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91008              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Palmer bpalmer@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  One of the most important parameters, which can be derived                
              from atmospheric Doppler radars, is the vertical component of the              
              neutral wind.  This project will compare and contrast the various              
              methods used in estimating the vertical velocity in the mesosphere.            
              Mesosphere-stratosphere-troposphere (MST) and partial reflection               
              drifts (PRD) radars will be used to achieve this goal.                         
                                                                                             
                   MST radars typically use either a vertically pointing beam or             
              the velocity-azimuth-display (VAD) technique to estimate the                   
              vertical wind.  The vertical beam technique can be biased by                   
              instrumental as well as atmospheric effects.  The PIs propose that             
              any instrumental bias can be removed using spatial interferometry              
              (SI) to track a radio star such as Cygnus A.  Differences between              
              the astronomical position and that obtained from the SI                        
              measurements can be attributed to a systematic offset in the beam              
              position.  Any atmospheric bias, due to inhomogeneities in the                 
              reflectivity field, can also be removed using SI techniques.  If               
              implemented properly, the VAD technique can produce an unbiased                
              estimate of the vertical wind.  On the other hand, if not properly             
              implemented, the resulting vertical velocity estimates will be                 
              biased by the divergence in the wind field.  The PIs propose to                
              implement both the VAD and SI techniques using the Middle and Upper            
              (MU) Atmosphere radar in Shigaraki, Japan, in the 60-90 km range.              
              Both these mesospheric measurements can be conducted essentially               
              simultaneously.                                                                
                                                                                             
                   Most PRD measurements are restricted to the vertical position             
              because of the configuration of typical systems.  Therefore, the               
              biases mentioned above, for the vertically pointing MST radar, are             
              also applicable for PRD systems.  Furthermore, the biases should be            
              enhanced because of the typically wide beamwidths used with these              
              radars.  PRD radars are multiple-receiver systems operating at 2-3             
              MHz.  As a result, the methods of eliminating the biases using SI              
              techniques are very similar to the MST case.  The PIs will make                
              measurements using a PRD radar, which is planned for installation              
              in Sondre Stromfjord, Greenland, by researchers at Clemson                     
              University and the University of Colorado.
