Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Seventh International Conference on Domain Decomposition
               in Scientific and Engineering Computing, Penn State University, October 27-30,
               1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1993      
File        : a9301980

Award Number: 9301980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinchao Xu xu@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Bona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas N. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Seventh International Conference on Domain Decomposition              
              Methods in Scientific and Engineering Computing will be held at                
              Penn State University from October 27 to 30, 1993.  Domain                     
              decomposition refers to a class of methods for the simulating                  
              large-scale scientific and engineering systems on computers.                   
              Using a divide-and conquer strategy to obtain the solution to a                
              massive problem by combining the solutions to numerous smaller                 
              ones, domain decomposition offers the possibility of simulating                
              systems that are too large and complex even for today's powerful               
              supercomputers using conventional solution methods.  Such                      
              problems include long term climate prediction and the study of                 
              global change and the design of space vehicles and structures.                 
              Among computational scientist, engineers, and mathematicians,                  
              domain decomposition techniques are of particularly intense                    
              interest now because they are well adapted to emerging high                    
              performance computer architectures.                                            
                   This conference will convene academic and industrial                      
              researchers in domain decomposition and allied areas in order to               
              disseminate recent advances and stimulate further development in               
              areas ranging from basic theoretical research on the analysis and              
              validation of domain decomposition algorithms to specific                      
              industrial applications.  The conference will enhance the                      
              technology transfer between academia and industry, and provide                 
              opportunities for students and young scientists and engineers to               
              become involved in this important new class of computational                   
              methods.  Graduate students, young researchers, women, minorities              
              and people with disabilities are being especially encouraged to                
              attend the conference and to contribute papers.  The proceedings               
              of this conference will be published by the American Mathematical              
              Society and are expected to become an important resource for                   
              researcher and users of domain decomposition.
