Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Natural Scene Statistics in
               Biological Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9301746

Award Number: 9301746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Ruderman dan@research.nj.nec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Daniel L.                                   
              Ruderman to work with Dr. David J. Tolhurst at                                 
              the Physiological Laboratory at Cambridge.                                     
                                                                                             
              Their research proposes to apply natural scene                                 
              statistics to basic problems in vision.  Dr.                                   
              Ruderman's graduate work measured the                                          
              properties of images in nature.  He found a                                    
              very robust scaling in the statistics, meaning                                 
              the character of natural scenes is invariant to                                
              scale.  They now hope to answer the question                                   
              "What does this scaling imply about the design                                 
              of image processing systems in nature?"  A                                     
              long-held belief is that detecting edges is                                    
              fundamental to image analysis.  The optimal                                    
              edge detector for biological vision is                                         
              determined by the structure of edges in natural                                
              images.  Similarly, the problem of constructing                                
              complete borders around objects can be phrased                                 
              relative to the statistical properties of                                      
              borders in nature.  Do the optimal algorithms                                  
              for edge and border finding need access to the                                 
              complete image, or is local information enough?                                
              This is a crucial question for biology since                                   
              neurons in the early stages of vision respond                                  
              only to local image features.  Does this fact                                  
              limit the processing ability?  Finally, optimal                                
              reconstruction of an image from noisy neural                                   
              responses requires statistical knowledge of the                                
              images and the noise.  Comparing this                                          
              reconstruction ability with the performance of                                 
              humans in psychophysical tasks represents a                                    
              measure of inaccuracy in visual computations.                                  
              Using natural scene statistics in answering                                    
              these questions provides a novel framework for                                 
              understanding vision in biology.                                               
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
