Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hydrodynamic Stability and Dynamo Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9301172

Award Number: 9301172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Vishik vishik@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The PI will investigate the growth rate of the magnetic field in               
              a smooth steady flow of an electrically conducting fluid in the                
              limit of high magnetic Reynolds number.  The methods from                      
              Geometric Measure Theory and  Dynamical Systems provide an                     
              estimate from above and possibly an explicit formula for this                  
              quantity which is a central problem of "Fast Dynamo" theory. He                
              proposes to study the completeness of a system of Floquet root                 
              vectors in time-periodic problems of fluid dynamics.  If such a                
              system indeed exists, it would mean that the magnetic field in a               
              time-periodic flow of a conducting fluid cannot decay                          
              superexponentially and the same fact is true for small                         
              oscillations in a viscous fluid.  He will continue the research                
              on the "geometric instability theory" for the Euler equation                   
              which would allow  treatment of flows of an ideal fluid with                   
              singularities.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The Dynamo problem concerns the  process of a magnetic field                   
              generation by the motion of a highly conducting fluid.  This                   
              process is responsible for the existence of the magnetic field of              
              the Earth, solar magnetic field and magnetic fields in                         
              astrophysics.  It also can be achieved in laboratory although                  
              experimental difficulties are considerable.  The suggested                     
              mathematical study sheds light on the process of "fast" (most                  
              efficient) generation of the magnetic field.  This "fast" process              
              takes place on a time scale many orders of magnitude less than                 
              the time of Ohmic decay of the magnetic field.  Another line of                
              research is the investigation of hydrodynamic instability using                
              ideas from dynamo theory.  General conditions for instability of               
              fluid flows are of fundamental importance in the areas of fluid                
              and aerodynamics.
