Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Specific Recognition of Proteins
               with Ligand Lipids Using a Fiber Optic Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9301706

Award Number: 9301706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Bohanon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
              9301706  Bohanon    This award is under the International  Postdoctoral Fellows
              Program, which enables  U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three  to
              twelve months of research at foreign centers  of proven excellence.  The
              program's awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and  the use of
              unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and experimental conditions
              abroad.      This award will support a twelve-month  postdoctoral research
              visit by Dr. Thomas M.  Bohanon to work with Dr. Helmut Ringsdorf at  Johannes
              Gutenberg Universitaet in Mainz,  Germany.    Dr. Bohanon and Dr. Ringsdorf
              will  quantitatively study the specific recognition  of proteins with ligand
              lipids using a fiber  optic sensor.  An evanescent wave from the  optical fiber
              excites fluorescent molecules  only within tens of nanometers from the optical 
              fiber; the optical fiber collects a fraction of  this fluorescence.  This
              technique is highly  selective and very versatile.  They will study  the
              specific binding of streptavidin to biotin,  the effect of spacers on the
              binding, and the  possibility of docking a second protein layer  to
              streptavidin.  They also will study the  specific binding of antiflourescyl IgG
              and Fab  to fluorescein lipids, and the effects of  spacers on this binding and
              perform kinetic  measurements.  Finally, they will perform the  same
              experiments using a quartz crystal  microbalance; the combination of these two 
              techniques will provide insight into specific  binding that could not otherwise
              be achieved.  ***
