Title       : Dissertation Research: Taking Care of Our Own: A Comparison of Amish and
               "English" Approaches to Eldercare in Rural Western New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9301576

Award Number: 9301576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann P. Mc Elroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              McElroy/Hewner  9301576      This project investigates eldercare from the
              perspective of household members most involved in health care in two
              communities in rural western New York.  The Amish are a group that has
              preserved traditional values in the midst of modern America.  In the course of
              ethnographic fieldwork, Amish families will be compared to a matched set of
              "English" (non-Amish, as the Amish use the word) families.  Comparative
              ethnographic interviewing in the two neighboring communities under natural
              conditions will serve to evaluate the contribution of a number of variables on
              eldercare.  A sample of informants who have experience in eldercare will be
              identified through a census of twenty-five Amish and twenty-five "English"
              households.  Data collected will include genealogies, a grid of significant
              household members, information on aging and its impact, and ratings (by the
              researcher) of overall household health and individual functional ability.  A
              nested sample will be selected for in-depth interview and
              participant/observation of current and past experiences in caregiving. 
              Quantitative analysis of demographic data and health rating will complement
              qualitative analysis of life history of caregiving.  The results will identify
              household practices which contribute to improved care of the elderly, with
              application in intervention strategies for policy-makers.  ***   s( t(         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    !           !            
                 f     ?                       x             x                               
               L    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial  & Lucida Sans    Bookman Old Style   
                 v   v         v           "             h                           r       
               j    mcelroy hewner abstract abstract thesis mcelroy hewner abstract  Raymond
              Hames Raymond Hames                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
