Title       : Microsponge Molecular Reserviors and Their Use in the Heterogenization of
               Homogeneous Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9301711

Award Number: 9301711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Ruckenstein feaeliru@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9301711  Ruckenstein    Porous polymer particles are useful in applications such
              as  chromatography, ion exchange, reactive polymer matrixes, and  for
              controlled release of drugs.  The synthesis of these  macroreticular particles
              is, in general, based on the  suspension polymerization of a dispersed phase
              that consists  of monomer, crosslinking agent, initiator, and a suitable  inert
              liquid which does not polymerize and that functions as a  porogen.  The size of
              the particles obtained depends upon the  suspending medium as well as the
              dispersant it contains.  The  porosity of the particles is controlled by
              varying the volume  fraction of the porogen and adjusting the concentration of
              the  crosslinking agent.  This project has two goals: (1) to  develop new
              methods for the preparation of porous micron-size  particles and to learn to
              control their internal surface area  and their pore size distribution, and (2)
              to suggest some  applications in the area of the heterogenization of 
              homogeneous catalysts.    The development of a new method for the preparation
              of porous  polymer particles based on the concentrated emulsion  polymerization
              method is planned.  The concentrated emulsion  is obtained by dispersing a
              hydrophobic (hydrophilic) liquid  into a surfactant-containing hydrophilic
              (hydrophobic) liquid  with mechanical stirring.  The volume fraction of the 
              dispersed phase should be larger than 0.74, which represents  the volume
              fraction of the most compact arrangement of spheres  of equal radii, and can be
              as large as 0.99.  The concentrated  emulsions have the appearance and behavior
              of gels and  therefore can be handled easily.  The concentrated emulsion is 
              stabilized by the adsorption of the surfactant on the surface  of dispersed
              droplets.  This concentrated emulsion method  employs a small volume fraction
              of continuous phase thus a  small amount of the hydrophobic phase is employed
              to prepare  hydrophilic particles.    Three kinds of porous particles will be
              prepared: (1) porous  crosslinke d hydrophobic particles, (2) sparse 
              poly(vinylbenzylchloride) matrices encapsulated by porous  nutshells of
              crosslinked polystyrene, and (3) porous  crosslinked hydrophilic particles of
              polyacrylamide or other  hydrophilic polymers.  Some applications that will be
              studied  include using the second category of materials synthesized to  entrap
              cobalt carbonyl anions and materials synthesized under  the third category to
              immobilize enzymes that are compatible  with the hydrophilic pores.  ***
