Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: A Model of the Creep Deformation of
               Dispersion-Strengthened Intermetallic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9301747

Award Number: 9301747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph P. Mason   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Ralph P.                                    
              Mason to work with Professor Dr. Eduard Arzt at                                
              the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research in                                
              Stuttgart, Germany.                                                            
                                                                                             
              They propose to develop a model of the creep                                   
              deformation of dispersion-strengthened                                         
              intermetallic alloys where the rate of creep                                   
              deformation is controlled by thermally                                         
              activated detachment of superlattice                                           
              dislocations from dispersoid particles.  This                                  
              model will incorporate two attractive                                          
              interactions between dispersoid particles and                                  
              superlattice dislocations which lead to the                                    
              attachment of superlattice dislocations to                                     
              particles.  These attractive interactions which                                
              inhibit dislocation motion will be offset by                                   
              the applied stress and by thermal activation                                   
              both of which will facilitate dislocation                                      
              motion.  The rate of creep deformation will be                                 
              determined by the balance of the above                                         
              elements.  The model will be tested against                                    
              existing data for dispersion-strengthened                                      
              intermetallics.  The proposed research has                                     
              potential application to the manufacture of                                    
              high-temperature parts such as blades, vanes                                   
              and disks in aircraft turbines.                                                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
