Title       : Commercial Opportunities Exploiting the Diversity of Beetle Luciferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9301865

Award Number: 9301865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith V. Wood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Promega Corporation
	      2800 Woods Hollow Road
	      Madison, WI  537115300    608/274-4330

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,9119,
Abstract    :
              Though radioactivity is widely used in bioassays due to its high               
              sensitivity and convenience, safety and environmental concerns have            
              accelerated efforts to eliminate its use.  Firefly luciferase                  
              accords the most efficient production of chemical luminescence,                
              which is an effective alternative to radioactivity.  Recent                    
              improvements in the enzymatic chemistry which yield greater                    
              luminescent intensity with simper reaction kinetics further improve            
              its commercial utility.  Examining the structure and function of               
              several divergent isozymes of beetles luciferases is proposed to               
              gain a broader perspective of their properties, and to develop one             
              or more isozymes which are better suited to commercial                         
              applications.  Phase I of this research demonstrated feasibility by            
              successfully developing efficient methods for a) luciferase                    
              expression in E. coli, b) mutagenesis and selection for novel                  
              phenotypes, and c) structural and enzymological analysis of                    
              modified enzymes.  Phase II will focus on characterizing the                   
              recombinant luciferases, examining their relative structural                   
              relationships, and employing mutagenesis to enhance their                      
              properties and provide a method for future rational enzyme                     
              development in the absence of 3 dimensional structural information.            
              In Phase III, specific bioassay and other commercial applications              
              will be developed.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Radioactivity is commonly used in biochemical analysis, such as                
              medical and industrial diagnostics, because it is convenient and               
              provides high sensitivity.   However, alternatives to radioactivity            
              y are being sough due to concerns for over safety and environmental            
              impact.  the light emitted from fireflies is an extremely efficient            
              signal, and the chemistry of this system has been recently advanced            
              to accord a viable.  In addition to efficient light production,                
              however, commercial practicality requires that the components of               
              the system be physically robust.  The enzyme isolated from                     
              fireflies, luciferase, is the least stable of these components.                
              Phase II research is proposed to improve this situation by two                 
              approaches: 1) examine luciferases from other luminous beetles for             
              enzymes with greater structure.  The feasibility of these                      
              approaches has been previously established in Phase I research.  It            
              is further hoped that the methods developed in the Phase II                    
              research will be applicable to the commercial development of other             
              enzymes.  In Phase III, the luciferases developed in Phase II will             
              be adapted to novel biochemical procedures.
