Title       : Behavioral Processes in Evolution of Physical Traits (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9301667

Award Number: 9301667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6835               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Haley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9301667  Haley    Darwin offered "sexual selection" as an explanation for a wide
              variety of traits having in  common the paradoxical quality of being apparently
              detrimental to survival.  He proposed  that such traits have evolved because
              they give an advantage to the bearer in competing for  or attracting mates. 
              Sexual selection is now widely regarded to be a major mechanism for  the
              evolution of differences between the sexes and a potentially important factor
              in the  evolution of new species.  Yet little is known about the mechanisms
              underlying sexual  selection, the factors constraining it, or the nature of
              variation in sexually-selected traits.    A prerequisite to studying sexual
              selection is to demonstrate that it operates in the present.   Dr. Haley will
              attempt to obtain such evidence for the long tail feathers of the male 
              streamertail hummingbird (Trochilus polytmus), an endemic Jamaican species. 
              The males of  this species have two strikingly long tail feathers (the
              "streamers"), which are featured  prominently in courtship display.  Male tail
              length varies considerably, and the males shed  and regrow their tail feathers
              regularly.  To test whether or not females discriminate between  males on the
              basis of tail length, Dr. Haley will perform tests in specially constructed 
              aviaries.  Each female will be presented a unique pair of males in an aviary
              where she can  move freely, but each male is confined to a separate adjoining
              cage.  Females will be offered  choices between males with experimentally
              shortened, lengthened, or unaltered tail feathers.   If females regularly
              prefer males with longer streamers, it would seem appropriate to  characterize
              male streamertail tail feathers as sexually-selected traits.  If not, future
              work  would include testing male tail length for its effect on competition
              among males.
