Title       : Actomyosin in a Basal Body-Associated Fibrillar Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9301904

Award Number: 9301904
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray H. Gavin rhgavin@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9108,9161,9177,9178,9181,9183,9251,9261,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 In ciliated cells, basal bodies are contained within separate,              
              filamentous cages connected to basal body microtubules.  A recent              
              study showed that actin is a component of the basal body cage                  
              complex in Tetrahymena and may be part of an actomyosin system                 
              associated with these organelles (Hoey and Gavin, J. Cell. Sci.,               
              103, November 1992).  There are three main objectives to this                  
              project.  The first is to identify the myosin component of the                 
              putative actomyosin system in the Tetrahumena basal body cage                  
              complex; the second is to localize myosin within the complex; and              
              the third is to determine whether basal body cage myosin mediates              
              actin filament motility.  An anti-oral apparatus anti-serum will be            
              screened for cross-reactivity with myosins I and II on immunoblots.            
              Antibodies that cross-react with myosin polypeptides will be                   
              affinity-purified and used to localize myosin-like components of               
              the Tetrahymena basal body cage complex using immunogold labeling.             
              To show actin filament interactions, in vitro assembled actin                  
              filaments will be mixed with purified basal body cage myosin and               
              applied directly to a carbon-coated grid, negatively stained, and              
              viewed by electron microscopy.                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the most important forms of eukaryotic cellular motility is             
              that mediated by axonemal beating: i.e., the highly regulated back-            
              and-forth movement of slender, microtubule-containing cellular                 
              extensions (cilia or flagella).  Depending on circumstances, such              
              movements enable a cell to either swim in a regulated manner or to             
              create local currents in its vicinity resulting in the movement of             
              the immediate environment with respect to the cell.  Specific cases            
              of ciliary or flagellar motility include such diverse examples as:             
              swimming of mammalian sperm toward the ovum, a process critical to             
              mammalian reproduction; swimming of unicellular algae or protozoans            
              in pondwater; feeding of protozoans by sweepinging food-containing             
              pondwater into their oral cavities; and clearance of respiratory               
              mucus from the lungs by the ciliary beat of epithelial cells lining            
              the trachea and bronchi.  The axonemes of such cells are rooted in             
              cellular structures called basal bodies, which are homologous to               
              centrosomes, structures in which intracellular microtubular arrays             
              (such as mitotic spindles) are rooted.  Although basal bodies have             
              been studied for more than a century, important questions about                
              their structure, chemistry, formation, and function remain                     
              unanswered.  These organelles form definite structural associations            
              with various fibrillar complexes in the cell, one of which is the              
              cage.  The structure-function relationship of these fibrillar                  
              complexes has not received much attention from investigators.                  
              Recent work has shown actin to be present in the basal body cage               
              complex of a ciliated protozoan, Tetrahymena (a useful model system            
              for studying ciliary function), and on the basis of the presence of            
              actin it was proposed that there is an actomyosin contractile                  
              machinery involved in the regulation of basal body position (and by            
              implication, the direction of the movement).  This proposal focuses            
              on the identification of the putative myosin component.  The                   
              implications of such a model go well beyond motility in protozoans.
