Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Structural Geology of the Eastern
               Brazilian Shield
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9301292

Award Number: 9301292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Marshak smarshak@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. D. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research abroad at research                                
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.  The actual                                    
              financial support for this research will be                                    
              from the U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science                                       
              Program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. W. Dickson                                  
              Cunningham of the University of Illinois at                                    
              Urbana to work with Dr. Fernando Flecha Alkmim                                 
              at the Federal University of Ouro Preto in                                     
              Brazil.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research project involves the study of the                                
              tectonic evolution of the eastern edge of                                      
              Brazilian Shield.  The project addresses                                       
              important questions concerning the structural                                  
              significance of the Brasiliano (=Pan African)                                  
              mobile belt and the tectonic relationship of                                   
              the Precambrian basement of the Mantiqueira                                    
              province to the Sao Francisco craton.  The                                     
              project has important implications for                                         
              understanding processes of Precambrian                                         
              continental amalgamation and the structural                                    
              evolution of South America.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The structural geology of the Mantiqueria                                      
              province is poorly known and existing maps of                                  
              the region emphasize Brasiliano trends in the                                  
              province.  Recent reconnaissance investigations                                
              by UFOP and the University of Illinois                                         
              researchers indicate that the region contains                                  
              evidence for an older basement terrane                                         
              containing Transamazonian (2.0 b.y) age                                        
              structures.  If this is correct, it will                                       
              totally change perceptions of the pre-Gondwana                                 
              geology of the eastern margin of South America.                                
              The Mantiqueira province may correlate better                                  
              with West African cratons than with South                                      
              American cratons.  The Brasiliano belt may mark                                
              a Late Proterozoic suture superimposed on older                                
              Transamazonian trends.                                                         
                                                                                             
              To address these issues, Dr. Cunningham plans                                  
              to conduct a detailed structural analysis                                      
              combined with detailed petrographic studies,                                   
              satellite imagery analysis, topographic studies                                
              and geochronological sampling along three east-                                
              west transects between Ouro Preto and the                                      
              Atlantic coast.  A multi-disciplinary approach                                 
              using these techniques has never before been                                   
              applied to tectonic problems in eastern Brazil.                                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months and a small travel allowance for                                 
              in-country travel and field work.
