Title       : Monetary Policy and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1998  
File        : a9601253

Award Number: 9601253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Christiano lchrist@merle.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to continue developing an  empirically based,
              dynamic general equilibrium framework for  analyzing monetary policy.  This
              effort will have two basic  components: to better understand the monetary
              policy making  process itself, and to develop improved models of the links 
              between monetary policy and the performance of the overall  economy.  The first
              component seeks to endogenize monetary policy  by thinking of it as being
              determined by a purposeful policy  maker who does not have the ability to
              commit to future actions.  This project will investigate the possibility that
              the take-off  of inflation in the 1970s reflects in part the kind of 
              instability that can arise when monetary policy is conducted in  the absence of
              commitment.  An important objective of this  proposal is to analyze alternative
              feasible institutional  arrangements that could give rise to a more stable
              monetary  policy.      The second component of this project focuses on
              developing  improved models of the economy.  For an analysis of alternative 
              monetary policy regimes to be persuasive, it must be built upon a  sound model.
               One strand of the proposed research builds on the  author's previous work
              developing a framework for integrating  monetary and business cycle phenomena. 
              Specifically, the project  will explore various factors that can help account
              quantitatively  for the observation that the price effects of monetary policy 
              disturbances appear to be small, while the output effects are  relatively
              larger.    In a third strand of research the investigator will continue his 
              work reconciling the salient characteristics of asset returns  with
              macroeconomic models.  This is important because virtually  any view about the
              way money affects the economy assigns a  central role to asset markets.  The
              investigator will also  explore the possibility that expectational shocks play
              an  important role in the business cycle.  Understanding what are the  ultimate
              impulses to the business cycle is likely  to be important  in any assessment of
              alternative monetary policies.  Finally, the  investigator will use financial
              market data to obtain improved  estimates of the exogenous component of
              monetary policy.  Such  measures play an important role in efforts to identify
              the  channels by which money affects the economy.
