Title       : Where the Water Meets the Land: An Archaeological Case Study of Two Millennia of
               Wetland Utilization at K'axob, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9601206

Award Number: 9601206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. McAnany tricia@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patricia McAnany and her
              colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of
              K'axob, located in the tropical lowlands of Belize. Extensive prior work at the
              site by Dr. McAnany has indicated an extensive Mayan settlement which spans the
              development and the classical period of Mayan prehistory. Associated with the
              settlement are a series of agricultural features, termed `raised fields` which
              consist of raised elongated `fields` and canals or drainage ditches which
              separate them. Dr. McAnany wishes to understand how and when these fields were
              constructed, how long they were used and just what crops were grown on them.
              She wants to compare changes in settlement pattern and size with development
              and changes in the field system. To accomplish this she will: 1. construct a
              complete ground-truthed map of the wetland canal and island-field system at
              K'axob; 2. conduct archaeological excavation of a statistically significant
              sample of island fields and canals drawn from a known sampling frame; 3. use
              optical microscopy for micromorphological analysis of wetland sediments to
              clarify formation processes; 4 apply magnetic susceptibility and total
              phosphate analysis to sediment columns to facilitate the discrimination of
              depositional sequences; 6. synthesize the chronology and stratigraphically
              derived excavations with that of settlement excavations in the adjacent
              uplands.  The lowland Maya flourished and lived in large groups in a harsh
              tropical lowland environment which is essentially uninhabited today.
              Archaeologists wish to understand the agricultural practices which permitted
              this florescence and to trace how these developed and changed over time. To
              date no consensus exists and scientists disagree strongly on the age of these
              occurrences and just how they functioned.  Dr. McAnany's carefully designed
              project should provide an answer to these questions. The work is also important
              for the insight it can shed on wetland management and many of the data may be
              relevant to management practices today. It appears that the Mayan people were
              able to utilize wetlands for extended periods of time and  use them for
              agricultural production without destroying their essential nature.   The
              results of this project will be of interest to many scientists. It will provide
              data of potential use for wetland management and shed new light on the
              subsistence practices of prehistoric Mayan peoples.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
