Title       : Excavation of Duinefontein 2, A Middle Stone Age Open-Air Site on the Western
               Cape Coast of South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9601021

Award Number: 9601021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Cruz-Uribe Kathryn.Cruz-Uribe@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Kathryn Cruz-Uribe and Richard Klein will conduct archaeological research
              at the site of Duinefontein which is located on the South African Atlantic
              coast approximately 35 km. North of Cape Town. For over 40 years scientists
              have known of the presence of thousands of well preserved fossilized bones in
              the Duinefontein sands but until Richard Klein's work they had not been found
              in secure stratified context. In recent work, the investigator has found two
              levels of in situ material in association with artifacts attributable to Middle
              Stone Age peoples. With National Science Foundation support Drs. Cruz-Uribe,
              Klein and their collaborators will return to the site to conduct two field
              seasons of extensive carefully controlled excavations. The goals of this work
              are to recover large enough samples of both lithics and faunal remains to
              conduct statistically meaningful analyses, to clear large enough surfaces to
              recover potential behavioral information, and to collect samples which can
              provide absolute dates for the two levels.  The Middle Stone Age is of great
              archaeological interest because it is during this period, between a. 250,000
              and 50,000 years ago that humans assumed their modern physical form and many
              hallmarks of modern behavior appeared. Before the Middle Stone Age there is no
              evidence for art, religion or burial of the dead. Trade and interaction spheres
              were geographically limited yet at the same time there is no indication of
              tribal or other ethnic groupings. By the end of the Middle Stone Age period the
              presence of all these traits - all hallmarks of modern day peoples - are
              abundantly clear in the archaeological record. Drs. Cruz-Uribe, Klein and their
              colleagues wish to determine the temporal origin of these attributes and
              determine how they developed over time. A site such as Duinfontien with its
              excellently preserved bone and rich lithic assemblage is will suited for such a
              purpose.  This research is important for several reasons. it will provide
              information of interest to many archaeologists and increase understanding of
              how we became human.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
