Title       : Exploitation and Domestication of Animals in Southeastern Turkey: The Faunal
               Remains from Neolithic Cayonu Tepesi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9601408

Award Number: 9601408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80408              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Meadow meadow@harvarda.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hitomi Hongo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Meadow, Hongo and their colleagues
              will analyze faunal remains recovered from the archaeological site of Cayonu
              which is located in southeastern Turkey. Excavations at this early village site
              were conducted between 1964 and 1991 and have uncovered a long sequence of
              occupations spanning the period between ca. 8,000 and 5,000 years ago. They
              also resulted in one of the largest exposures of architectural remains of any
              site from this period in the Middle East (over 7,000 square meters) and thus
              provide a rare opportunity to examine intra-site variability. The site
              particularly important to researchers because it spans the period when animals
              were first domesticated in the Near East and because of the large numbers of
              well preserved faunal remains it contains. It can therefore shed light on the
              transition from hunting and gathering to the use of domestic species. The
              research team will select faunal samples from tightly controlled stratigraphic
              and architectural contexts. Initial focus will be placed on animal exploitation
              and change through time by documenting and comparing taxonomic abundances,
              kill-off patterns and skeletal part distributions. A second stage of the
              research will relate to animal domestication and the investigators will attempt
              to determine whether this fundamental process took place at the site. Cayonu is
              located in a region where the progenitors of several domestic species such as
              pig are located. A third stage in the research will involve intra-site
              variability with the focus on assemblages from areas of the site with different
              architectural configurations. With such data it will be possible to examine
              questions which involve social differentiation and the emergence of social
              hierarchies. Specimens will be identified and characterized using standard
              zooarchaeological techniques including morphological and metrical
              documentation.  The `Neolithic Revolution` is marked by the domestication of
              plants and animals and the origin of pastoral and agricultural ways of life.
              Prior to this, peoples lived solely by hunting and gathering and the Neolithic
              constitutes a fundamental watershed in human cultural development. The more
              dependable and abundant resources provided by domesticates paved the way for a
              settled village way of life, large population aggregations and the eventual
              rise of the state. What makes this transformation so interesting is that it
              occurred independently in many different parts of the Old and New Worlds and
              therefore some underlying causal process and not mere historical accident must
              be involved. Archaeologists wish to understand this transformation and have
              postulated a number of possible causes. To select among them it is necessary to
              have a series of well documented cases and Cayonu because of the abundant and
              well dated remains it contains and because it spans the relevant period of time
              is extremely important from an archaeological perspective. Although portions of
              its fauna have been analyzed, these materials have never been approached in a
              comprehensive and consistent way and therefore Drs. Meadow's and Hongo's
              research is particularly important.  This project will provide data of great
              interest to many archaeologists and will be widely used. It will increase our
              understanding on one of the most fundamental transitions in human prehistory
              and will assist in the training of students.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
