Title       : Functional Morphology of Vomeronasal Chemoreception in Squamate Reptiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9601173

Award Number: 9601173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Schwenk schwenk@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9601173  Schwenk    Squamate  reptiles (lizards and snakes) have figured 
              prominently  in  the  growth of biological thought over the last fifty  years. 
              In  particular,  they have served as model organisms  in  studies  that  have 
              shaped  the  field  of vertebrate  ecology,  strongly  influencing the
              development of modern ecological theory.   It  is  now  universally
              acknowledged that much of the behavioral ecology  of  lizards  and  snakes  is
              directed  by  the  chemical  senses,  especially  the vomeronasal system (VNS).
               Therefore, elucidation  of VNS function is a desirable goal within this
              broader context.    The  VNS  is  mediated  by paired sensory  receptors 
              called  the  vomeronasal (or Jacobson's) organs (VNO) which lie in  the  snout 
              just  above the palate.  In squamates the VNO are separated  from  the  nasal
              cavities but open directly to the oral cavity  through  two  tiny  holes in the
              palate.  They are stimulated by a  unique  behavior  called tongue-flicking
              (TF) during which the tongue  is  protruded  and  oscillated to varying
              degrees.   The  tongue  tip  samples environmental chemicals extra-orally,
              either from the air  or  from the ground, and delivers these chemicals to the
              openings  in the palate where they make their way to the VNO.    The  study
              will elucidate the anatomical and functional bases  of  VNS  function  in  a 
              representative species,  the  Gila  monster  (Heloderma suspectum).  Gila
              monsters are an ideal study  species  for  VNS  function because they retain an
              intermediate morphology  of  the  chemosensory apparatus that can serve  as  a 
              functional  baseline  for  future  comparative studies.   By  embodying  both 
              primitive  and  derived features, their morphology  and  behavior  provides 
              information that can be generalized  up  and  down  the  squamate evolutionary
              tree.    The  study will use dissection, histology and electron microscopy  to 
              examine  the  gross and microscopic anatomy  of  the  tongue-  vomeronasal
              system.  The morphological mode l generated from these  data  will  be 
              combined with functional data derived  from  high  speed cinegraphic (slow
              motion movie) and cineradiographic (x-ray  movie) analyses to create a
              functional-morphological model of (1)  tongue  protrusion  and  oscillation;
              (2) environmental  chemical  sampling;  (3) chemical delivery to the VNO.  This
              model  of  VNS  function  will  be  supplemented with a 
              theoretical/mathematical  model  of  how chemical molecules diffuse into the
              fluid  coating  the  tongue surface so that chemicals can be concentrated on 
              the  tongue during a tongue-flick. By clarifying the mechanism of  the  most  
              fundamental  sensory  system  in  squamate  reptiles,   an  important model
              group, this study should contribute substantively  to  our further
              understanding of how this and other animal groups  diversify through time.
