Title       : Mating and Parasitic Behavior of Brown-Headed Cowbirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9601201

Award Number: 9601201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary V. Ashley ashley@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott K. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                        ABSTRACT    PI: 
              ASHLEY  PROPOSAL NUMBER:  9601201    Mating and Parasitic Behavior of
              Brown-headed Cowbirds    The breeding biology of the brown-headed cowbird,
              Molothrus  ater, will be investigated through a comprehensive field and 
              laboratory study.  Both the mating system and the parasitism  practices of
              individual female cowbirds will be studied by  assigning parentage to 450-500
              cowbird eggs and nestlings  collected at a field site at the Morton Arboretum
              in Lisle  Illinois from mapped nest locations.  This will be done by  DNA
              microsatellite genotyping, which allows parentage to be  determined by
              exclusion.  The genetic data will be used to  determine whether cowbirds at
              this study site mate  monogamously, as has been previously reported, or 
              promiscuously.  Brood parasites such as the brown-headed  cowbird are freed
              from parental care, which makes monogamy  theoretically improbable.  If it is
              determined that cowbirds  are indeed monogamous, prevailing theories of avian
              mating  systems may need to be reevaluated.  The genetic analysis  will also be
              used to test the hypothesis that female  cowbirds restrict egg-laying to
              definable areas that are  largely non-overlapping. Non-overlapping reproductive
              areas  would suggest competition for a limited resource, host  nests.  This
              will be done by mapping the locations of  offspring assigned to an individual
              female and comparing  these to distributions of other femalesU offspring. 
              Previous field work at this study site demonstrates that  cowbirds
              differentially parasitize the nests of certain host  species when multiple
              hosts are available.  Several  ecological factors including habitat, nest type,
              host size,  and host defenses are strongly correlated with observed  rates of
              parasitism.  The proposed study will examine the  extent to which these
              patterns reflect behavioral  adaptations (e.g. host choice) of female cowbirds.
               Two  related field studies will be conducted to determine if  fem ales
              preferentially parasitize the highest quality host  species and/or avoid low
              quality host species such as those  known to eject cowbird eggs from their
              nests (RrejectorsS).  The first field study will determine the relative
              abilities  of different commonly parasitized host species to  successfully
              foster cowbird nestlings. The relative  qualities of different hosts as cowbird
              surrogates will be  compared to observed patterns of parasitism to determine if
               high-quality host species are selectively parasitized.  The  second field
              study will determine parasitism rates of  RrejectorS species.  At our study
              site we have observed  parasitism of three species of hosts known to eject
              cowbird  eggs,  indicating that female cowbirds are not completely  avoiding
              these host species.  By experimentally parasitizing  the nests of these
              species, the rate of egg-ejection will be  determined.  From this measure and
              the observed rate of  parasitism, we can ascertain whether cowbirds prefer 
              acceptor host species over rejectors, or alternatively, fail  to discriminate
              against these  low-quality  hosts.  Demonstrating patterns of host choice is
              important both for  understanding host-parasite coevolution and for developing 
              conservation strategies to protect host species threatened  by cowbirds.
