Title       : Auditory Anchoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9601287

Award Number: 9601287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jamshed J. Bharucha bharucha@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601287  BHARUCHA    In perception, some objects or features seem more stable
              than  others.  For example, edges that are slightly oblique are  perceived as
              aberrations of perfectly horizontal or vertical  edges, as when we attempt to
              straighten a painting that appears  to be hanging askew.  Against a background
              of oblique lines of  the same orientation, however, a horizontal or vertical
              line is  perceived as unstable.  Perceptual stability and instability are  thus
              context dependent.  Stable elements serve as cognitive  reference points, and
              unstable elements are perceived in relation  to (are perceptually anchored to)
              their closest stable elements.   This research will explore mechanisms
              underlying the perceptual  anchoring of auditory events in familiar auditory
              contexts.  In  music that utilizes culturally familiar patterns, for example, 
              some tones are heard as more unstable, unfamiliar or dissonant  than others. 
              Unstable tones seem to demand resolution to (are  anchored by) stable tones
              that are pitch neighbors.  This  research will develop neural net models to
              account for how  learned auditory patterns are heard in terms of stable and 
              unstable elements, and how unstable elements are anchored by  stable neighbors.
               When a tone is heard, a mechanism called  auditory selective attention focuses
              processing in a narrow band  of frequency-tuned neural units around the
              frequency of the tone.  The neural units that are most active within that band
              then  capture auditory selective attention.  Thus when an unstable tone  is
              heard, the stable tones that are closest in frequency capture   auditory
              selective attention, resulting in the anchoring of the  unstable tone.  This
              research will include the detailed  development and computer simulation of the
              neural modeling  outlined here.  It will also include a set of perceptual  
              experiments that test the model that will vary the frequency  distance of
              unstable tones to their stable neighbors.  The work  should lead to a better
              understanding of the perce ption of  unfamiliar events in familiar perceptual
              environments, with  implications for the design of artificial perceptual
              recognition  systems.    ***
