Title       : Pilot Grant for the Development of a High-Field fMRI Facility for
               Interdisciplinary Human Brain Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9601019

Award Number: 9601019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Magin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal J. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie T. Banich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhi-Pei Liang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Within the last 20 years, our ability to link mental functions to  neurological
              substrates has been dramatically improved by a variety of  new technologies.
              Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in  particular provides us, for
              the first time, the capability to link the  functional, anatomical, and
              behavioral aspects of brain function. The  ultimate objective of this proposal
              is to establish a human fMRI  facility in the Beckman Institute that will
              provide the neuroscience  community with a critical research tool to unravel
              the mystery of brain  function.    In this SGER proposal we will take the first
              steps to build this  facility by establishing a research partnership with the
              Carle  Foundation Hospital in Urbana, IL to use its MRI facility as a 
              "test-bed" for fMRI. UIUC cognitive neuroscientists have developed a  set of
              fMRI paradigms, already tested on either neuropsychological  populations and/or
              at other MRI facilities (Univ. of Minnesota, Univ.  of Chicago), that will be
              implemented on the GE Signa 1.5 T clinical  MRI system at the Carle Foundation
              Hospital. The Carle MRI system will  be upgraded with an advanced gradient set
              (Signa Horizon) for high  speed imaging, purchased jointly by Carle and UIUC,
              to permit state-of-  the-art fMRI to be achieved. This SGER proposal is needed
              to obtain  funds to complete the initial cooperative studies that will prepare
              the  way for a future ARI proposal.    We have a very strong group of physical
              scientists in the Magnetic  Resonance Engineering Laboratory, the Biomedical
              Magnetic Resonance  Laboratory and the Image Processing Laboratory who have
              been  instrumental in pioneering new data acquisition methods, digital signal 
              processing routines, and RF coil design and modeling approaches. With  the
              existing interdisciplinary team of neuroscientists and engineers  within the
              Beckman Institute, and the collaboration of Carle  Radiologists and GE Medical
              Systems personnel, we are poised to push  the fMRI technology to the limits of
              its potential a nd make use of this  unprecedented opportunity to advance our
              knowledge of human brain  function.
