Title       : Acquisition of a Real-Time, API-TOFMS Monitor for Use with aMobile Test Gas
               Generation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1996 
File        : a9601951

Award Number: 9601951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry O. Farwell sfarwell@taz.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. MacTaggart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The desire to characterize the trace gas composition and chemical reactivity of
              the troposphere has stimulated the development of various instrumental methods
              for the analysis of atmospheric gases at low part-per-billion and
              part-per-trillion concentrations. In order to assess the quantitative agreement
              between independent analysis methods, the atmospheric chemistry community has
              promoted the use of formal intercomparisons. The principal investigator of this
              award has developed a portable dynamic dilution system for the preparation of
              synthetic gas mixtures containing known pptv amounts of various sulfur gases.
              This system was recently employed successfully in an intercomparison focused on
              sulfur dioxide.  An important step in extending the use of this system to
              non-sulfur compounds is the development of an enhanced measurement capability
              for testing and monitoring the different test gas streams prepared by the
              modified gas delivery system.  This award is to develop such a capability based
              on an atmospheric pressure ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometer
              (API-TOFMS).  The API-TOFMS will provide rapid response time for simultaneous
              real-time monitoring of several analytes and  relative design simplicity and
              robustness for dependable field operation.  The instrument will extend the use
              of the gas dilution system to trace atmospheric compounds such as nitrogen
              gases, halogenated gases, aldehydes and ketones, and biogenic hydrocarbons. It
              will also contribute to the education and training of young scientists related
              to the importance of quality assurance for trace species measurements.
