Title       : Glycoallcaloids of Temperate and Tropical Solanum Species: Patterns of
               Occurrence and Ecologocial Relevance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9601505

Award Number: 9601505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33788              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Cipollini mcipollini@berry.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berry College
	      5006 Berry College
	      Mount Berry, GA  301495006    404/232-5374

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    In this proposal, funds are being requested for the  acquisition, setup,
              and maintenance of a number of pieces of  equipment used for the analysis of
              primary and secondary  chemicals found in plants. Specific items include a
              high-pressure  liquid chromatography HPLC) unit, accessories to a low-pressure 
              liquid column (LC) chromatography apparatus, a centrifuge, a 
              refrigerating/heating water bath, a ductless fume hood, a an  ultrafreezer, an
              analytical balance, a pH meter, a hot plate, a  vortex mixer, a Wiley mill, and
              a set of micropipetters. These  instruments will be used principally in a
              research program  designed to quantify a number of related secondary compounds 
              (glycoalkaloids) in fruits of Solanum species and to isolate  these compounds
              for use in bioassays with birds, mammals,  microbes, and insects. Such studies
              are critical for  understanding the role of secondary compounds of ripe fleshy 
              fruits in mediating interactions among plants and the organisms  that consume
              their fruits. Of particular interest is the apparent  evolutionary paradox of
              "toxic" fruits and the relative effects  of fruit toxins on organisms with
              contrasting effects upon seed  viability and seed dispersal.          This
              research was initiated at the University of Florida  under NSF grant
              DEB-9207920 (Douglas J. Levey, PI) and is being  continued by the co-PI of this
              grant and the project director of  the current proposal, Dr. Martin L.
              Cipollini, with financial  support for materials and supplies from Berry
              College. Dr.  Cipollini began a tenure-track faculty position at Berry College 
              in August 1995. Because of a historical lack of academic research 
              instrumentation at this college and because of the necessity of  leaving
              research equipment at the University of Florida upon his  leaving, it has been
              very difficult for Dr. Cipollini to resume  the laboratory-based components of
              his research. Acquisition of  the above items will allow the resumption of this
              research and  will allow this research to expand i n other directions in the 
              future.          Of particular concern is the desire to involve  undergraduates
              in Dr. Cipollini's research program. Berry College  has a guaranteed student
              work program, which gives faculty  researchers virtually unlimited access to
              qualified undergraduate  research assistants, generally two or three students
              per  semester. With the instrumentation to conduct the research, 
              undergraduates will be able to be fully involved in all aspects  of this
              research program. Students will have the opportunity of  acting as research
              assistants, of being involved in directed  studies (independent research for
              credit), and of conducting  honors-level research. Moreover, use of a number of
              these pieces  of equipment will be shared with at least three other faculty 
              researchers at Berry College, Drs. Chris Mowry, Bill Davin, and  Laura Fielden,
              who share an unimproved lab (Cook 302) with Dr.  Cipollini. Availability of
              these instruments to these researchers  will likewise enhance their research
              programs and their ability  to support undergraduate research and education at
              Berry College.
