Title       : Acquisition of Computer Systems for Creating Analytical Interfaces to Diverse
               Environmental Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9601588

Award Number: 9601588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Krishtalka krishtalka@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian M. Humphries  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                    The University of Kansas (KU) is
              establishing a national                            computational  laboratory
              for the analysis of biodiversity and environmental  information. The Kansas
              Environmental Informatics Lab (KEIL) will  apply high-performance visualization
              and database systems to  computationally-intensive environmental and
              biodiversity research  problems. KEIL unites a cross-disciplinary campus
              consortium of  systematists, ecologists and computer scientists with 
              specializations in visualization, database and high-speed  communications
              organized around a common research focus of  biodiversity and ecological data
              analysis. We are collaborating  with the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC)
              on research  related to real-time access to terabyte sized environmental data 
              archives over gigabit networks. KU is making a fundamental  commitment to KEIL:
              a $300,000 cash match to the proposal  ($150,000 from KU and $150,000 from the
              Kansas Technology  Enterprise Corporation); a new, full-time position for the 
              Director of KEIL (PI); $100,000 for startup costs; the four-year,  $1~0,000
              Self Family Graduate Fellowship in Environmental  Informatics, and space and
              administrative support in the Natural  History Museum for KEIL.    KEIL will be
              the first facility in the United States totally  devoted to research questions
              in biodiversity and environmental  informatics. These research questions are
              grand challenges-- we  will demonstrate the effective use of high-performance
              computing  leveraged against a 300-year investment in biodiversity 
              documentation and burgeoning environmental data resources.  Research themes to
              be investigated by KEIL include:         Integration of heterogeneous
              environmental and biological    museum data sets       Predictive modeling of
              species spatial distribution based on  real-time aggregation of species
              occurrence in combination with  climate and geophysical data, as well as models
              of species  distributions under climate change scena rios       Database
              architectures for access and analysis of very large  environmental data
              archives, in collaboration with SDSC       Visualization methodologies for
              morphometric and  phylogenetic data       On-the-fly visualizations of
              landscape, terrain, species  distribution and climate data, integrating views
              at scales  ranging from specific collection points to global perspectives.     
               On-line access, user interface, and electronic publication  systems for
              disseminating biodiversity information using VRML,  SGML, HGML    These
              research themes will parallel KU training activities in  computer science and
              biological research. Several academic units  and programs at KU are involved in
              ecological biodiversity and  computer science research and will use the
              facility. Students at  Haskell Indian Nations University in Lawrence are being
              trained  in these programs. KEIL instrumentation will also be the platform 
              for: research on national museum community architectures;  training on
              community solutions and applications; and recruitment  of students and
              professionals to build and maintain a national  biodiversity information
              infrastructure.    To support the research mission of KEIL, we are requesting a
               four-processor SGI Onyx server. The Onyx is engineered to  function
              simultaneously as a high performance compute,  visualization and I/O (database)
              server. Three SIG Indigo2  workstations connected by an ATM work group LAN will
              provide  additional seats for faculty, postdoctoral fellows, staff and 
              students for development and visualization work. An ATM network  to SDCS and
              other data centers will complete the architecture.
