Title       : Value Structures in Neuropsychiatric Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9601550

Award Number: 9601550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94998              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Z. Sadler sadler@utsw.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,9123,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Through examining the ways that values are enmeshed in three scientific research
              programs related to psychiatry, this project merges two significant strands of
              recent intellectual history:  contemporary philosophy and sociology of science,
              which tell us that values have an influential role in shaping science; and
              social critiques of psychiatry, which are prompting reevaluation of psychiatric
              understanding and treatment of mentally disordered people.  The project aims to
              analyze and specify the particular manifestations of values within the three
              programs.  It hypothesizes that significant conflicts will be found between
              scientific, professional, and social values.  These conflicts may partly
              determine the results of the research program.  The research areas are
              psychiatric genetics, psychopathological personality theory, and
              psychopharmacology.  The project will assemble the relevant scientific,
              professional and lay literatures for each focus.  The analyses will focus on
              specific research questions and scientific controversies within each of the
              three areas.  The project uses a descriptive-causal model to identify and
              differentiate values in scientific discourse.  Values are defined as
              descriptions or conditions that both guide human action and lead the actor to
              be susceptible to praise or blame.  The model's classification scheme is used
              to identify the various ways that values appear in written discourses and
              address a variety of value-related questions such as:  What roles do values
              play in the comparison of competing theories within a scientific controversy? 
              What ontological assumptions are involved in the various theoretical and
              research focuses, and how does the research privilege these assumptions?  What
              role do practical, professional and social interests play in shaping the
              research program and its findings?  What are the ethical implications of the
              research?  A philosophy of science consultant and scientist-consultants in each
              of the three areas will aid in collection and interpretation of the respective
              literatures, and results of these analyses will be published in professional
              and humanities journals.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
