Title       : Identification of Environmental Pollutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9601523

Award Number: 9601523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Given Harper gharper@titan.iwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Frick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Rettich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Wesleyan Univ
	      
	      Bloomington, IL  61701    309/556-3151

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                         PROJECT SUMMARY                                      
                The requested research instrumentation includes a gas  chromatograph (GC)
              equipped with electron capture and flame  thermionic detectors, and a GC-mass
              spectrometer (GC-MS). These  instruments will be used by chemists and
              biologists for  identification and quantification of organochlorine and organo 
              phosphorus pesticides in Neotropical migrant passerines (i.e.  songbirds that
              breed in North America and winter in Mexico,  Central and South America) with
              reported declining populations.  Few data are available on the extent to which
              Neotropical  migrants are contaminated, and this baseline data is critical to 
              understanding the impact of organochlorine and organophosphorus  chemicals on
              these birds. The objective of this project is to  involve undergraduate
              students in determining more fully the  pattern of pesticide levels in
              Neotropical migrant species with  reported declining populations, and to
              correlate these levels  with age class, gender, food habits, wintering range,
              and winter  habitat preference. Funding of this proposal will allow students 
              to take part in collecting and preparing birds for analysis, and  identifying
              and quantifying pesticide levels in them.  They will  receive course credit in
              Chemistry 499 (Chemistry Research) or  Biology 499 (Biology Research),  be
              co-authors on papers submitted for publication, and present  the results of
              their research at professional meetings. Thus,  this project will provide
              chemistry-related information of vital  importance to conservation  biology,
              while preparing undergraduate students for careers in  research.         The
              GC-MS will also be used in another project involving  undergraduate students to
              study the production and fate of  hydroxyl radicals formed photochemically from
              common pollutants  in the environment. Students will take part in all aspects
              of the  project (e.g. photolyzing solutions of nitrous acid/nitrite ion, 
              extracting aqueous photolyzate, s eparating components on the  GC-MS), earn
              course credit, and present and write papers as  described above.        
              Illinois Wesleyan University opened the doors of its new  130,000 square-foot
              Center for Natural Science Learning and  Research in August l995, which doubled
              the number of teaching  labs and research labs opened new opportunities for new
               pedagogies. The Center is organized around two concepts: 1) a  "community of
              science" and 2) the undergraduate research  experience.         In 1992, eight
              of 10 or 80% of the graduating chemistry  majors were among the 31 Illinois
              Wesleyan seniors going on to  Ph.D. studies. All students had assistantship
              offers, several  from such places as MIT, Yale, Princeton and UC-Berkeley.
              Several  also received prestigious fellowships. One such award went to  Jane
              Johnson, one of 30 chemistry graduate students nationwide  awarded the highly
              competitive NSF graduate fellowship. This is  outstanding evidence of the
              benefit that participation in  undergraduate research has in terms of fostering
              professional  career aspirations. The 30 entering freshmen chemistry majors in 
              Fall 1994 had an average ACT Composite of 29.4. Eight of those  students are
              women with an average ACT of 30 or above.         The Biology Department at
              Illinois Wesleyan University has  attracted a large number of high quality
              students over the past  two decades. Indeed, more students continue to apply to
              the  biology program than to any other on campus--approximately  500-600 per
              year. The average ACT score for these students is 30  and the SAT composite
              1212. Currently there are 210 biology  majors or 13 to 15% of the student body
              and 17% of the liberal  arts college.         In 1995, 73% of the graduating
              class of biology majors  went on to graduate degree programs. Because of this,
              a  substantial number participate in various areas of biological  research in
              their graduate education. The opportunity to initiate  or participate in
              research at the undergraduate level provides a  particula rly valuable learning
              experience. Investigative lab  experiences in courses provide important
              background, but are not  a substitute for the creative processes, conceptual
              innovation,  literature searches, experimental design, successes and failures, 
              formal analyses, and written communication required by an  independent research
              project. The requested instrumentation will  enhance the research training of
              these students while increasing  the productivity of the faculty.
