Title       : School Qualities, Education Policy, and the Distribution of Educational Benefits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9601207

Award Number: 9601207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis N. Epple epple@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Romano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Dennis Epple and   Richard E. Romano  Carnegie Mellon University  SBR-9601207 
                 This research will study public school policy from a theoretical
              perspective.  A computational model paralleling the theoretical model is
              developed and used to explore properties of the model and investigate policy
              predictions.  We compare outcomes in localities that have residency
              requirements (neighborhood schools) with outcomes where there is some degree of
              choice among public schools. Outcomes with costless choice among public schools
              will be contrasted to outcomes with costly exercise of public school choice
              (e.g. commuting costs). In practice, when school systems introducing choice
              programs, they often impose selection criteria for admission to various
              schools; the research will investigate how such "controlled choice" policies
              affect equilibrium outcomes. These neighborhood school and choice alternatives
              will be considered in environments with centralized school finance and with
              decentralized finance.  We analyze settings with only public schools, then when
              there are both public and private school alternatives. The research
              characterizes the factors that determinate expenditures in all schools in all
              variations of the model. Public school expenditures will be determined by
              majority rule, exploiting our earlier work on voting over public provision when
              there are private alternatives.  The model developed in this research has the
              following features. Students are characterized by an ability level and
              household income. A student's educational achievement is increasing in own
              ability, educational expenditure per student, and in the abilities of the
              student's classmates (a peer-group effect). The demand for educational
              achievement is increasing in the student's household income.     The final part
              of the project will enhance the characterization of school quality to include
              faculty-student ratios and a hierarchy of faculty skills. The educational
              achievement function will be broadened to allow average faculty qu ality and
              faculty-student ratios to affect achievement. The utility function of faculty
              will depend on income, student quality, quality of faculty peers, and,
              possibility, the faculty/student ratio. This model will serve to permit
              analysis also of college and university education.     We will investigate how
              alternative policies affect the achievement of students of varying ability and
              income levels, the distribution of students by ability and income across
              schools, the welfare of students, school taxes and expenditures, private school
              financial aid policies, the distribution of faculty by ability across schools,
              and determination of faculty salaries in all schools.
