Title       : Human Capital Investment and Intergenerational Income Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a9601143

Award Number: 9601143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Cooper suzanne_cooper@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cooper  9601143    This project explores the role of redistributive school
              financing in mitigating the persistence of income inequality across
              generations.  Previous empirical and theoretical work has found that both
              family and neighborhood characteristics are important determinants of a child's
              future income.  This work has not addressed the interactions between
              communities in human capital accumulation, however.  The existence of state
              funding of public schools suggests that even in the absence of court mandates
              for redistribution, some transfers of human capital expenditure do take place. 
              This project takes both a theoretical and an empirical approach to the question
              of the extent to which redistribution is used and the effect it has on the
              persistence of income inequality across generations.    The proposed research
              begins with a theoretical model which suggests circumstances under which
              redistribution of human capital investment from wealthy neighborhoods to poor
              neighborhoods can take place voluntarily.  This model not only describes how we
              can observe redistributive human capital investment, but also suggests how we
              could bring about more voluntary redistribution by strengthening the spillovers
              in productivity across workers of different skill levels.  In addition, this
              proposal describes empirical work which assesses the role of human capital
              redistribution in reducing the transmission of poverty across generations.  The
              theoretical model suggests that children who grow up in poor communities and do
              not receive redistributive human capital investment are more likely to be poor
              as adults than are children in comparably poor communities that do receive
              redistribution of human capital expenditure.  Preliminary empirical results
              suggest that there is substantial variation across communities in the
              intergenerational persistence of income inequality.  In particular, the
              persistence of inequality across generations is greater for the poor and the
              wealthy than for those of middle incomes.  This  project extends this analysis
              to study explicitly the role for redistributive human capital expenditures in
              the dynamics of income inequality across generations.  Preliminary results in
              this area suggest a qualitatively important role for redistribution in reducing
              the intergenerational persistence of income inequality.
