Title       : Acquisition of Laser Ablation Deposition System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1998   
File        : a9601791

Award Number: 9601791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeynep Celik-Butler zcb@seas.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601791  Celik-Butler  The acquisition of a Laser Ablation Deposition system
              (LAD) is enabled.  LAD has been demonstrated as a superior deposition technique
              for the fabrication of compound oxide thin films as compared to other available
              techniques such as sputtering and e-beam evaporation.  The LAD will be placed
              in the Solid State Technology Laboratory which has the capability for
              semiconductor device fabrication including Si-MOS, Si micromachining, and
              semiconductor lasers.  The proposed LAD system will become the only LAD system
              in the North Texas region.  The LAD system will be primarily used to deposit
              semiconducting YBaCuO thin films for application as uncooled microbolometers
              and semi-insulating YBaCuO thin films for application as uncooled pyroelectric
              detectors.  This work is supported by the NSF, ARO and Texas Instruments.  The
              cost of the proposed LAD system project is $275,000 of which SMU will provide a
              45% cost share.    YBaCuO is well known for its superconducting properties. 
              However more recently, the nonsuperconducting phases of YBaCuO are
              demonstrating themselves useful in a number of applications including uncooled
              infrared (IR) detection, the second harmonic generation of light, and
              photoconductive switching.  The materials are attractive since they are stable
              in composition and properties and easy to deposit.  One of the phases of YBaCuO
              is YBa2Cu3O6+x.  As x is increased from 0 to 1, YBa2Cu3O6+x evolves from an
              insulator with a well-defined energy gap to a Fermi glass, and then through a
              metal-insulator transition to a metal.  Simultaneously, the crystal lattice
              changes from tetragonal to orthorhombic.  The oxygen content thereby determines
              the electrical and optical properties of a material.  YBa2Cu3O6+x is a
              ferroelectric material with pyroelectric properties.  In the semi-insulating
              phase, it has a low leakage current and is therefore suitable for application
              as an uncooled pyroelectric detector.  In the semi-conducting phase,
              YBa2Cu3O6+x  has a narrow band-gap, inheren tly low 1/f noise and a large
              change in resistivity with temperature (TCR=3.9%) making it suitable as an
              uncooled bolometer.  Our preliminary investigations have shown that
              semiconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x uncooled bolometers offer higher responsivities (Rv
              = 6x104V/W) and detectivities than cooled superconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x
              bolometers.  In addition, their performance is superior to other uncooled IR
              detectors including VO2 bolometers and PbTiO3 pyroelectric detectors.  To date,
              the semiconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x IR sensitive material has been fabricated by
              simple rf sputtering at room temperature onto Si, SiO2 and Si3N4 substrates,
              showing material compatibility with a CMOS process towards the fabrication of
              micromachined, uncooled microbolometer arrays with focal plane signal
              processing resultant in a low cost IR imaging circuit.  We believe that control
              over the stoichiometry of the YBa2Cu3O6+x thin films would be significantly
              improved by the use of LAD for the thin film fabrication.  This would allow for
              greater reproducibility and allow for the stoichiomery to be optimized to
              produce even better performance.  Therefore the acquisition of a LAD system
              would be a tremendous benefit to the project.    Further, an LAD system would
              improve the capability of the laboratory allowing for future research projects
              in the fabrication of compound oxide thin films with linear and nonlinear
              electro-optic properties.  Work in this area would compliment the semiconductor
              laser group and allow for the fabrication of integrated optic devices.  In
              addition, projects would be initiated on the application of ferroelectric
              compound oxides to Si devices such as the gate insulator in DRAMs.    Since,
              the proposed system will be the only LAD system in North Texas, it is
              anticipated other researchers will be attracted to the facility.  Faculty at
              SMU have a very cooperative relationship with faculty at the University of
              Texas at Arlington, the University of Texas at Dallas, and the University of 
              North Texas.  In addition,  a large number of companies are involved in the
              fabrication of Si and GaAs devices in the Dallas-Ft. Worth metroplex which may
              need access to a LAD system to test some concepts.  The probability is high
              that external users will find the facility attractive one established.  ***
