Title       : Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9601711

Award Number: 9601711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily M. Klein ek4@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Corliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601711  Klein       Funds are  requested to establish an inductively  coupled
              plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) facility at Duke  University. The ICP-MS is
              an ideal  instrument for the  analysis of trace elements, particularly
              low-abundance trace  elements, in diverse  geological samples.  The  ICP-MS
              will  be operated as a multi-user  facility and matching funds  have been
              committed from  Duke University and the University  of North Carolina at Chapel
              Hill (UNC-CH).  The Duke  Department of Geology has also committed funds toward
              the  long-term support of a  technician  to maintain the  instrument assist
              users in obtaining analyses.       The ICP-MS is capable of measuring a wide
              range of  elements with high precision at high sample throughput and,  as a
              result, is  being recognized as a major advance in  analytical instrumentation.
                Elements now routinely  measured in rock samples include the rare earth
              elements,  high field  strength elements, heavy alkali elements, U, Th,  and
              Pb.  The facility will expand analytical capabilities in  virtually every areas
              of geochemical and environmental  research in the  Research Triangle  are, and
              will complement  existing analytical facilities at Duke and the University of 
              North Carolina-Chapel Hill (UNC-CH).       The facility will serve a large and 
              diverse group of  faculty and students in the Research Triangle area, 
              including  igneous and metamorphic petrologists, marine  sediment and
              microfossil geochemists, and environmental  (soil and water) geochemists.  The
              faculty have a well-  established record of funding and research productivity,
              and  there is a clear need for an ICP-MS in our  area.  Indeed,  the research
              of many of our potential users already depends  upon the acquisition of  ICP-MS
              data at distant facilities  across the country, and the acquisition of an
              ICP-MS  facility at Duke will allow others to explore new avenues of  research
              beyond the reach of our present analytical  capabilities.  Furthermore, it is
              highly desirable that our   numerous graduate students have easy access to the 
              analytical equipment required for their research so that  they can become
              well-versed in its use.  Lastly, because we  at Duke and UNC-CH are committed
              to educating undergraduates  and encouraging them to choose careers in the
              geosciences,  it is critical that these bright young students have the 
              opportunity to become involved in research using state-of -  art analytical
              equipment.  ***
