Title       : Social Conflict about Risk & Variability in Framing Decision Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9601415

Award Number: 9601415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Vaughan evaughan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510201   Domestic Economic Modeling              
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Disputes about environmental risks often reflect fundamental disagreements about
              the definition and scope of the policy problem. Identifying how individuals
              frame or conceptually define complex issues about environmental risk may be a
              prerequisite for understanding the basis of many societal conflicts, and
              individual differences in responding. The framework imposed upon information
              affects the boundaries of discourse during a dispute, and frames-of reference
              influence what values are salient for a given issue. This set of `operating`
              values focuses individuals on specific aspects of the problem while guiding
              policy choices. How conceptual frames organize information and experiences
              regarding environmental risks, affect judgments and vary with the sociocultural
              context of exposure are the guiding questions of this research.  The project
              consists of two studies examining in detail the process and consequences of
              decision framing. Study #1 explores and measures in several lay populations the
              different conceptual frames that may be evoked to structure environmental risk
              problems, with a systematic look at the content of and variability in decision
              frames across different ethnic and socioeconomic groups. The project then
              considers how alternative framings of environmental risk issues, including an
              equity or justice perspective, may affect the subjective value of decision
              options, and whether effects are stable across different communities. The goal
              of an additional pilot study is to complete preliminary work for the
              construction of a scale measuring decision frames in diverse populations. 
              These studies target a variety of individuals for participation, including
              residents of lower-income urban communities. Objectives are explored through
              multiple methods including experimental, interview and multidimensional scaling
              procedures, and provide information about the validity and reliability of
              certain scientific procedures across diverse samples. From a policy
              perspective, results may have implications for the resolution of conflict about
              technology or environmental hazards, and the process of communicating about
              risk situations across a wide range of communities.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
