Title       : ARI: Acquisition of Equipment for Fabrication of Microelectromechanical Systems
               and Microelectronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9601865

Award Number: 9601865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Polla polla@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric D. Ganz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan C. Mantell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Robbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine F. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9601865  Polla  This Academic Research Infrastructure award provides funding for
              research equipment in the area of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and
              general microelectronics at the University of Minnesota.  The capital equipment
              to be acquired includes a photolithography aligner, a thin film deposition
              system, a reactive-ion etching machine, and computer controls for semiconductor
              furnaces.  The equipment will be acquired to support new research opportunities
              in sensors, actuators, electronics, and optoelectronic devices.  The specific
              aim of this research is to develop smart electronic systems on a silicon chip
              that can sense physical, chemical, and biological variables; process the
              resulting signals in real-time with on-chip electronic circuits; and actively
              do responsive work based on currently sensed conditions.  Applications include
              biomedical analysis and surgery, environmental monitoring, industrial process
              control, and safety monitoring devices such as those used for automotive
              air-bag deployment.  For example in one application, MEMS devices will be
              designed to sense human tissue properties during surgery, interpret these
              inputs, and guide a surgeon to remove only the intended tissue while leaving
              healthy tissue unaffected, thus providing minimal tissue disruption, improved
              safety, and a better outcome for the patient.    The equipment to be acquired
              in this program will help in the education and training of approximately 130
              graduate students in 11 academic disciplines carrying out graduate research in
              MEMS, microelectronics, and integrated circuits at the University of Minnesota
              and other midwest universities.  It will also provide an opportunity for
              approximately 50 undergraduate students to learn about MEMS and
              microelectronics.  These educational aspects are vital to maintaining a
              highly-trained and innovative U.S. high technology workforce.
