Title       : Latent Network Analysis of Central Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9601465

Award Number: 9601465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Schweickert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601465  SCHWEICKERT    Someone performing a task such as searching a screen for
              a symbol  of a certain size and shape must carry out mental processes, such  as
              perceiving, remembering, and deciding.  In some situations the  processes must
              be carried out in a certain order, for example  when the output of one process
              is the input to another.  In other  situations, there may be several ways in
              which the processes  could be ordered, for example, if two responses are to be
              made  and there is a choice about which response to make first.  These  choices
              sometimes lead to scheduling problems.  Major scheduling  conflicts arise from
              competition for space in working memory,  where information relevant to an
              ongoing task is held for a short  time.  All evidence points to the conclusion
              that working memory  space is very limited, so that usually only one process
              can use  it actively at a time.  For example, there is evidence that  mental
              arithmetic cannot be carried out simultaneously with a  search of memory.     
              This research will explore the possibility that certain processes  can use
              working memory simultaneously.  The main processes of  interest are those that
              prepare or set up the working memory  space for processes that are immanent. 
              These preparation  processes operate behind the scenes, so to speak, and may
              not   make intensive demands for space themselves.  Preparatory  processes of
              special interest are those that schedule the  upcoming processes.  One
              hypothesis to be tested is whether  preparation of upcoming processes can be
              carried out  simultaneously with other ongoing processing.    This research
              would not be feasible if it were not possible to  figure out whether covert
              mental processes are executed  concurrently or sequentially, and, if they are
              sequential, what  the order of execution is.  A methodology for doing this,
              Latent  Network Theory, was developed in previous research.  It is based  on
              reaction time and other performance measures.      While this research is
              fundamental in na ture, it will help us  understand the performance of humans
              in the sorts of speeded  tasks that arise in all manner of practical arenas,
              such as the  operation of complex equipment, and the design of those tasks 
              (and the relevant equipment) so that they build on the  capabilities of the
              humans who will have to perform them.    ***
