Title       : Building Multilateralism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9601080

Award Number: 9601080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Downs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601080  Downs    Despite the prominent role that they play in the evolution of
              many multilaterals and their obviously strategic character, membership
              decisions have received little theoretical attention from political scientists.
               Individual political scientists often have informed opinions about the
              historical consequences of a multilateral's decision to incorporate or exclude
              a particular state or the relative merits of a specific expansion decision that
              a multilateral now faces, but only recently have members of the discipline
              attempted to generalize about the factors that determine the outcome of these
              decisions or how they are likely to affect the multilateral's future evolution.
               As a result, international relations theory has not played a prominent role in
              the current and extremely salient debates about the likelihood and consequences
              of expanding membership; in NATO and the EU to include different Eastern Europe
              states or expanding the membership of NAFTA to include various Latin American
              states.    In this project the investigators continue recent efforts to
              formulate a formal theory of multilateralism that is capable of addressing such
              membership issues.  To accomplish this, they develop a set of models that
              endogenize three interrelated decisions that cannot be understood in isolation.
               These involve 1) membership, 2) voting rules, and 3) depth of cooperation. 
              The researchers explore how these decisions are affected by variations in three
              factors that are often salient in descriptions of multilateral development: 1)
              the nature of the good that the multilateral regulates, 2) the preferences of
              states both within and outside the multilateral and uncertainty about those
              preferences, and 3) uncertainty about the capacity of candidate states. 
              Conclusions are evaluated in the context of case studies that examine the
              evolution of five multilateral agreements:  the European Union, the Andean
              Common Market, Montreal Protocol, GATT/WTO, the Med Plan, and the International
              Whaling Commission.   ***
