Title       : Calcium, pH and the Cytoskeleton in Pollen Tube Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9601087

Award Number: 9601087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $632943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Hepler hepler@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601087  Hepler     Pollen tube growth is the process that delivers the male
              gametes to the egg apparatus and thus is essential for sexual reproduction in
              higher plants.  Understanding the mechanisms addresses issues of both economic
              and fundamental importance.  Recent work reveals that growing pollen tubes
              posses a steep, tip-focused gradient of intracellular free calcium (Ca), and a
              pronounced tip-directed influx of extracellular Ca, of which both are essential
              for growth.  In addition the gradient fluctuates in magnitude, being correlated
              with changes in the growth rate.  Ca thus appears to occupy a pivotal position
              in the control of pollen tube growth.  Specifically, Ca may stimulate the
              occurrence and define the location of vesicle exocytosis required for cell wall
              formation and cell elongation.  Ca might also control the formation of the
              cytoskeleton, which is responsible for transporting the vesicles to the apical
              region of the tube.  We know much less about the role of hydrogen ions (H), but
              it is plausible that local gradients in pH exist and that they are essential
              for growth and development.  It is a goal of the proposed work to elucidate the
              organization, activity and interaction of the Ca gradient, the putative H
              gradient, and cytoskeletal elements, and to understand how these factors
              contribute to the polarity and growth of the pollen tube.  Particular emphasis
              will be given to events as they occur in living pollen tubes using
              intracellular microinjection as a means for introducing specific fluorescent
              analogs, probes and indicator dyes.  Intracellular Ca, for example, will be
              analyzed by fluorescence ratiometric ion imaging on pollen tubes loaded with
              the indicator dye, fura-2 dextran, while H can be detected with BCECF-dextran
              or SNAFL-dextran.  Through rapid, sequential image acquisition, Ca or H levels
              will be directly correlated with growth.  Similarly, in cells injected with low
              amounts of fluorescent phalloidin, specific for F-actin, it will be possible to
              observe the relati onship between growth, cytoplasmic streaming and the
              organization of the microfilaments.  The live cell studies will be augmented by
              those using immunofluorescence and immunogold to spatially localize key
              proteins, e.g., myosin, in an attempt to further elucidate function.  The
              proposed studies address basic aspects of pollen tube growth, particularly
              within the context of the live cell.  Whereas we know the existence of certain
              fundamental processes, e.g., tip-focused Ca entry, and structural complexes,
              e.g., the actin microfilaments, we understand much less about how these are
              integrated within the cell, and how they interact to produce the highly
              polarized and rapidly elongating pollen tube.  The proposed work attempts to
              bridge this gap and thus to provide a new level of understanding that can apply
              not only to tip growing cells, but also to plant cells in general.  ***
