Title       : Development of EB/TOF Mass Spectrometer with CID and SID Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9601809

Award Number: 9601809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki H. Wysocki vwysocki@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure (ARI) Program will   assist
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Arizona acquire a   hybrid
              mass spectrometer (MS) with an electric sector (E)-magnetic   sector(B)/curved
              field reflection time-of-flight (TOF) geometry. This   equipment will enhance
              research in a number of areas including the   following: (1) design and
              synthesis of a variety of biologically active   linear and cyclic peptides,
              pseudopeptides, peptidomimetics and complex   peptide libraries (2)
              structure/physical property/reactivity   relationships in hemes and heme
              proteins  (3) studies of the enzyme and   compounds that mimic features of the
              molybdenum and heme centers of the   enzyme (4) synthesis and characterization
              of new organic compounds (5)    synthesis of carbohydrate based natural product
              analogs and the   development of novel carbohydrate based materials (6)  design
              and   synthesis of novel amphiphilic molecules that form organized assemblies  
              upon solvation  (7)  novel organic snthesis methodology to synthesis of   novel
              materials, and (8)  mechanism of lipid transport in insects.  Mass spectrometry
              (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate structural   details and to obtain
              the molecular compositions of a vast array of   organic, bioorganic, and
              organometallic molecules. The addition of the   technique of electrospray
              extends the range of MS to proteins and nucleic   acid molecular weights far
              beyond any other technique. The use of   electrospray ionization in combination
              with high resolution provides the   latest techniques available in mass
              spectrometry.  It affords the chemist   one of the most powerful tools
              available for the characterization of   compounds. The acquisition of this
              capability in mass spectrometry is   essential for the prosecution of frontier
              research in many fields of   chemistry.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
