Title       : Synaptic and Non-Synaptic Interactions Between Mesopontine Cholinergic Neurons
               Controlling REM Sleep
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9601165

Award Number: 9601165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Emmeline Edwards                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Leonard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601165  Leonard    Synaptic and non-synaptic interactions between mesopontine 
              cholinergic  neurons controlling REM sleep.    An important step toward
              understanding how we sleep and  dream has been the  identification of specific
              groups of neurons in the brain  that generate  these states.  An important next
              step will be to determine  how these  neurons interact.  This proposed work is
              focused on how  signals from  neurons that trigger dreaming and waking are
              controlled.  These cells,  which use the chemical acetylcholine to communicate
              with  their distant  target-cells, may also release this chemical locally to 
              regulate their own  activity.  Our experiments will test this possibility by 
              stimulating these  cells and determining if any released acetylcholine can 
              influence the  neurons in the immediate neighborhood of the stimulated  cells. 
              We will  also use a novel method to visualize these neurons with the  electron 
              microscope to look for possible chemical release sites.  This will allow  us to
              determine if these release sites make direct contact  with  neighboring neurons
              that contain acetylcholine or are  positioned at a  distance from these neurons
              and their processes.  The  results will help  determine if acetylcholine acts
              as a local feedback signal  and whether  this signal gets transmitted via
              classical rapid cell-to-  cell contacts or  via a slower and longer pathway
              through the extracellular  space.  Since  these two signaling paths have
              different spatial and  temporal properties,  our results will make testable
              predictions about the role of  acetylcholine  in controlling the timing of
              sleep and wakefulness.  Accordingly, these  findings will advance our
              understanding of the neural  mechanisms of  sleeping and dreaming.
