Title       : Development of Computer Assisted Tree Ring Dating System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9601867

Award Number: 9601867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm K. Hughes MHUGHES@LTRR.ARIZONA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Schowengerdt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Malcolm Hughs and his colleagues
              at the  University of Arizona will develop a computer assisted system for tree
              ring dating. At the present time all dendrochronology laboratories rely solely
              on very time consuming but accurate manual techniques and the proposed system
              which would increase speed but maintain accuracy would have a major impact on
              the numbers of samples which could be analyzed.  Because the characteristics of
              tree rings are affected by temperature and moisture which vary annually, rings
              differ in thickness from year to year and it has been possible to construct
              sequences which are chronologically anchored in the present extend back
              thousands of years in time. On this basis one can take old wood fragments
              (often in the form of charcoal) , match them against a master sequence and
              determine their absolute age. Because of geographic variation in climate,
              individual sequences must be constructed for different parts of the world and
              most laboratories work both to construct and extend master sequences as well as
              to date samples of unknown age.  This project is important for two reasons. The
              first involves its broad scientific impact. A broad range of scientists
              includingarchaeologists, paleobiologists, ecologists, geologists and
              climatologists require accurate dating of past events and dendrochronology
              provides such information.  For example, scientists use such data to study
              rates of ecological succession and the role of climate change in species
              extinction. Through analysis of oxygen isotopes contained in tree rings it is
              possible to reconstruct detailed changes in annual temperature and rainfall
              over several millennia. Because of this, for many years the NSF Climate
              Dynamics Program supported the Arizona Tree Ring Laboratory and the development
              of a master chronology. Secondly this project is extremely important because
              the Arizona prototype, if developed would serve as model for other tree ring
              laboratories both in the US and abroad. Although the challenge is significant,
              the need for a computer assisted system is evident. Dendrochronology was
              founded at the University of Arizona. The laboratory provides training for many
              dendrochronologists and its methodological innovations diffuse rapidly.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
