Title       : Acquisition of Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer and Sample Preparation
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9601871

Award Number: 9601871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold J. Bloom ajbloom@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Y. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Pearcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison M. Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                1. PROJECT SUMMARY    We  propose  to  establish  a  stable  isotope  facility
               at  UC  Davis  containing   two  isotope-ratio  mass  spectrometers,   two  
              elemental  analyzers,  and  associated equipment for sample preparation  and 
              data  analysis.  One  of  the mass spectrometers would be a high  throughput, 
              medium resolution instrument that would be dedicated to the analysis of 
              enriched  samples;  the other would be a lower throughput,  but  higher 
              resolution  instrument,  dedicated to  the  analysis  of  variation  in 
              natural abundance levels. This facility would expedite experiments that 
              require  stable isotopes including (a) field studies of  soil  nutrient  and
              water movement, (b) determination of carbon fixation pathway, plant  water use
              efficiency, and nitrogen utilization, and (c) measurements of  metabolism and
              nutrient uptake. At present, our analyses are  conducted  off-campus  at  many
              different locations. Not only has uniformity  been  difficult to insure, but
              the high expense has limited such analyses  to  research  with  extramural 
              support.  Worse,  long  turnaround  times--  sometimes  extending to nearly a
              year--have seriously  compromised  our  experimental  protocols. The proposed
              stable  isotope  facility  at  UC  Davis should alleviate these problems.     
              Students, faculty, and staff in the plant and environmental  sciences  at  UC
              Davis would have access to the proposed facility. The seven  PIs  are 
              associated  with nine graduate programs. During the  last  decade,  1134 
              students  have  received graduate degrees  from  these  UC  Davis  programs,  
              and  364  graduate  students  are  currently  enrolled.   A  significant 
              percentage  of  these  students  would  benefit  from  the  proposed  facility,
               either  through  course  work  or  through   their  independent  research 
              programs. With a facility  on  campus,  students  could prepare their own
              samples for analysis to reduce costs as well as  to  provide  direct 
              experience  using  these  techniques.  Thus,   more  students  would  be 
              likely to incorporate stable isotopes  into  their  protocols.
