Title       : Mechanisms of Contractile Activation in Trout Myocardium: Role of Key Ions and
               Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9601434

Award Number: 9601434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith K. Gwathmey jgwathmey@gwathmey.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Paige  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronglih Liao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Cardio Dis & Musc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601434  Gwathmey  Teleost (fish) are exposed to extremes in environmental
              temperature and pH.  As the global environment changes with increases in
              temperature and acidification of the waters this species will be negatively
              impacted.  Dr. Gwathmey plans to define the pH and temperature dependence of
              key enzymes involved in myocardial contractile activation and troponin C
              calcium binding affinity.  She will mechanistically define the relationship
              between temperature, ion fluxes and myocardial energetics.  With state of the
              art techniques that are available to her speculation and assumption in the
              literature regarding cardiac physiology in teleosts can now be addressed.  She
              will for the first time ever measure intracellular calcium concentrations as
              well as key in muscles key ions in muscle preparations from the hearts of
              teleosts and directly study contractile activation.  Unique to teleost is the
              fact that unlike mammalian species, the heart tolerates well hypoxic/ischemic
              conditions and changes in intracellular pH.  By studying the myocardium of
              teleost i.e. a salmon she will be able not only to study the adaptive
              mechanisms that enable teleost to survive extremes in environmental conditions,
              but to apply a comparative approach.
