Title       : Establishment of a Nucleic Acid Analysis Shared Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9601805

Award Number: 9601805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor K. Spicer spicerek@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Warr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                     This proposal requests funds to establish
              a Nucleic Acid  Analysis Core Facility at the Medical University of South 
              Carolina (MUSC). The goal of this facility is to provide  non-disease-oriented,
              basic science investigators at MUSC access  to newly developed molecular
              biology instrumentation that will  significantly improve the progress of their
              research objectives.  The focus of this proposed facility is on the analysis of
              DNA and  RNA macromolecules. Much of the basic biological research carried  out
              today at MUSC, as in other universities, involves analysis of  genes, their
              mRNA transcripts, sequences controlling expression  of the genes, or
              translation of mRNA into protein products. In  all of these areas of
              investigation, the characterization of  nucleic acids is central. Thus, the
              proposed facility will have  broad application to fundamental molecular biology
              projects being  pursued by investigators in most research departments at MUSC. 
                      The main objective of this facility is to provide  user-friendly access
              to three major instruments that will provide  automated DNA sequencing,
              automated DNA and RNA fragment sizing  and quantitation, and sophisticated
              imaging detection, for  analysis of electrophoretic gels and blots. The major
              proposed  instruments include an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer, an ABI Prism  310
              Genetic Analyzer and a Molecular Dynamics STORM Imager. The  ABI 377 DNA
              sequencer will primarily be used to carry out DNA  sequence analysis on samples
              prepared by individual  investigators. Sequencing reactions will be performed
              by thermal  cycling, using a Perkin-Elmer 9600 thermal cycler. The Prism 310 
              Genetic analyzer will be used to determine the size and quantity  of DNA
              restriction fragments and PCR products, which are produced  in gene mapping and
              cloning experiments. The Prism 310 will also  be used for DNA sequencing on
              occasions when no fragment analyses  are required. The Storm Imager will have a
              variety of  applications, inc luding quantitative analysis of Southern, 
              Northern and Western blots, analysis of gel mobility shift  assays,
              quantitation of CAT assays, and colony and plaque  screening. By housing these
              instruments in a shared instrument  facility and supporting their use with a
              trained technician and  an experienced director, we will be able to optimize
              the use and  productivity of these instruments and accordingly increase their 
              impact on basic research and research training at MUSC.          The proposed
              facility will also be an important educational  and research laboratory for a
              variety of training programs at the  Medical University of South Carolina.
              Within the laboratories of  the major and frequent user groups, there are 26
              postdoctoral  fellows, 42 graduate students and an increasing number of 
              undergraduate science majors who will make use of the facility in  pursuing
              their science degrees and advanced research training.  The facility will also
              be used as a resource for students and  high school teachers participating in
              programs at MUSC aimed at  advancing science education at the K-12 levels in
              the State of  South Carolina.
