Title       : Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Analyses of Aquatic,
               Geologic, and Atmospheric Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9601501

Award Number: 9601501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215240             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kirk Cochran kcochran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Mak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel T. Lerdau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of the acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer
              (IRMS) and sample preparation equipment for stable isotopic analyses of
              atmospheric, marine, geologic, and groundwater samples. The IRMS permits
              extremely precise measurements of stable isotope abundances (such as those of
              carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, etc.) with respect to a chosen reference
              standard. Analysis of stable isotope ratios in various natural substances has
              numerous geophysical and ecological applications. The applicability of IRMS
              technology therefore crosses the boundaries among many of the major
              disciplines, including the geosciences, chemistry, biology, and physics.    
              The principal uses of the SUNY Stony Brook IRMS facility will be to further
              strengthen Stony Brook's expertise in atmospheric chemistry, specifically with
              regard to oceanic, terrestrial, and atmospheric interactions, and to complement
              the institution's existing expertise in the marine and earth sciences. Isotope
              ratio mass spectrometry is an extremely valuable way to quantify the relative
              source strengths of trace gas species in the atmosphere and to use this
              information to evaluate the extent of anthropogenic influences on those
              species. There are also numerous applications where stable isotopes may be used
              as tracers of biological, chemical, or physical mechanisms, and the mass
              spectrometer facility will also permit the analyses of marine and groundwater
              samples (organic carbon, water, carbonates). Many Stony Brook faculty from
              several departments and institutes have interests in the stable isotopic
              composition of a variety of substances, including dissolved organic compounds,
              marine carbonates, carbonate rocks, and organic carbon in marine sediments.
              This IRMS facility will represent a major improvement to the general scientific
              research capability of SUY Stony Brook.
