Title       : Archaeology & Paleoenvironments of the Kapthurin Formation, Baringo District,
               Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9601419

Award Number: 9601419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally McBrearty mcbrearty@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Sally  McBrearty will
              continue archaeological research in the Baringo Basin region of Kenya. In
              particular she will focus on the Kapthurin Formation in the Tugen Hills.
              Previous archaeological research in the area has yielded a stratified sequence
              of archaeological sites as well as a small amount of hominid (human) skeletal
              material.  Research will include analysis of existing museum collections, new
              archaeological site excavations and investigation of ancient landsurfaces.
              Geochemical analysis and argon dating of tuff units will refine the Kapthurin
              chronology. Dr. McBrearty will use stone artifacts and archaeological fauna in
              an attempt to reconstruct human behavior. A number of techniques will be
              employed to understand the fluxuating environment to which these hominids
              adapted.  While a number of lines of evidence   archaeological, 
              paleontological and genetic   suggest that anatomically modern  humans first
              appeared in sub Saharan Africa just when and where this occurred is unknown.
              What interests paleoanthropologists most however is the process which lead to
              this emergence and here also little evidence is available. Dr. McBrearty's
              research will address this issue. Information to date suggests that the
              transition took place during the Middle Pleistocene and the Kapthurin Formation
              encompasses this time period. Prior work indicates that it contains
              archaeological materials and fauna as well as human remains. Dr. McBrearty's
              work will increase this data base and bring a wide range of modern scientific
              techniques to bear in order to make interpretations.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of Africa's
              past. It will provide data of interest to a large number of
              paleoanthropologists and shed new light on the emergence of modern humans.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
