Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Plant Developmental Genetics", August
               10-15, 1996, Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9601010

Award Number: 9601010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Poethig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601010  Poethig    This conference is the fifth in a series of very successful
              FASEB conferences on Plant Molecular Biology. The focus of these conferences
              has changed from year to year as this rapidly moving field has progressed. The
              fifth conference is entitled "Plant Developmental Genetics" and will be held
              from August 10-15, 1996 at Vermont Academy in Saxton's River, VT. Much of the
              recent progress in plant development has occurred as a result of the use of
              classical genetic approaches to identify genes involved in various
              developmental processes, followed by a molecular analysis of these genes. This
              meeting will summarize recent advances in this exciting area of plant biology.
              The sessions will carry us through the plant life cycle starting with
              gametogenesis and ending with reproduction. Woven through the sessions will be
              a consideration of the cellular, molecular and environmental factors that
              regulate plant morphogenesis. Although much of the recent work in this area has
              been carried out on Arabidopsis and maize, other systems -- including ferns,
              petunia, snapdragon, tomato, pea and the algae, Fucus and Acetabularia -- have 
              also made significant contributions. Each of these systems has unique
              advantages for studying particular aspects of the plant life cycle. The invited
              speakers include both young and established investigators. Additional speakers
              will be drawn from attendees on the basis of submitted abstracts. Ample use
              will also be made of poster presentations. By bringing together investigators
              studying these different systems, the organizers hope to facilitate the
              exchange of ideas and information between scientists who otherwise might not
              interact.  ***
