Title       : Polypeptide Signaling in Plants: Structure, Function, Evolution and Mechanism of
               Action of Systemin and Its Precursor, Prosystemin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9601099

Award Number: 9601099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $943000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence A. Ryan cabudryan@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601099  Ryan  The objective of this research is to understand the fundamental
              processes involved in the synthesis and storage of the 200 amino acid
              prohormone protein, prosystemin, and the mechanisms of processing, release and
              mode of reception of the 18 amino acid polypeptide hormone, systemin, that is
              derived from prosystemin in response to wounding by herbivore attacks.  The
              specific cell types in which prosystemin is synthesized will be identified and
              the sites of its inter- or intracellular storage will be established.  The
              mechanism by which wounding causes processing and release of systemin from
              prosystemin will be studied, and research to identify the specific novel
              processing enzymes will be carried out.  The processing enzymes will be
              purified and characterized.  The mode of transport of systemin in tomato plants
              will be investigated and the mechanism(s) of its reception in target cells will
              be studied at the biochemical and subcellular levels.  The full spectrum of
              proteins that are activated by systemin will be identified, purified and
              cloned.  Prosystemin protein, produced in an E. coli expression system, will be
              produced in mg quantities to determine its three dimensional structure, and to
              relate the stuctural features to its storage and processing.  The occurrence of
              prosystemin homologs throughout the plant kingdom will be systematically sought
              using prosystemin antibodies, cDNA hybridization analyses, and PCR analyses. 
              The role of prosystemin and systemin in systemically activating defense genes
              in plant species other than tomato will be studied.  The possiblity that
              polypeptide hormones other than systemin may be derived from the prosystemin
              protein will be examined. Systemin is the only peptide hormone identified in
              plants to date.  It has a role in plant defense against insects and other
              insults.  This research will contribute to our fundamental understanding of how
              plants cope with stresses that they encounter during their life cycle.
