Title       : Acquisition of Advanced Equipment for Rapid Thermal and High Density Plasma
               Processing for Integrated Circuits and Flat Panel Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9601835

Award Number: 9601835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miltiadis K. Hatalis mkh1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Hess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin H. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. M. Hwang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9601835  Hatalis      The rapid thermal annealing (RTA) system will enable the
              formation of ultrathin gate insulators for CMOS transistors, multi-dielectric
              nonvolatile semiconductor memory devices and promote the development of a new
              technology for novel silicon carbide MOS devices especially the so-called MCT
              or MOS Controlled Thyristors.  New silicide contact metallurgy, and rapid
              crystallization of amorphous silicon films will be explored for both silicon
              ICs and TFT based flat panel displays.  Furthermore the new RTA system will
              provide us with critical control of the device dimensions during the implant
              activation anneals which is essential for the realization of our new
              nanoelectronic devices.    The ICP high density plasma reactor will be used in
              the development of new materials and new deposition processes for both IC and
              flat panel display applications.  Such materials and processes will include: 
              low dielectric constant fluorocarbon films as intermetal dielectric material,
              high quality amorphous silicon and silicon dioxide films deposited at high
              rates for IC and flat panel display applications, and novel plasma
              hydrogenation, oxidation and nitridation processes for single crystal silicon,
              polysilicon and compound semiconductor devices.    A rapid thermal processing
              system and an inductively-coupled high density plasma (ICP) deposition system
              will be purchased in order to enable advanced research and training at Lehigh
              University on the following microelectronics areas:  a)silicon integrated
              circuits ,b) compound semiconductor microwave devices, and c) thin film
              transistor flat panel displays.  The equipment will enhance the education of
              students by exposing them to the fundamental s and applications of new singly
              wafer processing approaches.
