Title       : Evolution, Learning, and Economic Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9601743

Award Number: 9601743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236384             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Peyton Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The basic phenomenon studied is social learning, and the ways in which social
              learning generates social institutions and norms endogeneously.  Social
              learning occurs when individuals in a large population interact randomly, and
              then adjust their behavior based on information about their past experiences
              and what others in the population are doing.  The focus is on the dynamics of
              such a process, and on the aggregate patterns of behavior that emerge over
              time.  The project is particularly interested in situations where these
              aggregate patterns correspond to recognizable economic and social patterns of
              behavior, such as forms of economic contracts, rules governing government
              market transactions, and norms of behavior in social interactions.  The first
              and primary objective is to compare the predictions of evolutionary game theory
              with the development of specific kinds of economic contracts.  The study
              focuses on incentive contracts between principals and agents, particularly real
              estate commissions, contingency fees in the law, and crop sharing contracts in
              agriculture, for which both time-series and cross-section data exist.  The
              starting point of this research is previous work of the principal investigator
              on evolutionary properties of distributive bargaining games.  This framework is
              extended by explicitly modeling agents' opportunity costs, by incorporating
              uncertainty into the output function, by allowing the agents to bargain over
              multiple dimensions of the contract, and by giving a more detailed treatment of
              the process by which they gather information.  The general goal is to show how
              patterns of inertia, change, and regional variations in these kinds of
              contracts can be illuminated by evolutionary arguments, and to show how these
              patterns differ from those predicted by neoclassical equilibrium models.  The
              second part examines the robustness of evolutionary selection results under
              different specifications of the agents' learning rules, and in particular their
              degree of rationality.  The third part examines the idea that the structure of
              social and economic interactions in general -- the rules of the game -- can
              also be explained, at least in part by evolutionary arguments.  It is
              conjectured that efficient institutions are more stable (in an evolutionary
              sense) than inefficient ones; moreover their payoffs exhibit a central tendency
              effect -- they tend to lie toward the middle of the feasible payoff set as
              opposed to the extremes.  This result has implications not only for the form of
              economic institutions (e.g., forms of contracts), but more generally for the
              welfare properties of different forms of social organization, and connects with
              prominent ideas of distributive justice in the philosophy and game theory
              literatures.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
