Title       : Molecular Signaling by Insulin Receptor Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9601427

Award Number: 9601427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonia M. Najjar SNAJJAR@OPUS.MCO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3035 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436145804    419/383-4252

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-01427  Najjar     Insulin regulates glucose and lipids homeostasis, gene
              expression, and protein synthesis through concerted actions on numerous
              enzymatic activities. Insulin binding to its cognate receptor activates
              receptor-associated tyrosine kinase which in turn, phosphorylates the receptor
              itself and a number of intracellular protein substrates. In recent years,
              considerable progress has been made in elucidating the molecular mechanism of
              insulin action.   Pp120, an integral membrane glycoprotein, is a substrate of
              the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in the liver. Among the substrates of the
              insulin receptor kinase, pp120 is unique because it is not phosphorylated by
              the highly homologous insulin like growth factor-1 receptor kinase. This is a
              novel finding. For years, scientists have searched for differences between the
              insulin and IGF-1 receptors that would explain their different actions. Insulin
              receptor primarily regulates metabolic pathways; The IGF-1 receptor induces
              proliferation.   This project aims to identify specific amino acid residues in
              the carboxyl domain of the insulin receptor that regulate pp120
              phosphorylation. Single amino acid substitution will be introduced to specific
              residues of the carboxyl terminus of the insulin receptor and the effects of
              the mutant forms on pp120 phosphorylation in transfected hepatocytes will be
              analyzed. Mutants of the insulin receptor will be transfected into a newly
              developed hepatocyte cell line genetically deficient of insulin receptor. Using
              this assay system, the role of pp120 phosphorylation by the insulin receptor in
              insulin endocytosis will be determined. These studies will expand our
              understanding of the molecular mechanism of the complex signal transduction
              pathways that are mediated by the insulin receptor.  %%%   Insulin regulates
              glucose and lipids homeostasis, gene expression, and protein synthesis through
              concerted actions on numerous enzymatic activities. Insulin binding to its
              cognate receptor activates receptor-associat ed tyrosine kinase which in turn,
              phosphorylates the receptor itself and a number of intracellular protein
              substrates. In recent years, considerable progress has been made in elucidating
              the molecular mechanism of insulin action. Scientists have searched, however,
              for differences between the insulin and IGF-1 receptors that would explain
              their different actions. Insulin receptor primarily regulates metabolic
              pathways; The IGF-1 receptor induces proliferation.   Pp120 is a substrate of
              the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in the liver and is not phosphorylated by
              the IGF-1 receptor kinase. This project aims to identify specific amino acid
              residues in the carboxyl domain of the insulin receptor that regulate pp120
              phosphorylation. These studies will expand our understanding of the molecular
              mechanism of the complex signal transduction pathways that are mediated by the
              insulin receptor.  ***
