Title       : ARI: Acquisition of Scanning Acoustic Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9601582

Award Number: 9601582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuris A. Dzenis ydzenis@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              N. J. Ianno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Beatty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney O. Dillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9601582  Dzenis  This is an Academic Research Infrastructure Award that provides
              funds to purchase a Universal Scanning Acoustic Microscope (SAM). The SAM
              combines microimaging, microtesting, and microscopic non-destructive evaluation
              devices in a single instrument. It will be dedicated to support research and
              education in science and engineering at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.   
              Acquisition of SAM will be beneficial for a large number of current and planned
              research projects spanning a wide range of topics including, for example,
              fundamental studies and development of new polymers, metals, composites, and
              coatings; studies of peculiarities of chemical reactions, glass transitions,
              and crystallization in polymers; studies on emerging manufacturing technologies
              of electrical discharge machining and electrospinning; studies of evolution of
              microdamage in advanced heterogeneous materials and composites; studies of
              microdebonding at interfaces; studies on surface morphology and subsurface
              residual stresses; studies leading to development of smart nondestructive
              evaluation system, and others.  The multidisciplinary nature of the instrument
              is evidenced by the involvement of eleven faculty members from seven
              Departments in the Colleges of Engineering and Technology, Arts and Sciences,
              and Dentistry.  In addition to the broad research applications, the acquired
              system   also will be used as a laboratory device in several senior
              undergraduate and graduate courses. These include courses on experimental
              mechanics of solids, crystallog raphy, experimental composites, damage
              mechanics, thin films, surface finishing, machining, and others.  The user
              friendly computerized control and data acquisition software of the new system
              will allow students to concentrate on the peculiarities of mechanical behavior
              and microstructure of materials.  Acquisition of this sophisticated equipment
              will improve national research and education infrastructure.  At the present
              time, only a few of the top universities thro ughout the world have this new
              technology available in their labs. Thus the acquisition of SAM will place the
              University of Nebraska-Lincoln in a leading position with regard to the
              research areas where the unique features of this technique can be utilized. 
              These features include a wide range of resolutions and depths of penetration,
              three-dimensional microimaging, microscale non-destructive evaluation, and a
              combined information on geometric morphology and distribution of mechanical
              properties of materials. New experimental capabilities will assist in
              attracting quality researchers and students to UNL and will improve the quality
              of their experimental research training.  The acquisition of SAM is also in the
              interests of local industries involved with advanced and novel materials, such
              as Brunswick Composites, Telex, Addax, Spirotech, Cushman, and others.  SAM
              service is currently unavailable in Nebraska.  ***
