Title       : Genetic Analysis of Yeast Casein Kinase 1 Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9601294

Award Number: 9601294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy C. Robinson LROBIN@LSUMC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71105    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601294  Robinson    Protein kinases of the casein kinase 1 (CK1) family are
              found in all eukaryotes.  These kinases phosphorylate serine or threonine
              residues in an local acidic context, which can be comprised of an upstream
              phosphorylated amino acid.  There are at least four distinct CK1 isoforms in
              mammalian cells, several of which are encoded by multiple genes.  These
              isoforms have distinct cellular locations and functions.  For example, one
              human form that localizes to the mitotic spindle appears to be required for
              mitosis.  Another form, in liver cells, may participate in the response to
              epinephrine.  The study of these proteins as distinct gene products is very
              recent, and little is yet known about the functions of most forms of CK1.  The
              budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is amenable to genetic
              manipulation, contains three CK1 isoforms.  One isoform affects DNA
              recombination and repair.  The second has as yet undefined functions, which
              appear to be distinct from those of the other two.  The third, a plasma
              membrane-associated CK1 isoform encoded by the functionally redundant YCK1  /
              YCK2 gene pair, is the first CK1 demonstrated to be essential for cell growth
              and division and is the focus of this study.  The goal is to identify the
              cellular pathways that require Yck activity and to identify the biological
              targets of these kinases.  Recent results suggest that multiple cellular
              processes require the activity of the Yck proteins.  Two processes will be
              studied in detail, morphogenesis and endocytosis.  The analysis of mutants and
              the characterization of the pleiotropic phenotype of the conditional yck mutant
              will allow insight into these and other processes that require Yck activity. 
              The proposed research combines classical and molecular genetic techniques with
              biochemical and cell biological methods of analysis to achieve three specific
              goals.  The first is to assess the requirement and temporal specificity for
              localization of the Yck proteins to the site of the emerging bud,  and to
              determine the relationship of Yck-mediated phosphorylation to the activities of
               other proteins at this site.  This will be accomplished by
              immunohistochemistry and by assay of differential in vivo phosphate labeling of
              potential targets in a conditional YCK mutant.  The second is to clarify the
              relationship of Yck activity with endocytic processes.  This will be
              accomplished by genetic and biochemical assays of various endocytic processes
              in a conditional mutant.  Four gene products with sequence similarity to the
              four subunits of clathrin adaptor complexes were identified by mutations that
              eliminate the requirement for Yck function.  These will be assessed for their
              ability to interact in a complex and for association with specific vesicle
              populations.  Also, tests for a role in endocytosis will be performed with loss
              of function mutants.   The third aim is to identify other gene products that
              either act in these pathways or that are affected by Yck phosphorylation.  A
              genetic screen for mutants requiring full levels of Yck activity will be
              carried out using yck mutants.  This approach will allow independent
              confirmation of Yck activity in endocytosis and morphogenesis, and may allow
              identification of downstream functions as well as potential targets for these
              protein kinases in other pathways. The Yck kinases are functionally similar to
              a mammalian CK1 isoform; therefore the results of these studies could provide
              clues for CK1 functions in higher cells  ***
