Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-Processor Computer for Computational Physics and
               Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9601845

Award Number: 9601845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrej Sali sali@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Marko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Kuriyan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Cowburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Burley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary      This  proposal  seeks funding for a new multi-processor 
              computer  for   structural  biology  and  computational  physics   at   The 
              Rockefeller  University. Structural biologists need  increasingly  faster
              computers with memories in excess of 256 MB because of the  size  of  data sets
              from X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy,  and  electron microscopy that
              need to be processed and fitted  by  complicated  models. In addition, the main
              subject of  structural  biology,   understanding  the  relation  between 
              structure   and  function,  frequently depends on large computer simulations 
              such  as  molecular dynamics and protein structure modeling.  Likewise, 
              calculations in computational physics also require more computing  power  and 
              memory than currently available in order to  simulate  larger  systems  at  a
              higher resolution and  to  explore  larger  parameter spaces. The projects of
              the eleven major users  include  crystallographic,  NMR,  and  electron 
              microscopic  studies   of  structure, dynamics and function of proteins. The
              proteins  under  study   are   involved   in   signal  transduction,  
              chromosomal  replication,  transcription, and transmission of signals  through 
              cell  membranes.  Additional work by  the  major  users  includes  protein
              identification and characterization by mass spectrometry,  simulations  of 
              protein,  DNA,  and  chromosome  structure   and  dynamics,  and  modeling  of
              neuron function  and  visual  cortex  architecture.   The   researchers  are 
              currently   using   small  workstations,  many of which are more than three 
              years  old  and  have  less  than  64  MB of memory. Speed  and  memory  of 
              these  workstations  are  increasingly  restricting.  The  existing  and 
              future  needs can best be met by a multi-processor computer  such  as  the
              Silicon Graphics Power Challenge XL system with 12 R10000  processors and 1.25
              GB of memory, which we propose to purchase. A  multi-processor server computer
              is more suited to a  small  group   of   independent  users  than  is  a  large
               number   of   client  workstations  because of the speed deriving from fast 
              processors  and  from coarse parallelization, because memory and software can 
              be  shared  among several users, and because of  the  savings  in  support  
              and   maintenance.  The  use  of  a   locally   located  multi-processor
              computer is also more appropriate than the use of  national  supercomputer
              centers because of the  faster  and  more  flexible  networking, sustained
              availability of computing  power,  smaller  backlog, and access to local
              consultants. In  comparison  with  the current equipment, the new server
              computer will provide  a   four-fold  increase  in  computation  speed  and 
              will  allow  effective  execution of very large jobs by avoiding  swapping  to 
              hard  disks.  The  server  will  also  free  the  current  client  workstations
                for  their  original  purpose,   interactive   and  graphical  work,  both of
              which are impeded  by  the  large  jobs  running  in  the  background. As a
              result, current  computational  bottlenecks   in   protein   structure  
              refinement   in    X-ray  crystallography, NMR, and electron microscopy will be
              eliminated.  The  server  will  thus help in the structural  determination  of 
              eukaryotic RNA polymerase system, DNA polymerase complex, E. coli  RNA 
              polymerase, voltage-gated potassium channel, Abl SH(32) dual  domain,  and 
              other proteins. It will also allow many simulations  that  are  currently out
              of reach. For example, NMR and molecular  dynamics will be used to determine
              motions of protein domains and  large  loops  on  the  nanosecond time scale; 
              proteins  will  be  identified  rapidly by mass spectrometry and database 
              searching,  which  will  be useful in the analysis of sequences  produced  by 
              genome  projects; protein structure modeling by homology will  be  improved  by
               simultaneous optimization  of  the  model  and  the  alignment,  which will
              allow a significantly larger  fraction  of  protein  sequences  determined by
              genome projects  to  be  modeled  with  useful accuracy; molecular orbital
              calculations of  retinal  and  its environment will elucidate the opsin shift
              mechanism  in  visual  pigments;  the experimental data on the  condensation 
              of  eukaryotic  chromosomes will be analyzed  statistically  and  the  models 
              for  this  process will be proposed; and  more  realistic  neural   models 
              will  be  solved  that  may  result  in   better  understanding of the function
              of the brain. The server will  also  provide  graduate  students  and 
              postdoctoral  fellows  at   The  Rockefeller University an opportunity to
              program and exploit  the  latest  generation  of mini supercomputers.  This 
              will  be  made  easier   and  encouraged  by  the  existing  infrastructure  
              for  networking  and consulting. In addition, the new server  computer  will 
              facilitate planned recruitment of new faculty in the  areas  of  structural
              biology and computational physics. And finally, it  will  stimulate  the 
              growing interest  of  all  the  faculty  in  structure-function studies in
              biology and in the problems at  the  interface between physics and biology.
