Title       : Consortium: Research Computing Facility for the CMU/Pitt Center for the Neural
               Basis of Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9601491

Award Number: 9601491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214035             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. McClelland mcclelland+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Carnegie Mellon University and the
              University of Pittsburgh joint Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition will
              acquire instrumentation to improve the computational facilities used by a group
              of 15 laboratories. The Center is creating a computing facility based on a
              scaleable parallel processing system for very large-scale computational
              projects and has recently acquired the core of the system through a grant from
              IBM. With NSF funds the Center will purchase a fast, symmetric multi-processing
              compute server to provide impulse computing power for exploratory modeling and
              interactive data analysis; and desktop display stations to facilitate accessing
              resources. The server will consist of four state-of-the-art HP PA-8000
              processors, 512 Mb of memory and nearly 100 Gb of disk and would provide a wide
              range of pre-compiled software tools for simulation modeling at the cognitive
              and biological levels as well as for analysis of data from functional imaging
              and multi-electrode recording studies.  The Carnegie-Pittsburgh center is
              dedicated to understanding how cognitive processes arise from underlying neural
              mechanisms, how anomalous forms of cognition arise from biological disturbances
              and how experience and brain development interact to give rise to the emergence
              of cognitive functions. The Center brings together the methods of behavioral
              analysis, neurophysiology, functional imaging and computational modeling, in an
              effort to understand how functions such as perception, attention, memory and
              language emerge from the interactions among neurons in the brain. Fifteen
              laboratories have a range of foci which include memory and learning, language,
              attention and control of processing, and perception and spatial cognition. In
              addition, several labs address general principles of neural function relevant
              to many aspects of cognition and several have contributed to the development of
              tools for computational modeling and functional imaging research.  The
              instrumentation will also be made available to graduate students and to
              researchers in related areas who lack adequate computing facilities. Thus is
              will serve an educational function and assist a broad research community.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
