Title       : Oxygen Isotope Compositions of Fossil Biogenic Phosphates: Climate
               Reconstruction in East Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9601532

Award Number: 9601532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. Schoeninger   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Valley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Kohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Margaret Schoeninger and her
              colleagues will initiate a long term project to reconstruct East African
              Plio-pleistocene climatic variation based on the analysis of phosphate oxygen
              incorporated into tooth enamel. This first stage of the research will be
              directed to the study of enamel to determine the extent of post depositional
              alteration or diagenesis. The group will develop tests which determine whether
              or not diagenesis has occurred so that samples can be selected accordingly. To
              accomplish this goal they will collect both enamel and associated geological
              samples and determine the degree to which host rocks are lithified. This will
              be compared to the degree of enamel chemical alteration. Infrared spectra will
              be obtained since preliminary information indicates that recrystallized
              apatites are identifiably different from unaltered phosphates. Fluorine
              content, which increases with diagenetic alteration, will also be measured and
              several other indicators of change examined as well. With such data it should
              be possible to determine if unaltered samples exist and determine criteria to
              select them.  If the project is successful it will provide a methodological
              tool of value to many geochemists, biochemists and related scientists. It will
              also set the stage for the next step of this research. Depending on diet and
              thermoregulation the oxygen isotope ratios in different species of animal
              reflect different climatic variables and through analysis of samples from
              carefully controlled stratigraphic contexts it is possible to monitor changes
              in temperature humidity and rainfall over time. The researchers hope to
              establish a climatic record for the Northern Turkana area of Kenya over the
              period from ca. 5 million years ago to recent times. Against these data it will
              then be possible to examine the evolution of  mammalian species including
              hominids. This region is particularly important because of the rich fossil
              materials it contains. Many scientists have speculated on the relationship
              between species change and climate and this research will provide important
              data to address the issue.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
