Title       : Acquisition of an Integrated Computational and Psychophysical Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9601828

Award Number: 9601828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomaso Poggio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The recently established MIT Center for Biological and Computational Learning
              (CBCL) unites seven faculty in the study of computational neuroscience with
              specialization in the areas of visual perception, motor control, language and
              the theory of learning. Recently space has been made available and renovated to
              bring the group together in a single physical location and this NSF award
              provides an infrastructure for research and training activities with the
              purchase of a modern networked computer laboratory, including workstations,
              servers and a network hub. Items to be purchased include 3 Bay Networks Network
              Huns, three Sun UltraServers, an SGI Indigo High-Impact Workstation and an
              Electrohome Marquee 8500 projector. Central to the facility  is a 'virtual
              reality` system in which complex multi-modal stimuli (visual, auditory and
              haptic), can be synthesized and presented to subjects. A system for recording
              the positions of subjects' limbs and eyes will be developed, with tight
              coupling to the stimulus display system. The Electrohome Marquee projector is a
              high-brightness projector which displays stimuli in a large field of view. The
              visual stimuli will be generated on the high-performance Silicon Graphics
              Indigo which, when equipped with a High Impact video board, can generate real
              time texture-mapped images.  The problem of understanding intelligence in terms
              of its algorithmic realization in the mind and brain is one of the greatest
              challenges of modern science. It has many facets; one which has become a
              unifying goal throughout the computational and brain sciences is the problem of
              understanding how an animal or a machine can learn. CBCL has provided
              leadership in research on learning mechanisms by developing a theoretical
              understanding of learning and by applying this understanding to a wide variety
              of problems in the domains of visual perception, motor control and language.
              The instrumentation provided through this grant will significantly further that
              goal.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
