Title       : Learning in an Invertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9601991

Award Number: 9601991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. E. Bitterman jeffb@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Couvillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                              ABSTRACT    PI:  Bitterman  PROPOSAL NUMBER: 
              9601991      Learning in an Invertebrate  Although invertebrates comprise more
              than 95% of all animal species, there has been almost no systematic study of
              their intelligence.  Few invertebrate species actually are suitable for the
              purpose, which requires that they be inexpensive and abundant, live well in or
              near the laboratory, and have manageable sensory, motor, and motivational
              properties.  The investigators have been studying honeybees, highly evolved
              invertebrates which do meet those requirements and which are also of great
              economic importance (in honey production and the fertilization of crops).  For
              the most part, they use individual foragers that come of their own accord to
              the laboratory, where they work for a highly concentrated sugar solution to
              take back to their hives- a solution that is preferred to the nectar provided
              by flowers in neighboring fields.  The experiments carried out thus far point
              to close similarities in the learning of honeybees and vertebrates, which are
              surprising in view of the vast differences in brain structure and the
              remoteness of the evolutionary relationship.  (The two lines of animals have
              evolved independently over a half-a-billion years from a simple common ancestor
              that seems to have had hardly any brain at all).  If the similarities are to be
              understood in terms of random genetic variation in structure and natural
              selection based on similar environmental demands, those demands must be general
              indeed, since the environments vary widely in detail. It is possible, however,
              that evolution is a more organized process than is traditionally assumed and
              the avenues of change are more limited.  As the tasks set for the animals
              become increasingly complex, the investigators can expect to find differences
              in performance that reflect the absence in A honeybees of certain advanced
              vertebrate capabilities-differences that should further their understanding
              both of the common and of the a dvanced capabilities.  The present phase of the
              research deals with questions about the nature of reward; competition among
              concurrent sensory inputs; the relation between short-term and long-term
              memory; and the inhibitory control of behavior.
