Title       : Acquisition of Wide Bore Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imager
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a9601691

Award Number: 9601691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435002             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Glazier james.a.glazier.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1038,9157,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9601691  Glazier    The University of Notre Dame will purchase a Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging (MRI) to pursue research in the department of Biological
              Sciences, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Chemical Engineering, Electrical
              Engineering and Physics.  Research problems include the study of the evolution
              of foams, their structures and the time dependence of their rheology;  the flow
              of liquids including foams in porous media; the imaging of flow in concentrated
              suspensions and their properties; the architecture of neural network as a
              source of information for the mathematical modeling of these networks;
              hibernating myocardium and fumarate reductase as a study of anaerobiosis and
              metabolic alteration; the design of selective MRI contrast agents and studies
              of tissue freezing and cryoprotectant distribution as a metabolic response. 
              The results obtained from these studies will support the research of the OLISAO
              program in the Department of Electrical Engineering which develops theory and
              numerical simulations to fit and process image signals.  These studies vary
              from theoretical to applied and form engineering design to neurobiology.  The
              support from LISA will aid in developing improved imaging technology and
              increase speed and accuracy in processing of data into images.  The proposed
              studies either require static imaging of prepared samples or study of the
              changes of images in time.    These projects can all be adequately performed
              with a vertical, high resolution NMR imagine spectrometer operating at 300 MHz
              (7 Tesla magnetic field) with the necessary accessories to acquire and process
              data.  The in-vivo probe (64mm working diameter) will monitor 1H at gradient
              strengths of 20 G/cm (at 40 A), suitable for high resolution 3-d imaging
              experiments on frog and for large scale hydrodynamics experiments.  The
              microimaging probe will be available with 0.4 cm to 2.5 cm coils for various
              nuclei, with microprobes for microimaging at a resolution below 100 um for use
              in high resolution materials science and bioc hemistry experiments.  Some of
              the hardware and software will require custom design for individual
              experiments.  Three NMR specialists will be present in the NMR facility, one
              devoted solely to MRI and one with extensive MRI experience, to provide support
              for experiment development and execution.    The current proposal includes 10
              faculty, 5 postdoctoral, 12 graduate students and 5 undergraduate researchers. 
              MRI will also be used in undergraduate courses with an enrollment of about 65
              and graduate courses with an annual enrollment of about 25.  ***
