Title       : Acquisition of a Structural NMR Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9601607

Award Number: 9601607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vern L. Schramm   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Girvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Shared  training  and  research facilities  at  the  Albert  Einstein 
              College  of Medicine have been developed  substantially  during the past
              decade. The focus of these facilities has been in  structural and mechanistic
              biology. These new facilities  include  a)  an  x-ray  crystallography suite
              with  facilities  for  three  faculty  members  and  trainees, b) a mass
              spectrometry  facility  with  three  instruments, faculty and staff, c)  a 
              facility  for  micro-scale   peptide   synthesis,  isolation,   sequencing  
              and  analysis,  d)  a laser spectroscopy laboratory for  time-resolved 
              molecular  spectroscopy which supports a broad group  of  faculty  and 
              trainees, e) a synchrotron beam-line at Brookhaven  National  Laboratories 
              which  currently  supports  research  and  training  activities of faculty
              members in several departments.  These  new  facilities  have added to the
              strengths of existing  programs  in  pulsed  EPR  spectroscopy (Dr. Jack
              Peisach), and biological  NMR  (Dr.  Raj  Gupta).  Together, these facilities 
              make  the  Albert  Einstein  College of Medicine one of the premier  training 
              sites  for structural biology in the greater New York area. Each year, a 
              larger  fraction of the approximately 300 Ph.D. and  postdoctoral  trainees are
              involved in structural biology training as  part  of  their research programs. 
                      A  weakness in our training and research programs has  been  the 
              deficiency in multipleresonance high-field NMR equipment  of  the  type 
              required  for structural determination  of  biological  molecules  by current
              technologies. This deficiency was mentioned  in the written critiques for each
              of the past two site-visits for  training  grants  in  structural biology and
              biophysics  at  this  school.          This  proposal describes a plan to
              remedy this weakness  by  the  construction  of  a structural NMR resource 
              containing  two  spectrometers and associated workstations for molecular
              modeling:         600 MHz 1H13C15N triple resonance 2.5 and  5 mm probes, 4   
              channel system, 3-axis gradients       300 MHz 1H13C31P19F 5 mm probe and 10 mm
              broadband    multinuclear probe, 2 channels       four 175 MHz UNIX graphics
              workstations located in the  facility for offline data analysis    The facility
              will be newly constructed for the purpose of housing  this equipment and will
              be located on the ground floor of the  Ullman Research Building, excavated into
              foundation bedrock. A  highly qualified faculty member, Dr. Mark Girvin, has
              been  recruited to oversee the facility. A full-time staff person will  also be
              provided. The structural NMR resource will operate as a  shared research and
              training facility available to all faculty  and their trainees.    Examples of
              research problems under investigation by faculty and  their trainees include:  
                    structure of the transmembrane subunit c of F1Fo ATP    synthase from E.
              coli       melting rates of stem-loop RNA secondary structure and the   
              influence of RNA binding proteins       structure/function relationships for
              cell-surface N-linked  complex carbohydrates       structure of domains which
              constitute protein-localization  binding sites       structure of chromogranin
              A1-40, a disulfide secretory  protein and the effect of AA-replacements      
              structure of the linker region of the membrane protein  P-glycoprotein      
              determination of catalytic site flap movements by NMR of  15N-labeled tyrosine
              phosphatase       analysis of the binding of carbohydrates to lectins by NOE 
              and paramagnetic effects          In addition to fostering these research
              programs, the  structural NMR resource will be used as the site for a hands-on 
              advanced level graduate school course in the theory and practice  of solving
              structural problems by NMR. The course is to be taught  every two years so all
              Ph.D. students will have the opportunity  to learn NMR methods of structural
              analysis. The location of the  graphics workstations in the structural NMR
              resource will  facilitate use of the laboratory for graduate an d postgraduate 
              training.
