Title       : Monitoring Rapid Social Change in Southeastern Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9601370

Award Number: 9601370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186716             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Collier gcollier@Stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane F. Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project involves the ethnographic research of cultural anthropologists
              based at Stanford University.  The project is to monitor and compare the
              economic, political and demographic transformations occurring in two highland
              Chiapas, Mexico indigenous communities whose changes have been charted in
              separate projects for almost 30 years.  This area has seen an armed rebellion
              by Zapatista rebels in 1994, and is the focus of high interest by the national
              Mexican government as well as foreign observers.  The communities to be studied
              exemplify broader dynamics affecting indigenous society throughout this region
              and in other similar regions in Latin America.  One community  in Zinacantan
              has been the local indigenous elite for over 500 years, and has differentiated
              around capitalized farming and small business enterprises; the other in Chamula
              has been land-poor for many years and has relied traditionally on agrarian wage
              work.  In both communities economic changes have recently factionalized local
              politics, in one case identifying with national political parties, in the other
              with national (and international) religious proselytizing sects.  Both
              communities are experiencing new flows along what were traditionally fixed
              ethnic boundaries.     Using methods of ethnographic participant-observation
              coupled with household-level censuses of local communities that have been
              recorded since the early 1960s in one case and the early 1970s in another case,
              the investigators will update demographic, political, social, economic  and
              cultural information on families and individuals.  These censuses will be
              coordinated, computerized, and placed into relational databases, which will be
              linked with a local research institution ECOSUR, compiling health-related
              socio-economic data for use by regional planners.  The strength of this data
              set will be the relatively long time span, the rich ethnographically-described
              cultural context, and the clear focus on individuals and households instead of
              on communities.   This project is important because the data to be gathered
              will be used by analysts to explain differential activities in job creation,
              social and political organization, and religious conversions in this region
              which is undergoing dynamic rapid and explosive change.  It will be an
              immensely valuable resource for social scientists trying to explain the course
              of events as well as planners trying to modify these trends.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
