Title       : Upgrade of the Facilities in the Archaeozoology Laboratory at the University of
               Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1996     
File        : a9601062

Award Number: 9601062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24147              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. O'Shea Oshea@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Redding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Museum of Anthropology at the University of Michigan maintains a comparative
              collection of faunal material. The 340 skeletons were collected under
              controlled conditions and represent a wide range of species from North America
              and the Middle East. They are widely used by archaeologists who wish to study
              and identify excavated remains. The archaeozoology laboratory in which these
              materials are housed is extensively used by faculty, graduate students and
              visiting scientists.  The laboratory and its comparative collection have been
              used as a resource for the identification and analysis of faunas from a large
              number of sites. However the laboratory's present arrangement and limited
              crowded storage facilities have inhibited efficient work and the growth of the
              comparative collection. The crowded and make-shift storage has resulted in
              damage to and increased wear and tear on the comparative collection and other
              archaeological specimens. The Museum has developed a renovation plan and will
              contribute significantly to upgrade the facility and establish adequate working
              spaces. This NSF award will permit the purchase of high grade storage cases to
              house the comparative collection. This will permit easy researcher access, help
              to minimize damage to the materials themselves and provide space to permit the
              collection to grow.  Bone preserves well in many environmental contexts and is
              often recovered in large amounts in the course of archaeological excavation.
              Identification and analysis of such remains can further a number of scientific
              goals. Such research sheds light on the subsistence and social practices of
              prehistoric peoples. It also permits reconstruction of past environments and
              allows scientists to study human-environmental interactions. This award will
              permit such research to proceed more effectively.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
