Title       : Instrumentation to Enable and Enhance Three-Dimensional Nanofabrication
               Capabilities in the National NanofabricationUsers Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9601886

Award Number: 9601886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Davis rjdavis@emprl.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn L. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel C. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Fonash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601886  Davis  Nanofabrication, or the fabrication of solid structures on the
              nanometer size scale, has evolved into a field which is the foundation of a
              significant fraction of the world economy, namely, the semiconductor integrated
              circuit industry.  The ability and potential of this field to fabricate small
              structures for use in  other fields such as optics, physics, materials science,
              chemistry, biology, medicine, and mechanics is also being quickly realized by
              both researchers and industry.  Yet, with the exception of some materials
              growth techniques, the field of nanofabrication has been somewhat confined to
              the two lateral dimensions which are defined by the plane of a smooth solid
              surface.  This is partly due to depth-of-field issues which are important and
              common to optical and electron beam lithography, the difficulty of plasma
              etching a wide variety of materials to form high aspect ratio structures, and
              the difficulty of characterizing fine structures in three dimensions, to name a
              few.    The National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN), an NSF-sponsored
              network of five university nanofabrication laboratories, has been tasked with
              providing user-facility service to the US nanofabrication community (including
              industry, academia, and government laboratories), and to provide technical
              leadership to that same community toward the solutions of problems.  The NNUN
              consists of sites at five universities, with two sites (Cornell and Stanford)
              serving as primaries with the remaining three (Howard, Penn State, and
              University of California at Santa Barbara) serving as subcontractors. 
              Together, these five University laboratories unite expertise in silicon
              processing (Stanford), nanometer lithography (Cornell), wide-bandgap materials
              (Howard), novel materials (Penn State), and III-V processing (UCSB), all within
              the common theme of nanofabrication.  To date, the Network is serving a user
              base which is rapidly approaching 1000 users, service which is implemented and
              enhanced by project referral s, sharing of laboratory and teaching techniques
              and information, and complementary capabilities.    This award will find
              acquisition of a:    A Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP) System:  This
              system, to be located at the Cornell site, will permit the chemical mechanical
              etchback of structures for planarization and bring CMP capabilities to the
              NNUN;    Reactive Ion Etching Additions:  Due to the importance of anisotropic
              etching to the nanofabrication of 3D structures, Penn State will add an RIE for
              materials such as transparent oxides, piezoelectrics, and plastics.
