Title       : Luminescence Dating of Middle Stone Age Sites in South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9601302

Award Number: 9601302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184301             (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Feathers jimf@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for Dr. James Feathers to purchase equipment for the
              thermolumenescence laboratory at the University of Washington and to analyze a
              series of samples of archaeological significance. In early 1996 Dr. Feathers
              conducted geological fieldwork in South Africa and collected sediment samples
              from a series of sites which contain Howieson's Poort and Middle Stone Age
              industries. Because these materials lie beyond the range of radiocarbon dating
              and rest in sediments not amenable to other potassium-argon dating, their age
              is very poorly known. Dr. Feathers will utilize thermolumenescence dating to
              address this problem.  Anthropologists want to know when, and in what
              conditions, anatomically and behaviorally modern humans first appeared and
              recent fossil and genetic evidence points to sub-Saharan Africa. However
              relevant hominid remains are extremely scarce and the question remains
              unsettled. Dr. Feathers and other archaeologists have noted an extremely
              unusual stone industry which appears for a relatively brief interval of time
              and which may be coincident with the first evidence of anatomically modern
              humans in the paleontological record. Known as the Howieson's Poort it contains
              types of tools which did not occur outside of South Africa and which reappear
              only much later in the archaeological record. In this latter period they are
              clearly associated with anatomically modern humans. The Howieson's Poort and
              the Middle Stone Age industry which both proceeds and follows it are very
              poorly dated. Dr. Feather's work should change this situation.  The
              thermolumenescence (TL) technique is of great potential significance to
              archaeologists because it can date types of materials and time periods which
              lie beyond the scope of radiocarbon. However the approach is not developed
              enough to apply on a mechanistic basis and no laboratory in the United States
              has a focus on TL dating of archaeological significant materials. Dr. Feathers
              research is important not only for the archaeological question it addresses but
              also for its methodological and infrastructural contributions.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
