Title       : Unusual Narial Structures in Dinosaurs and other VertebratesA Case Study in the
               Functional Interpretation of Anatomical Novelty in the Fossil Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9601174

Award Number: 9601174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Witmer witmer@exchange.oucom.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9601174  Witmer    Several  groups  of dinosaurs exhibit unusual morphology  in 
              the  narial  (nostril)  regions of their skulls.  The  most  divergent  narial 
                anatomy   is   found   in   the   duck-bill   dinosaurs  (Hadrosaurinae),  
              horned  dinosaurs  (Ceratopsidae),   and   the  brontosaurs  (Sauropoda).  The
              function of these enlarged  narial  regions    remains   enigmatic,  
              preventing   a    comprehensive  understanding of skull evolution in
              Dinosauria.  Ideas range from  inflatable sacs and trunks to brain-cooling
              devices.   Thus,  the  investigators  will test functional hypotheses on  these
               unusual  narial  specializations.   Furthermore,  the  investigators  will 
              probe  the  vexing  issue of anatomical  novelty  in  the  fossil  record.  
              The  noses of the modern relatives of dinosaurs  (birds  and  crocodilians)
              will be studied to provide baseline anatomical  data.   Additionally,  a 
              number of  modern  groups  with  narial  novelties similar to those proposed
              for dinosaurs will  serve  as  analogues or "models" for the dinosaurs.  The
              fossil taxa will be  studied in museums worldwide, and important specimens will
              be  CT  scanned  for  the first time.  This research will  provide  clear 
              advances   for   the  anatomical,  functional,   and   behavioral 
              interpretation of dinosaurs.  Furthermore, new, general  data  on  the 
              functional anatomy of vertebrate noses will be  of  use  for  researchers
              working on modern animals, including humans. Finally,  the perspectives and
              methods used in this research will make it a  model  study  for the functional
              interpretation of the  enigmatic  novelties of other extinct organisms.
