Title       : Selected Problem Periods in the Prehistory of the Eastern Mediterranean: A
               Dendrochronological Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9601028

Award Number: 9601028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter I. Kuniholm peter@dendro.mail.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Kuniholm and his
              collaborators will continue to construct a master dendrochronology for the
              Eastern Mediterranean and to provide precise dates for sites of archaeological
              interest. `Dendrochronology`, or tree ring dating, is the most accurate dating
              technique available to scientists. Because the thickness of wood rings which
              trees add annually is affected by temperature and rainfall, these vary from
              year to year and it is possible to start with living trees, plot a thickness
              curve back from a known starting date and then extend the series further
              backwards in time with the addition of samples from geological and
              archaeological contexts. One can take wood of unknown age from archaeological
              sites and match it against the master curve to determine the absolute age of
              the rings. Dr. Kuniholm and his colleagues have single-handedly worked for many
              years to construct such a master chronology for Greece, Turkey and other
              countries in the Eastern Mediterranean. This has resulted in a chronology which
              covers some 6,500 of the last 9,200 years. The longest part of the chronology
              is 1,633 years long and absolutely dated from A.D. 3652-1994. The remaining
              portions have had their age anchored by radiocarbon dating, but they still
              `float` because gaps remain between them and the major part of the chronology
              which is anchored in the present.  Dr. Kuniholm and colleagues will now work at
              carefully determined archaeological sites to collect wood samples which will
              attach the floaters to the master sequence. Over the course of three field
              seasons he will focus on 53 prehistoric sites where evidence suggests an
              unusually large number of well-preserved samples exist. These include the
              Neolithic, Chalcolithic and Bronze age periods.  The team will visit sites to
              collect suitable samples, meet with archaeologists who curate such materials
              and analyze wood thus collected at Cornell University's tree ring laboratory.
              The project is extremely important because the resulting sequence will permit
              the absolute dating of large numbers of archaeological occurrences. Because the
              laboratory involves many undergraduate students it will continue to play an
              important role is science education.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
