Title       : Acquisition of Cryosectioning System for High Resolution 3D Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9601656

Award Number: 9601656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102452             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Nissanov nissanoj@dunx1.ocs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Accurate 3D reconstruction of biological tissue is technologically 
              challenging. The proposed project will fund acquisition of an  instrument to
              accommodate high-resolution reconstruction of large  tissue samples and would
              support histology of very hard bone samples.  The system is based on a Leica
              Cryopolycut, a large horizontal  cryostat. Modification of the basic system
              will permit imaging the  tissue block face at unprecedented resolution. Using
              already available  techniques, these block face images would guide accurate
              registration  of consecutive tissue sections.     The proposed instrument will
              be housed in the Computer Vision Center  for Vertebrate Brain Mapping (CVCVBM),
              a NIH Biomedical Technology  Resource. Three neuroimaging projects of the
              Center would directly  benefit from this grant. A fourth project to be
              supported by the  proposed instrument is in the field of mechanical and
              material  engineering.     The central objective of the CVCVBM is to develop
              the technology to  support multimodal fusion of brain histological data. The
              specific  focus is on the rat and mouse nervous system. The approach being 
              developed involves computer algorithms to map experimental data into 
              high-resolution, 20 m/voxel, 3D atlases. The proposed instrument would  support
              both construction of the rat and mouse atlas and critical tests  of the mapping
              algorithms.     The fourth project discussed in this proposal examines bone 
              remodeling activity in the vicinity of a new class of swelling type  composite
              materials for orthopaedic implant application. Here, the  critical feature
              offered by the Cryopolycut is its ability to section  through untreated bone.  
                The impact of the proposed infrastructure enhancement extends beyond  these
              projects. The CVCVBM research program is an instrumentation  development
              research program. Tools built at the Center are widely  distributed to other
              laboratories. Success in construction of the  multimodal fusion engine would
              likely enhance neurobiological research  at l arge. Furthermore, the facilities
              at the center are open to the  research community and the proposed
              instrumentation would compliment  currently available shared equipment to
              support construction of other  high resolution 3D digital atlases.
