Title       : Cognitive Consequences of Emotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9601298

Award Number: 9601298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald L. Clore  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technical Summary. This research examines the consequences of positive and
              negative affective states on judgment and information processing.  Positive and
              negative moods frequently influence the process of evaluative judgment. In
              addition, experiencing positive affect also appears to lead individuals to
              assimilate incoming information to their existing conception of a situation
              (top down processing), whereas negative affect leads them to accommodate their
              conception to the incoming information (bottom-up processing). These effects
              will be examined by manipulating positive and negative moods (e.g., by
              describing emotional events or watching emotional films) and then observing
              judgment (e.g., risk estimates, liking judgments) and performance in diverse
              cognitive tasks (e.g., gambling, impression formation, recognition memory).
              Experiments will be guided by a framework integrating the explanatory
              hypotheses of multiple theorists.  The research has four specific goals: (1) to
              resolve issues about how objective and subjective information combine in
              judgment, (2) to determine under what conditions different theories make
              accurate predictions about the cognitive consequences of mood, (3) to examine
              individual differences in attention to emotion to test predictions about the
              mediating role of subjective experience in these phenomena, and (4) to
              determine the extent to which positive affect results in active rather than
              passive assimilation of information.  %%%  Project Justification. This research
              examines the influence of emotional feelings on both the content and process of
              thought. Prior research shows that a person's mood can readily affect one's
              evaluations and judgments. More recent research also suggests that mood affects
              how people think. Positive feelings stimulate people to rely on their own
              knowledge, beliefs, and intuitions, whereas mildly negative feelings lead
              people to attend outwardly to the situation, to be analytical, and to engage in
              new learning. These phenomena will be examined by inducing positive and
              negative moods (by asking participants to describe emotional events they have
              experienced or to watch emotional films). Of interest is the influence of the
              emotions on judgment (e.g., risk estimates, liking judgments) and on
              performance on various tasks (e.g., gambling, forming impressions of others,
              memory for previously seen material). Different explanations for the findings
              will be tested, focusing on four specific goals: (1) to learn how people
              combine information from emotions with information from the real world, (2) to
              determine when the different theories make accurate predictions about emotional
              influences, (3) to examine differences among people in how much they pay
              attention to their emotions and how that plays a role in these phenomena, and
              (4) to determine the extent to which people are active rather than passive
              thinkers when experiencing positive emotion.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
