Title       : Research Data Management and Connectivity for Neotropical Field Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9601194

Award Number: 9601194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Stone  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5926,9139,9184,9198,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Tropical Field Stations (TFS) generate information vital to the  advance of
              ecological, evolutionary, biosystematic knowledge, as  well as providing core
              data relevant to sociological, biological  and economic processes directly
              related to the conservation and  management of tropical ecosystems. TFS are
              characterized by being  sites at remote locations in less developed countries,
              often used  on a temporary basis by researchers from different home 
              institutions, and whose interactions are restricted by  disciplinary, cultural,
              national and language barriers.  Nonetheless, they hold an important key to
              unveiling the effects  of climate change and the principles of ecosystem
              management in  the tropics.    In spite of the importance of preserving and
              making accessible  the information generated at TFS, there is no consensus on
              the  guidelines that should regulate data documentation, generation of 
              metadata sets or overall data management at these sites.  Furthermore, TFS are
              not yet connected among themselves with a  suitable communications network.
              This lack of a framework  restricts comparative analysis and jeopardizes the
              long-term  utility of the data sets. Some characteristics of TFS --such as 
              remote locations in less developed countries and their  multidisciplinary,
              multilingual, and transcultural set of users--  are, in part, responsible for
              their underdeveloped stage  regarding data management and connectivity.    In
              cooperation with other leading tropical stations, the  Organization for
              Tropical Studies (OTS) proposes the development  of a planning process
              (consisting of two phases: needs-analysis  and prototype development) that will
              seek a consensus on the  guidelines that will effectively regulate data
              management and  accessibility at neotropical field stations.    Expected
              products are: (i) a document specifying the needs and  characteristics of data
              management and connectivity in TFS; (ii)  a consensus on basic guidelines and
              recommendations for data  management and connectivity  issues; (iii) a tested
              prototype for  later implementation involving a large array of field stations; 
              (iv) a report on the procedures applied and the problems and  solutions
              generated; and (v) a proposal for wider implementation  of interconnected data
              management systems at neotropical field  stations.                             
                                                                            iv
