Title       : Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscope for Biological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9601524

Award Number: 9601524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161767             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Hikida hikida@ouvaxa.cats.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Eastman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellengene H. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Patrick Hassett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This proposal requests funds to provide a modern  transmission electron
              microscope facility for the Biological  Sciences Department of Ohio University.
              This facility also serves  as the Transmission Electron Microscopy Resource for
              the  University. The requested microscope will supplement the current  1
              6-year-old, student-grade electron microscope currently being  used for both
              teaching and research in this department of 65  faculty and 80 graduate
              students. The upgraded facility will  continue to provide training for graduate
              students and  undergraduates with special aptitude for biology and research. It
               will also be used for ultrastructural research. All of these  activities have
              been carried out for the past 25 years; they have  been supported by two
              transmission electron microscopes in the  past, but the older one was
              decommissioned last year, and the  remaining microscope is old and was never
              meant for analytical  research use.       Research that will be done with this
              facility include  several studies on muscle, such as _ examining the changes in
              the  nucleocytoplasmic relationship of skeletal muscle with aging or '  with
              changes in activity, detecting how skeletal muscle damage  occurs in the muscle
              fiber, or exploring the effects of dietary  trace elements on cardiac
              ultrastructure. Besides these muscle  studies, neurobiological research will
              include structural and  computational studies of mechanoreceptors in the inner
              ear, and  the structural mechanisms underlying the vestibular control of  head
              movements. Another project will use a combination of time  lapse and electron
              microscopy to study how the retina trophically  affects development of the
              optic tectum of the brain. The  mechanism by which mosquitoes become infected
              and transmit  arboviruses will also be investigated. Ultrastructural studies 
              will also be done on morphological adaptations evolved in  Antarctic fishes to
              reduce their buoyant density, and how feeding  upon toxic microorganisms has
              affected the digestive s tructure  and function of marine copepods.       Most
              of the projects listed above are currently supported by  NSF funding and use a
              combination of methods; all of them include  electron microscopy. The presence
              of a modern transmission  electron microscope is vital to these projects.
              Acquisition of a  new electron microscope will further enhance research in the 
              department because of the opportunity to attract more graduate  students and
              technicians to learn electron microscopy. It will  also allow graduate students
              to use a greater diversity of  research tools. The general effect of having a
              modern electron  microscope will be to enhance the training capabilities, the 
              research productivity and the level of grant support to this  department.
