Title       : Japan STA Program: Titaniumdioxide Films as an Efficient Photocatalyst for the
               Degradation of Organic Pollutants in Waste Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1996   
File        : a9601557

Award Number: 9601557
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Pranitha Gaddam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AL Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, AL  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0511303   Toxicology                              
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9601557  Gaddam    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Ms. Pranitha  Gaddam at the National
              Institute of Materials and Chemical  Research (NIMC), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
              Ms. Gaddam will  work with Dr. Keiichi Tanaka, Director of the Process 
              Synthesis Laboratory, on a research project entitled,  "Titaniumdioxide Films
              as an Efficient Photocatalyst for the  Degradation of Organic Pollutants in
              Waste Water".    The proposed research will examine how catalytically-active 
              high-surface area titaniumdioxide films act as an efficient  photocatalyst for
              the degradation of organic pollutants.  Although titaniumdioxide powders are
              used widely for this  purpose, there has been complications using catalyst
              powders  in slurry photoreactors as a result of filtration problems.  One of
              the main objectives of this research will be to  improve the surface area
              distribution of the catalyst so as  to improve its relative effect in the
              degradation process.  The primary goal of the research is to develop a viable 
              catalyst that would effectively and immediately mineralize  environmentally
              harmful pollutants, volatile  hydrochlorocarbons in particular, to harmless
              chemicals.  ***
