Title       : ARI: Acquisition of Multidisciplinary Instrumentation for Intelligent Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9601968

Award Number: 9601968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vittal S. Rao raov@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Levent Acar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariesa L. Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Sourlas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin Y. Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K Krishnamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. N. Balakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Robert Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601968  Rao         Funds for acquisition of research instrumentation are 
              provided for the development of multidisciplinary research  facilities in
              intelligent control systems.  The University of  Missouri-Rolla (UMR) has
              identified intelligent control as part  of its emphasis areas in manufacturing
              and civil infrastructure  for research and training.  A multidisciplinary
              research team at  UMR is actively pursuing research in this area and has been
              quite  successful in obtaining the support of federal agencies.  This 
              instrumentation will significantly expand the research and  training
              capabilities in the area of intelligent control systems. The instrumentation
              package consists of (i) real-time control  systems and hardware-in-the-loop
              simulation systems, (ii)  connected network of adaptive processor systems
              (CNAPS) for  hardware implementation of neural networks, (iii) real-time 
              neural network and fuzzy logic control development system, (iv)  multi-channel
              dynamic signal analyzer, (v) vision and image  processing system for
              vision-based intelligent control, and (vi)  a cluster of advanced workstations.
               This instrumentation package  supports the multidisciplinary research and
              training efforts in  real-time implementation of intelligent control area.  The
              senior  undergraduate and graduate students and faculty members from the 
              departments of electrical engineering, civil engineering,  chemical
              engineering, and mechanical and aerospace engineering  will benefit from the
              proposed equipment.  This equipment will  interface with existing laboratories
              and enhances the research  infrastructure of UMR.       The primary research
              areas/research training to be supported  by the proposed instrumentation are:
              (i) basic research in  intelligent control; (ii) intelligent control of smart 
              structures; (iii) structural control; (iv) intelligent control in 
              manufacturing; (v) intelligent control applications in aerospace  vehicles;
              (vi) intelligent control of power systems and drives;  (vii) intelligent pro
              cess control; (viii) combined research-  curriculum development projects; (ix)
              laboratory support for  senior undergraduate/graduate level courses in neural
              networks  for control, fuzzy logic control, control of smart structures,  and
              flexible power system control.  ***  ??
