Title       : Acquisition of a Pulsed FT-EPR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9601774

Award Number: 9601774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell LoBrutto LOBRUTTO@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne D. Frasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew N. Webber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willem F. Vermaas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The purchase of commercially-built electron paramagnetic  resonance (EPR)
              instrumentation is proposed which will advance  the ASU Photosynthesis Center's
              EPR laboratory to the state of  the art in several areas. The majority of the
              budget is allocated  to the purchase of a pulsed Fourier Transform (FT)-EPR
              accessory,  the Bruker ESP 380E, for the Center's existing continuous-wave 
              (CW) EPR spectrometer, a Bruker ESP 300E. The 380E offers  improved
              sensitivity, time resolution, reliability, ease of use,  and (most importantly)
              versatility over the home-built pulsed  spectrometer currently used by the
              Center's investigators. For  example, 380E can perform two-dimensional electron
              spin echo  envelope modulation (ESEEM) experiments, execute complex 
              phase-cycling routines automatically, and implement long or novel  pulse
              sequences without modification of microwave or pulse timing  hardware. The
              Center's present pulsed instrument has none of  these capabilities. In
              addition, attachments for the 300E and  380E will be purchased that will
              provide the Center's  investigators, for the first time, with the following 
              spectroscopic tools: pulsed electron-nuclear double resonance  (pulsed ENDOR);
              35 GHz EPR measurements from 3.8 K to room  temperature; and 35 GHz ENDOR. The
              proposed upgrade of the  Center's Bruker 300E CW spectrometer will also include
               construction (by the PI) of a high-Q quartz 9 GHz ENDOR cavity of  the type
              described by Lubitz.    The uses of this instrumentation will lie mainly in the
              area of  photosynthesis and plant science, but will also include basic  studies
              of protein structure and enzyme mechanisms which have  applications across the
              life sciences. For example, pulsed and CW  ENDOR and fast time-resolved EPR
              measurements will aid in  characterization of Photosystem II mutants in which
              the  properties of the tyrosine D or Z radicals have been affected. In  studies
              of chloroplast Fl-ATPase using oxovanadium (VO2+) and  Mn2+ as paramagnetic
              probes, the availability of the new  in struments will permit precise
              determination of local ligand  structure. In addition, extensive spectroscopic
              characterization  of metal-ligand model systems whose crystal structures have
              been  determined will help to establish the 'signature' hyperfine  couplings
              from commonly-occurring protein-based metal ligands.  Determination of
              structural changes during the ATPase's catalytic  cycle will lead to full
              mapping of its highly complex catalytic  mechanism. Other systems to be
              examined using the new  instrumentation are: Photosystem I; the
              Fenna-Matthews-Olson  protein in photosynthetic green sulfur bacteria; lysine 
              2,3-aminomutase and ethanolamine-ammonia lyase (both of whose  reactions
              proceed through free radical intermediates); and the  enzyme
              S-adenosylmethionine synthetase, which produces the  primary intracellular
              methylating agent in a wide variety of  organisms. Finally, FT-EPR measurements
              on short-lived  charge-separated states in artificial photosynthetic systems
              will  be undertaken, as a probe of the complex problem of the influence  of
              structure upon electron transfer processes. In all cases, the  proposed
              instrumentation will yield, to a degree not heretofore  possible, atomic-scale
              structural information from disordered  samples.    Funding of the proposed
              equipment purchases/construction will  enhance significantly the research
              training for graduate students  as well as summer research experiences for
              undergraduates. The  improvement in ease of use of the pulsed instrument will
              make it  far more practical to introduce students to the intricacies of  pulsed
              techniques, within the context of a formal course or as a  part of individual
              laboratory training. This-project will also  allow the Center's EPR facility to
              maintain its high-profile  external collaborations with investigators from
              leading  institutions nationwide, and to attract other such  collaborations.   
                    )    A - I
