Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation to Examine Anthropogenic Effects on Biodiversity
               and Ecosystem Function in Southcentral Pennsylvania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9601671

Award Number: 9601671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Yocom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy L. Steucek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Zegers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie W. Ambler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                Due to the pattern of human occupation and
              land use in Lancaster  County and Southcentral Pennsylvania, where nearly two
              thirds of  the land is in agricultural use, significant populations of  native
              species are restricted largely to forested areas on the  low mountains in the
              northern portion of the region and riparian  forests in the southern portion.
              The first goal of this research  project is to examine selected elements of the
              biodiversity of  riparian forests of southcentral Pennsylvania in an attempt to
               understand the nature and distribution of organisms and the  impact of
              continued human expansion and growth on population  densities and reproductive
              successes of these nonhuman species.  Instrumentation acquired through this
              research proposal will  greatly expand the research capacity of the Department
              of Biology  at Millersville University in order to pursue the following 
              specific topics dealing with biodiversity:  1. the genetic diversity of
              populations of rare-endangered ferns,     Vittaria and Trichomanes  2. the
              distribution of rare-endangered plants in Southcentral     Pennsylvania  3. the
              impact of habitat fragmentation on mammal and bird     populations  4. the
              composition and distribution of riparian plant communities     in the southern 
                 Susquehanna River drainage.    Many of the problems of poor water quality,
              environmental  degradation, decline in beds of submerged aquatic vegetation,
              and  reductions in population densities of valuable fishery species,  including
              shellfish, in the Chesapeake Bay have been attributed  to high inputs of plant
              nutrients, such as phosphorus and  nitrogen from non-point sources in the
              Susquehanna River  drainage. Agricultural fertilizers and manures from
              livestock  account for 75% of the phosphorus and 50% of the nitrogen  entering
              the Chesapeake Bay. With nearly 400,000 acres of  agricultural land, over
              600,000 cows, steers and pigs, and over  55,000,000 chickens, Lancaster
              County's contribution to the  non-p oint source pollution of the Chesapeake is
              huge. The  vegetation of riparian forests has been identified as one type of 
              buffer reducing this pollution by trapping eroding soil and  absorbing soluble
              nutrients. Once in the aquatic environment the  nutrients stimulate alga
              blooms, which reduce water quality; a  major factor in the degradation of the
              Bay. The second goal of  this proposal is to examine biological activities in
              the riparian  forest and aquatic ecosystems which might reduce the quantity of 
              nutrients flowing into the water or control alga populations that  reduce water
              quality. Acquisition of equipment will facilitate  research in:  I. restoration
              of aquatic ecosystems through viral control of  alga blooms  2. effects of
              plant root systems and the associated mycorrhizal  fungi on nutrient flow
              through raparian vegetation.    Acquisition of the requested equipment will
              greatly expand  opportunities for undergraduate students to become involved in 
              research projects at Millersville University. After graduation,  many
              undergraduates from Millersville University pursue  scientific careers through
              graduate studies at large research  universities. Acquisition of research
              equipment will facilitate  undergraduate research and nurture aspirations of
              careers in  science.
