Title       : Acquisition of a Computer System for Biophysical and Computational Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a9601851

Award Number: 9601851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Levy ronlevy@lutece.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilma K. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen M. Berman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lionel Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karsten Krogh-Jespersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      Funding is requested to purchase a multi-processor computer  based  on 
              the RISC architecture to replace the Convex C220.  The  projects  for which the
              requested equipment will be used include:  Computer  Simulations  of  Solvated
              Proteins  and  Liquids  (R.M.  Levy),  Computer Simulations of Double Helical
              DNA (W.K.  Olson),  Biomolecular Structure and Interactions (H. M. Berman),
              Potential  Surfaces  for  Internal  Rotation  in  Conjugated  Molecules  (L. 
              Goodman), Medium Effects in Electronic Structure Calculations (K. 
              Krogh-Jespersen), NMR Structure Determination and Protein Folding  (J.  Baum), 
              and  Structure  and Interactions  of  Macromolecular  Complexes   (M. 
              Georgiadis).  The  need  for  the   RISC   based  multi-processor is based on
              the computationally intensive  nature  of  these  projects,  and the need for
              the visualization  of  the  computed results concerning complex biomolecular
              systems.          Rutgers  University is internationally recognized  for  the 
              strength  of  its  research program in Biophysical  Chemistry.  A  central
              theme connecting the investigators participating in  this  proposal  is  that
              of "Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics".  The  complexity and sheer size of
              biological macromolecules makes  the  analysis of the structural and dynamic
              features in these  systems  computationally  intensive.  This is  true  for 
              the  theoretical  studies  including  molecular modeling using  computer 
              graphics,  computer  simulations  of biomolecules in  solution  and  quantum 
              chemical  calculations of electronic properties  of  biomolecules  and 
              conjugated molecules. This is also true of the  experimental  techniques  that
              are represented in the proposal:  macromolecular  x-ray   crystallography  and 
              NMR  spectroscopy.  The  individual  projects  carried  out by the
              coinvestigators  all  involve  very  large scale computations.         The
              shared computational facilities for molecular biophysics  and  computational 
              chemistry  are housed  primarily  within   the  chemistry department. The
              backbone of the computational resources  for  biophysical chemistry is the
              Convex C220 dual processor.  In  1986  a Convex Cl uniprocessor was purchased
              with funding from  a  National  Institutes of Health Shared Instrumentation 
              Grant.  In  1989, with funding provided by an instrumentation grant from  the 
              National Science Foundation and by Rutgers University, the Convex  was 
              upgraded  to  a  dual processor C220. At  the  time  of  its  purchase,  the 
              vector  architecture  of  the  Convex  was  quite  remarkable, providing 10-50
              times the performance gains over  the  DEC VAX 780 hardware which it replaced.
              In the context of today's  computing  environment, with the availability  of 
              RISC  computer  workstations,  the  performance  of  the  Convex  is  much  
              less  impressive.  At  present, perhaps the only  remaining  remarkable 
              attributes of the Convex are its sheer physical size,  its  power 
              requirements, and exhorbitant maintenance costs.         We propose to replace
              the Convex C220 with a multi-processor  RISC computer system. A final choice of
              vendor will be made after  competitive  evaluations of alternative RISC systems
               is  carried  out  after  the  grant  award. Possible vendors  include  Silicon
               Graphics,  Hewlett  Packard, IBM and DEC. At this  time,  we  are  seriously 
              considering the Silicon Graphics Power Onyx  primarily  because  of  its  cost
              effective floating point performance,  but  also  because  of its graphics
              features. Our proposed  budget  is  based  on  the  purchase of an SGI Power
              Onyx system  with  eight  R8000  90  Mhz  processors, 2 GByte high density
              memory,  Reality  Engine graphics hardware, and 64 GBytes of magnetic disk
              storage.
