Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Southern Vowels in Ethnic Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9601443

Award Number: 9601443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5968               (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Wolfram wolfram@social.chass.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is provide an account of the  sociolinguistic and
              ethnolinguistic boundaries for the three  ethnic communities in Warren County,
              NC: the African-American  community, the Native-American community, and the 
              European-American community. The complex nature of the  relationships between
              the communities offers an ideal  sociolinguistic laboratory for examining the
              effects of ethnic  boundaries on language change and variation.       Acoustic
              analysis of vowels will be conducted to pinpoint  inter- and intradialectal
              variation, and quantitatively based  covariance studies of a set of social and
              linguistic varieties  will provide a profile of the overlapping but distinctive
              dialect  systems. Interviews with members of all three communities will be 
              conducted using sociolinguist/native fieldworker teams to augment  the present
              corpus of speakers, which presently includes 36  Warren County speakers.      
              The project will provide data and analysis relating to three  major issues in
              sociolinguistics today. First, research will  provide current and refined
              information on the state of Southern  linguistic identity. Second, quantitative
              and qualitative  analysis will provide a closer look at the possible
              convergence  or divergence between African-American Vernacular English (AAVE) 
              and European-American Vernacular English (EAVE). Studies done in  large, urban
              cities reveal social influences on the variation and  change of vernacular
              English; the triracial community of Warren  county offers a vastly different
              social situation, that of an  agriculturally based rural community. The
              possible convergence  and divergence of the Native American community with
              either the  local AAVE or EAVE speech communities, vis-a-vis a separate 
              dialectal identity, will also provide crucial evidence pertaining  to the
              attempts of the Warren County Native American community to  meet regulations
              for federal recognition. A distinctive dialect  may lend credence to claims of
              cultural diversity for the Native   American community. Third, data and
              analysis of Warren County  speech will provide the linguistic community at
              large with a  clearer view of the nature of ethnic boundaries and language 
              variation. The social setting of Warren County's ethnic  boundaries offers a
              different, diverse, and culturally rich  perspective on language variation.
