Title       : Reciprocal Induction of Development During the Establishment of an
               Animal-Bacterial Cooperative Association
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9601155

Award Number: 9601155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. McFall-Ngai mcfallng@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Ruby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9601155  Mcfall-Ngai  The goal of this research program is to define
              specific aspects of the complex morphological, biochemical and molecular
              conversation that underlies the development of the cooperative association
              between the sepiolid squid Euprymna scolopes and its luminous bacterial
              partner, Vibrio fischeri.  The present proposal draws directly from the
              foundation created by recent developmental studies of this model system, and
              focuses on four specific questions:   1. What are the characteristics of the
              bacteria-induced     cell death that occurs in the light organ during the    
              colonization process, and how do the bacteria signal     this process?   2. How
              is development of the accessory structures of      the light organ induced, and
              to what extent are the     bacteria symbionts involved in this process?   3.
              What are the identities of symbiosis-induced                       bacterial
              genes?   4. Is bacterial catalase induction essential for       symbiotic
              competency, and/or for the triggering of      host development?  These
              questions will be addressed both by examining diagnostic characteristics of
              embryonic and postembryonic development, and by experimentally manipulating
              symbiotic and aposymbiotic juvenile animals.  In addition, development of the
              bacterial symbionts will be probed using promoter-reporter constructs that will
              lead to the identification of bacterial genes that are induced specifically
              during symbiosis, and reveal the role(s) of these genes in host development. 
              Light and electron microscopy will be used in concert with in situ
              hybridization dn immunocytochemistry to visualize regions of host and symbiont
              gene expression, and the presence of resultant protein products.
