Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: High Performance Resonant Cavity Enhanced
               Photodetectors and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a9601770

Award Number: 9601770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41076              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Selim Unlu selim@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
              13        Physics                                 
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This award  supports a cooperative project between a US
              scientist, Dr. Selim Unlu, from the Department of Electrical, Computer, and
              Systems Engineering at Boston University, and Dr. Ekmel Ozbay, Department of
              Physics, and Dr. Orhan Aytur, Department of Electrical Engineering at Bilkent
              University, Ankara, Turkey.  The research aims at improving the design,
              fabrication and characterization of compound semiconductor photodetectors in
              various material systems operating at near-IR spectral region.  The research
              will emphasize the fabrication of high-performance photodetectors with
              bandwidth-efficiency products approaching 100GHz.  These are suitable for use
              in high performance optical communication and signal processing systems that
              require high sensitivities, short response times, and low power consumption. 
              Over the past few years a new family of optoelectronic devices has emerged
              whose performance is enhanced by placing the active device structure inside a
              Fabry-Perot resonant microcavity.  The resonant cavity enhanced (RCE) detection
              scheme has been studied using computer simulation techniques, which showed they
              can impart drastic improvement to high-speed performance of conventional
              photodetectors.  This project will build on the mature theory and existing
              experience in RCE detectors and to prototype high-performance ultrafast and
              nearly unity quantum efficiency photodetectors.  Scope:  This award allows
              cooperation of two teams of scientists whose capabilities complement each other
              to do important scientific work.  The U.S. P.I. is an accomplished young
              scientist who is at an early stage in his academic and research career, but who
              has already received a grant from the NSF's CAREER program.  The research under
              that grant is complementary to that planned in the present award.  The two
              scientists at Bilkent have received their doctorates recently at universities
              in the United States.  They have excellent facilities at their university for
              fabrication of the ultrafast photodetectors.  One U.S. graduate student at
              Boston University will participate in the work done at Bilkent, and will have
              an opportunity for conducting research in an international setting.  This award
              is jointly funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Electrical and Communication Systems.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
