Title       : Support for Computerization and Stabilization of Archaeological Collections at
               the Fort Burgwin Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9601066

Award Number: 9601066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Adler madler@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Fort Brugwin research center was established in 1956 and is a permanent
              research and education facility operated by Southern Methodist University and
              located outside Taos, New Mexico. Its central focus is on archaeological
              research and it has for many years conducted summer field schools which focus
              on sites located in the northern Rio Grande region of New Mexico. Excavated
              materials are curated at the center and collection holdings include over
              1,000,000 cataloged objects from prehistoric and historic contexts in the Taos
              region. Associated materials include a catalog card inventory of collection
              holdings (22,000 cards) and approximately 45,000 pages of documentation,
              including unpublished excavation reports, field notes, maps and associated
              individual photographs, negatives and slides relating to the collection and
              site excavations. Because they are currently stored at Fort Burgwin in a
              non-environmentally controlled area, they are subject to potential
              deterioration and destruction. The data are not computerized and very difficult
              to use. This NSF grant will serve to remedy the situation. The materials will
              be moved to Southern Methodist University and rehoused in a controlled
              environment. The accessibility of these resources will then be enhanced by
              transferring collection documentation and photographic materials to microfilm
              and electronic formats. The collection catalog will be computerized and
              microfilms, CD-ROM discs and the computerized catalog inventory will be made
              available at SMU and Fort Burgwin and several other facilities. Eventually
              these data will be made available electronically to all interested researchers.
               The Fort Burgwin archaeological materials are important because they document
              the rise of complex cultures in the Southwestern U.S. Covering a span of
              thousands of years, they can be used to trace the change from a small band
              hunting and gathering form of social organization through the introduction of
              domestic plants and animals to the development of social entities which
              organized peoples on a tribal level. The materials also shed light on how
              people at a simple level of technology coped successfully with a harsh and
              unpredictable semiarid environment. Archaeological materials are only as useful
              as the documentation which accompanies them and therefore these records must be
              carefully preserved. To conduct effective research it is necessary to know what
              collections contain and where specific artifacts are located. To do this,
              computerization is necessary. This project is important because it will both
              preserve important records and make information rapidly available to
              researchers.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
