Title       : Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencer for The New York Botanical Garden's
               Cullman Program for Molecular Systematics Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9601515

Award Number: 9601515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9275               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor A. Albert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks cost-sharing support for the purchase of an  ABI PRISM 377
              Automated DNA Sequencer and necessary peripherals.  The Lewis B. and Dorothy
              Cullman Program for Molecular  Systematics Studies, which is a joint initiative
              of The New York  Botanical Garden and the American Museum of Natural History,
              was  formed through a charitable donation from the Lewis B. and  Dorothy
              Cullman Foundation. The New York Botanical Garden's  Cullman Program occupies
              laboratories at both locations, which  includes entitlement to user-fee based
              operation of the Museum's  ABI 377 sequencer. The Cullman Program resides
              primarily in newly  renovated laboratory space in the Garden's Harding
              Laboratory  building. A matching challenge grant of $116,000 from the Cullman 
              Foundation has been used toward the total costs of equipping the  new
              laboratories for molecular systematics research. This  proposal requests the
              balance of necessary funds from the NSF.         This proposal seeks matching
              funds from NSF to complete  the planned equipping of the Garden laboratories
              with automated  DNA sequencing and DNA fingerprinting capacities. DNA
              sequencing  is not currently possible at the Garden, although all other 
              relevant molecular techniques (e.g., DNA and RNA extraction and  purification,
              Southern and northern blot analyses, PCR  amplification of DNA, in situ
              hybridization and in situ PCR  against DNA or cDNA, visualization of
              fluorochrome labeled in  situ probes, and molecular cloning) are supported with
              the newly  purchased equipment. The sequencing facility at the American  Museum
              is crucial for present research initiatives, but it is no  long term substitute
              for in-house DNA sequence and DNA  fingerprint determination at the Garden.
              Aspects such as  cost-effectiveness, throughput, flexibility, and enhanced 
              research and educational development argue strongly for the  Garden's
              completion of its own automated DNA analysis facility,  as has been planned.   
                   The general goal of the Cullman Program is to enr ich and  invigorate the
              Botanical Science Division of The New York  Botanical Garden with the modern
              tools of molecular systematics  research. Molecular systematics not only
              entails DNA sequence  production for use in phylogenetic analysis; it also
              encompasses  bold new attempts to link systematics reasoning with the 
              burgeoning field of plant molecular development. The Cullman  Program currently
              supports standard molecular systematics  projects as well as systematically
              oriented projects focusing on  flower and root development. Molecular
              systematic work in  Lecythidaceae, Arecaceae, Anacardiaceae, Neckeraceae, 
              Gentianaceae, and Cactaceae is proceeding in collaboration with  Cullman
              Program Adjunct Curators, other staff, and graduate  students. These projects
              are primarily oriented toward  classificatory, character evolutionary, and
              biogeographic issues.  Other projects focusing on population level issues will
              profit  from the ABI 377's capacity to perform rapid genotype analysis  (e.g.,
              using the amplified fragment length polymorphism  AFLP   approach). Likewise,
              the evolutionary-oriented developmental  research of the Cullman Program
              requires active DNA sequencing  capacity. A Garden sequencing facility will act
              much like a local  workstation for plant molecular systematics activity,
              especially  given the Garden's academic collaborations with Columbia 
              University (The Center for Environmental Conservation and  Research--CERC),
              Cornell University, Lehman College--CUNY, New  York University, and Yale
              University. Immediate commitments for  use of an automated sequencer are
              substantial (16 investigators),  and installation of this instrumentation at
              The New York  Botanical Garden should permit a considerable molecular 
              systematics research capacity in the years to come.         The ABI PRISM 377
              Automated DNA Sequencer (manufactured by  Perkin Elmer's Applied Biosystems
              Division) is a sophisticated  instrument representing the forefront of
              second-generation  sequencer technology. The instrument' s use of simultaneous,
               scanning-laser detection of four different fluorescent dyes  permits samples
              to be resolved in single gel lanes (as opposed to  the four gel lanes occupied
              by other vendors' equipment, which  have a single-dye approach). Throughput
              time has been increased  by a factor four from earlier models through
              refinements to the  scanning procedure. Combined with appropriate software
              (some  software and hardware are included within the base purchase  price),
              gel-plate and loading comb combinations, apparatus for  PCR-based DNA labeling,
              and a dedicated water purification  system, the ABI 377 will complete the
              equipping of The New York  Botanical Garden's molecular laboratories.
