Title       : Acquisition of a New TIMS for Ocean and Earth Sciences at the University of
               Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9601872

Award Number: 9601872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Mueller Mueller@geology.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Hodell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen E. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Perfit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann L. Heatherington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601872  Mueller  This proposal seeks funding to support 50% of the cost of 
              acquiring and operating a state-of-the-art  thermal  ionization mass
              spectrometer (TIMS) for the Geology  Department of the University of Florida. 
              The proposed  instrument will provide enhanced performance in three areas:     
               1) The instrument will be capable of providing extended  dynamic range (>10 ) 
                   through the ability to measure sample ion beans with  both Faraday and
              electron     multiplier- or scintillation -  type detectors simultaneously. 
              This capability is  essential for utilizing systems in which the abundance of 
              individual isotopes,     including tracers, exceeds the  dynamic range of
              Faraday detectors alone.         2) The instrument will be capable of providing
              high  abundance sensitivity at high      mass.  This extended  capability,
              relative to traditional TIMS configurations, is  also      necessary for
              accurate measurements in the U-Th  series and provides benefits in    lower
              mass systems such  as Ca.  Recent developments in the use of retarding 
              potential lens can provide this capability without the need  (and cost) of
              large,     double focusing configurations;         3) The instrument will be
              capable of high precision  isotopic ratio measurements in     static mode. 
              Measurement  in this mode is necessary in order to combine the  advantages of
              increased dynamic range and extended abundance  sensitivity to      provide
              maximum accuracy for small  samples, e.g., those containing only picogram    
              (10  g)  quantities of Pb, and those with low ionization  efficiencies, e.g.,
              Th.         Specific applications that will benefit include the  analysis of
              U-series isotopes for  recent geochronology; the  analysis of individual zircon
              crystals or parts of crystals  for geochronologic and petrogenetic studies; Pb,
              Sr, and Nd  isotopic studies of      very small samples for tracer, 
              chronostratigraphic, and paleo-environmental  applications; and Sr/Ca isotopes
              via isotope dilution for  paleoenvironme ntal  studies.  Their current mass 
              spectrometer is heavily utilized by graduate students.  Approximately half of
              these students are women, a minority  in the geosciences.         The
              University of Florida is supporting this project  with $360,730, which    
              represents a 50% cost share.  ***
