Title       : NMR and MRI Studies of Biomaterials. Structure, Dynamics and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9601018

Award Number: 9601018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $552695             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Zax dbz1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn W. Jelinski  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1773,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601018  Jelinski  The goal of this research is to understand the molecular 
              basis for the exceptional mechanical properties of dragline  silk from the
              spider Nephila clavipes.  This biopolymer  possesses a unique combination of
              high stiffness with a very  large extension to break, so that the toughness --
              the  energy required to cause a tensile failure -- is very high.  This unique
              combination of properties makes this polyamide  in some ways superior to the
              best manmade synthetic polymers  such as nylon-6,6 and Kevlar. Solid state
              deuterium NMR and  high resolution solid state NMR, including REDOR, will be 
              the primary physical techniques used in this research. The  specific goals of
              this project are (1) to test the  hypothesis that the glycine-serine pairs are
              involved in  bends; (2) to understand the molecular dynamics and response  to
              stretching of the highly conserved tyrosine, leucine, and  tyrosine residues,
              which are known to reside in the  amorphous regions; (3) to discover the
              changes in amino acid  orientation and dynamics upon supercontraction; and (4)
              to  deduce how the spider processes the silk and then mimic or  modify this
              process in the laboratory.  This research will produve a fundamental
              understanding of  the structure, dynamics and processing of strong and tough 
              protein polymers, and thus it will provide the underpinnings  for the
              manufacture of an entirely new class of materials.  %%%  Now that the tools of
              modern biotechnology make it possible  to produce "designer" materials in
              bacteria and in plants,  it is appropriate and timely to develop a fundamental 
              understanding of certain biomaterials.   Silk from the  Golden Orb Weaving
              spider, Nephila clavipes, is being used  as a source ofb io-inspiration.  This
              silk is stronger per  cross-sectional area than steel, and stretches to 10% of
              its  length before breaking.  This research aims to identify the  molecular
              arrangements and motions that contribute to its  strength and toughness.  Such
              an understanding would permit  the  design of non-natural, protein-based,
              high-performance  materials.  Once the materials are produced it will also be 
              necessary to understand how to process them correctly so  that they acquire
              their ultimate mechanical properties.  The  spinning apparatus of the spider is
              being used as a source  of bio-inspiration to learn how to process these
              matherials  into fibers.  ***
