Title       : Analysis of Histidine Decarboxylase Cooperativity by Crystallography and Protein
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9601096

Award Number: 9601096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Robertus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601096  Robertus  Histidine decarboxylase (HDC) from Lactobacillus 30a converts
              histidine to histamine and CO2.  The enzyme shows cooperative regulation.  It
              is activated by low pH.  The goal is to examine the mechanism of this
              activation in atomic detail using X-ray crystallography and site-specific
              mutagenesis.  A kinetic analysis of HDC found the wild-type enzyme can be
              described as having a Tense state T with low substrate affinity and a Relaxed
              state R with higher affinity; low pH and high histidine concentrations
              stabilize the R form.  Several site-directed mutants, including some double
              mutants, have been made which stabilize the T form.  The X-ray structure of HDC
              originally solved by the Hackert group corresponds to the R state at pH 4.8. 
              Two mutants of the enzyme have been crystallized in its T state.  X-ray data
              have been collected to 3.1 ( resolution on one form and molecular replacement
              and SIR phased solutions of the structures are underway.  It is also proposed
              to complete the molecular structure of several other important mutants which
              have been crystallized.  The T structures will be compare with the known R
              model to describe tertiary and quaternary structural changes involved in the
              cooperative mechanism.  Residues likely to play prominent roles in the T to R
              conversion will be identified.  A substrate analog, histidine methyl ester HME,
              will be soaked into the crystals and the mode of substrate binding analyzed. 
              These will be compared with the binding already described for R state HDC at pH
              4.8.  Difference in binding caused by pH and/or by quaternary structural
              rearrangement will be elucidated.  %%%  The overall goal of this research is to
              shed light on the atomic forces and interactions which turn enzymes on and off.
               The principles involved in this kind of regulation are universal, and what we
              learn studying an enzyme from bacteria will help us understand the rules used
              by all living systems.  The switch trigger under study in this project, the
              simple hydrogen ion, is of  considerable importance.  The reason is that many
              metabolic processes involve the movement or production of hydrogen ions, and
              indeed they are among the most common effectors of biologic activity known.  In
              spite of the simplicity and breadth of this kind of enzyme regulation, there
              are presently no detailed models of how hydrogen ions turn proteins off or on
              at the atomic level.  We have formed a likely hypothesis that the positively
              charged ion binds between two molecules of the enzyme when they are arranged in
              a ring, and "pulls" them into an active conformation.  When the hydrogen ion
              level in the cell decreases, the ones trapped in the protein exit leaving two
              negative charges at this site on the proteins to repel one another.  This
              repulsion changes the enzyme shape into an inactive conformation.  The work in
              this proposal should produce an atomic model of the enzyme with and without the
              bound hydrogen ion and allow us to actually see if the hypothesis is correct.
              This in turn will build our confidence that we can understand the strategies
              used by other living systems to regulate enzyme activity according to the local
              hydrogen ion concentration (pH).  ***
