Title       : Effects of Tooth Use on Tooth Shape, Structure and Wear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9601766

Award Number: 9601766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark F. Teaford   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Maas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Ungar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Glander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paleobiologists have long had a keen interest in the diets of prehistoric
              creatures, because `diet`  is the key to so many important questions in
              evolution.  Of the techniques currently available for  making dietary
              inferences, three (analyses of tooth shape, dental microstructure, and 
              microscopic wear patterns on teeth) stand ready to yield new insights, if only
              better data from  living animals with known diets can be gathered.  The purpose
              of this study is to push each of  these techniques closer to their
              paleobiological potential through a study of living primates with  known diets.
                The animals to be studied will be from 35 social groups of howling monkeys,
              Alouatta palliata,  living in patches of dry tropical forest at Hda. La
              Pacifica near Canas, Costa Rica.  The howlers  at La Pacifica have been the
              subject of behavioral observation for over 25 years.  Thus their diet  is known
              to vary from season to season, and between microhabitats at La Pacifica. It
              also  includes a mixture of fruit and vegetation making it a good model of the
              diet of medium to  large-sized fossil primates.   Animals will be periodically
              captured and released, and while captured, high resolution copies  of their
              teeth will be made.  Scanning electron microscopy and 3-D digitizing of the
              dental  replicas will yield new measurements of tooth microstructure, tooth
              shape, and tooth wear.  In  conjunction with analyses of food samples, stomach
              contents, fecal samples, and dust collected  from the forest canopy, this study
              will document, once and for all, the functional implications of   tooth wear in
              these animals.   This work should lead to new insights into (1) changes in
              tooth use associated with both growth  and development and changes in diet, (2)
              variations in dental microstructure, (3) causes of tooth  wear, and (4)
              physical properties and phytolith content of Neotropical plants.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
