Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Research and Education in Plant Ecophysiology,
               Ecology, and Evolutionary Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9601816

Award Number: 9601816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Sala sala@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Brewer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ragan M. Callaway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Zabinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Mitchell-Olds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              We are developing a collaborative research and education group in  plant 
              ecophysiology  ecology. and  evolutionary  genetics.  This  interdisciplinary 
              group is composed of six scientists.  five  of  which have ;assumed their
              positions since January 1993. Our group  is  interested  in  the  genetic
              variation  of  ecophysiological,  phenological  and  morphological  traits  and
               how  these  affect  population  dynamics  and ultimately, community 
              structure.  This  interdisciplinary  group is focussing on questions  essential
               to  understanding  the  evolutionary  and  physiological  causes  and 
              consequences  of  patterns in plant ecology.  Due  to  the  rapid  increase  of
               our  research activities  in  plant  ecophysiology,  ecology  and 
              evolutionary genetics, we have an urgent  need  for  plant growth facilities
              and analytical equipment. We are strongly  committed  to developing a
              collaborative group with national  and  international   recognition  extending 
              beyond   the   individual  members.  With  well  equipped facilities  we  can 
              significantly  increase  collaborative  efforts and research  productivity. 
              and  continue to recruit qualified graduate students and post-docs  in  our 
              program.  With  adequate infrastructure,  our  complementary  fields   of 
              expertise  will  lead  to  many  additional   future  collaborations. 
              Specifically  we are  requesting  three  walk-in  growth chambers, a dry
              combustion C,N,S analyzer, a scintillation  counter and a plate reader. A
              steering committee composed by  the  six  principal investigators will
              determine growth chamber  space  partitioning and day-to-day use of analytical
              equipment. Specific  training  to graduate and undergraduate students will be 
              offered  by  means  of  intensive workshops developed by  members  of  the 
              steering committee.
