Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Development of a Protein Characterization
               Laboratory to Serve the Needs of the Texas A&M Scientific Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9601595

Award Number: 9601595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas O. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery W. Kelly  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                     The purpose of this proposal is to
              establish the  instrumentation base required for initiating a protein chemistry
               laboratory to serve the needs of PIs involved in protein research  at Texas
              A&M University. Texas A&M has made a long term  commitment of $195,000/year to
              hire and retain an exceptional  Ph.D. level working director ($45K start ) as
              well as a senior  (25K) and junior technician (18K) to support the laboratory.
              The  remainder of the annual budget will be for supplies and  maintenance
              ($107K). Sufficient space has been provided in the  department of chemistry so
              that the established Laboratory for  Biological Mass Spectrometry and the
              proposed Protein Chemistry  Laboratory will located in contiguous space
              allowing a MALDI mass  spectrometer to be shared between the facilities. The
              Ph.D.  working director of the biological mass spectrometry laboratory,  which
              is already serving over 100 PIs on campus, will be  instrumental in training
              the Ph.D. level director of the Protein  laboratory in mass spectrometry to
              take advantages of the  emerging mass spectrometric characterization and
              sequencing  methods. The new laboratory will be advertised by seminars in 
              various departments by the faculty director and by a home page on  the world
              wide web.       The analysis of typical protein samples will be handled by 
              purchasing a ninhydrin-based Amino acid analyzer for protein and  peptide
              composition analysis as well as for concentration  determinations and a protein
              sequencer which utilizes  phenylthiohydantoin (PTH) chemistry for sequencing
              peptides of  less than Ca thirty residues. The required separations 
              capabilities will be met initially by the purchase of a variable  temperature
              HPLC fitted with a dual wavelength UV-Vis recorder  and a capillary zone
              electrophoresis set up. These will be used  for determining the number of
              chemically different polypeptide  chains in a given sample (after disulfide
              reduction and  denaturation) and for purification of  samples which are not of 
              the required purity. The capillary zone electrophoresis set up is  particularly
              important as it can separate polypeptides that  cannot be separated by routine
              RP-HPLC. Classical SDS-PAGE /  electroblotting technology will also be
              incorporated into the  Protein laboratory to allow PTH sequencing directly from
              a 1- or  2D-SDS PAGE gel. Eventually peptide synthesis services will be 
              offered, but only after the research community at A&M is pleased  with protein
              sequencing and related services which is where we  are severely deficient. Our
              logic here is that peptide synthesis  can be accomplished with outside vendors
              and in collaboration  with several research laboratories with expertise,
              although this  situation is still not ideal. When the time comes the Kelly 
              Laboratory will donate their 1995 vintage ABI peptide synthesizer  to the
              Protein Chemistry laboratory in return for weekend  privileges. This instrument
              is currently being utilized by  several groups whose use would be best
              accommodated under the  auspices of the laboratory for protein chemistry.      
              In addition to handling and delegating responsibilities for  routine samples
              (70% effort) the director of the laboratory will  be responsible for bringing
              emerging technology into the  laboratory after consulting with the faculty
              advisory committee  which oversees the laboratory (15% effort). We envision 
              significant interaction between the working directors of the mass  spectrometry
              and protein laboratories, particularly with regard  to making edge of the
              envelope methods available to non-experts.  The director in collaboration with
              the faculty advisory committee  would also be responsible for advertising and
              teaching  mini-courses periodically to train undergraduate, graduate  students
              and post-doctorals how to best use the technology  available in this
              facility(l5% effort). Laboratories who make  extensive use of the facility may
              elect to have their graduate  students become more intimately familiar with the
              opera tion of  the equipment m a supervised manner. As a result of this policy 
              in the mass spectrometry laboratory the graduate students at A&M  understand
              these techniques well enough that there now is a  walkup MAIDI instrument for
              their use.    The long term objective is to build a superb protein chemistry 
              laboratory which serves the needs of A&M faculty in a variety of  departments
              interested in various aspects of protein chemistry.  An important feature of
              such a facility is that the faculty,  graduate students and post-doctorals in a
              wide range of  disciplines become intimately familiar with classical and 
              emerging technology for protein characterization. In addition  students and
              faculty in various departments end up talking to one  another often leading to
              substantive collaborations between  research groups.
