Title       : Rapid Computational Analysis of Biomolecular Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9601463

Award Number: 9601463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Honig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9183,9184,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                       Project Summary      The  purpose  of the research
              described in this proposal  is  the  development of rapid computational tools
              for the analysis of  the  three  dimensional  structure of biological 
              macromolecules.  The  goal  is  to  combine graphical techniques designed to 
              highlight  functionally important features of macromolecules with  numerical 
              and  theoretical methods that allow a user to extract  meaningful  numbers  
              about  important  physical  properties  from  a   three  dimensional 
              structure. Capabilities of this type  of  have  been  incorporated   into  the 
              GRASP  (Graphical  Representation   and  Analysis  of  Structural Properties)
              computer program  which  was  developed in the current funding period. In the
              past three  years  GRASP evolved into one of the most widely used analysis
              tools  in  Structural Biology. A goal of the current proposal is to continue 
              the  development of GRASP by making it more widely accessible and  through  
              the  incorporation  of  new  functionalities  and   new  quantitative analysis
              tools.    The  major  application  of GRASP has been  the  calculation  and 
              representation  of the electrostatic potentials of  proteins  and  nucleic 
              acids  on  the  molecular surface.  The  potentials  are  calculated    from   
              finite-difference    solutions    to    the  Poisson-Boltzmann  (PB) equation
              obtained  from  essentially  the  same  algorithm  used  in  the  DelPhi 
              program  which  was  also  developed  in this lab. It has become commonplace
              for the  report  of  a  new  structure of a protein to include one or  more 
              GRASP  pictures  representing  solutions to  the  PB  equation.  However 
              Silicon  Graphics  workstations  are  required  to  depict  these  images,  a
              factor which has to some extent limited their use.  In  order  to  make GRASP
              images more widely available,  we  plan  to  convert  the graphical routines
              within GRASP to output  graphical  descriptions in VRML, the 3D scene
              description language  proposed  for  the   World  Wide  Web  (WWW).  We  also 
              plan  to  introduce  interfacing tools which will facilitate communication with
               other  programs, will simplify the learning curve for the use of current 
              functionalities  and  will  make it  possible  to  integrate  new  quantitative
              analysis tools within GRASP.    A  second  goal  of  the current proposal is
              the  creation  of  a  database of GRASP images for the entire Protein Data Base
               (PDB).  GRASP  molecular  surface images of electrostatic  potential  and 
              curvature  will be created for each protein in the  PDB  will  be  stored  in 
              a  database.  2D and 3D GRASP  images  will  be  made  available  for viewing
              over the WWW. It is anticipated  that  the  wide availability of these images
              will lead to the development of  a  new  structure-function relationships and,
              ultimately, to  the  creation  of  new  surface-based data bases which  will 
              make  it  possible to deduce function and functionally active regions given  a 
              three dimensional structure. The final goal of the proposal is  the 
              integration of quantitative analysis tools within GRASP.  In  particular,  a
              user will be able, in real-time, to  obtain  pKais  solvation,  conformational 
              and binding  free  energies  for  any  structure depicted graphically on the
              screen.    The  significance of the proposed research to the advancement  of 
              knowledge  is  manifest  in  the  success  of  GRASP  which   has  demonstrated
               the  impact  of interactive  quantitative  analysis  tools  on  the analysis
              of macromolecular structure and  function  relationships.  The  database  of 
              surface  properties  and   the  addition  of  new  GRASP functionalities should
               have  comparable  impact  on  the ability to exploit the vast amount of
              information  embodied  in  the  three dimensional structure  of  proteins  and 
              nucleic acids.
