Title       : Research, Technology, and Comparative Advantage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9601765

Award Number: 9601765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Eaton jeaton@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Kortum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to analyze the dynamics of  innovation and
              technological diffusion in the world economy.  One  component of this research
              is to specify and to estimate a model  of productivity differences and patterns
              of trade, given the  allocation of technological knowledge across countries and
               sectors.  The model implies that, given the distribution of  technical
              knowledge, trade can influence observed measures of  productivity, so that
              these measures reflect underlying access to  technology indirectly.  Using the
              model's implications for trade  flows and productivity, the parameters of the
              model will be  estimated with international data on these magnitudes.      The
              second component of the research is to specify and to  estimate a dynamic model
              of sectoral innovation and technology  diffusion underlying this static trade
              model.  Different  countries may serve as the major innovators in specific 
              industries, and the speed of diffusion may depend on the  technology in
              question and the countries involved.  The model  incorporates the decision to
              innovate and to patent innovations  in different countries.  This model can be
              used to infer the  sources of innovation and the direction of technology flow
              from  sectoral data on research input, productivity, and international 
              patenting.  Together, the two components of the research have  implications
              for: (i) which countries are the major innovators  and contributors to
              productivity growth in different sectors;  (ii) the extent to which other
              countries benefit from these  innovations, either through diffusion or through
              trade; (iii) how  innovation and technology diffusion affect observed patterns
              of  productivity and trade; and (iv) how barriers to trade affect  productivity
              and growth.
