Title       : Acquisition of a Multidisciplinary Transmission Electron Microscope Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9601821

Award Number: 9601821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilson A. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim W. Pierson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Geraghty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Hooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darwin D. Wittrock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                  The University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire
              (UWEC) proposes a major  equipment upgrade in its electron microscope center
              with the  purchase of a new Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and 
              associated TEM preparation equipment. The proposed equipment will  augment
              equipment purchased almost 20 years ago and will function  in support of both
              the university's teaching and undergraduate  collaborative research mission.
              The new TEM will have both  analytical and video capabilities that do not exist
              with the  current instrumentation. Development of this lab will ensure that 
              UWEC remains a well respected regional laboratory for the  analysis of
              materials using electron microscopy.          Four departments currently use
              the electron microscopes for  instruction of undergraduate students (Biology,
              Chemistry,  Physics and Geology) and well over 100 students have been trained 
              to do EM in the existing facility. Faculty members currently use  the facility
              for research with graduate and undergraduate  students in Biology and with
              undergraduate students in materials  science and mineralogy. The enhanced
              resolution and analytical  capabilities of the new instrument will draw
              additional  researchers including one new UWEC faculty member (Dr. Anne 
              Geraghty - plant physiology/plant molecular biology) who is  experienced in
              immunocytochemical localization techniques for  TEM. This powerful research
              tool forms an important link with the  highly successful interdisciplinary
              program in biochemistry/  molecular biology which is one of the most popular
              majors on  campus and draws some of UWEC's best students. This will ensure 
              more use of electron microscopy in the future. Since UWEC has  been designated
              the University of Wisconsin System Center of  Excellence in Student/Faculty
              Collaborative Research, it is  imperative that state-of-the-art research
              facilities be funded  and maintained. Towards these ends, the State of
              Wisconsin has  recently committed $343,000 to renovate exist ing space to house
              a  new EM center and the new facility, completed in February, 1996  has a room
              devoted exclusively to development of a modern  analytical TEM laboratory. In
              addition, UWEC is pledging an  additional $256,311 for purchase of the proposed
              equipment  indicating again the level of commitment on this campus to the 
              proposed program. The combined university contribution to this  laboratory
              including the remodeling will be ~ $600,000. We are  seeking $269,953 from NSF
              to complete equipping the laboratory  facility.          The new TEM and
              associated equipment will add the following  capabilities to the current
              laboratory: (1) TEM microanalysis,  including accurate immunocytochemical
              localization, (2) ability  to perform higher resolution studies (ten-fold
              increase in  resolution over current TEM) and image crystalline structures 
              with atomic resolution, (3) video display for instruction and  demonstration,
              (4) video capture of digitized images for display  and image analysis, and (5)
              improved access to electron  microscopy for school and community groups. A
              surprising number  of current science majors indicate that summer programs and 
              school year visits to the university influenced their career  decisions.
              Acquisition of this equipment will allow safe,  effective training and research
              in EM to continue at UWEC for the  next 20 years. Students from UWEC will have
              experience using  state-of-the-art equipment, whether they are bound for
              graduate  school, professional school, or simply a science literate life in 
              the private sector.
