Title       : Integrated Computer Crystallization Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9601633

Award Number: 9601633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Jane Saunders                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Fletterick flett@msg.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Agard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Stroud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  UCSF has had a vibrant crystallography lab in the Department of 
              Biochemistry. The successes over the last years encouraged the  university to
              expand the Faculty Appointments in Structural Biology. In  1995, Brigitte
              Raumann, a Program in Biological Sciences Fellow, joined  as an independent
              researcher. In 1996, Wendell Lim and Jonathan  Weissman joined as Assistant
              Professors in Cellular and Molecular  Pharmacology. This expansion, and the
              natural growth in numbers of  graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
              working the structural labs  in Biochemistry, has virtually overwhelmed the
              X-ray diffraction and  computer facilities at UCSF. In this proposal we present
              plans to  augment the facilities for three dimensional experimental Structural 
              Biology for the Department of Biochemistry and to equip a new lab with  X-ray
              diffraction equipment and computers within the Department of  Cellular and
              Molecular Pharmacology. The proposed newly equipped and  updated labs, one in
              Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology and one in  Biochemistry, are to be in
              their use and structure, equally accessible  to all X-ray crystallographers at
              UCSF. An extensive computer system  built in three tiers is planned to permit
              computing also in transparent  and equivalent ways.    In the following
              narrative, we list the projects of the six principal  investigators and
              demonstrate the need for the new communal equipment.  The laboratory to house
              the new machines in the Department of Cellular  and Molecular Pharmacology will
              be renovated: a wall is to be added for  separating the core computers from the
              X-ray set, plumbing changed,  electrical installation and a safety enclosure
              will be huilt. The  projects, most supported by NIH grants to the P.I.s, are
              briefly  described in narrative form, with references to published work where 
              possible, and followed by a table defining projects and personnel. This  lists
              the individual projects by title, the principal scientists  working on the
              project and the status of the project. T he status  provides a brief summary of
              the current needs for data collection.
