Title       : Research: New Postcranial Fossils of Australopithecus Afarensis and A. anamensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9601025

Award Number: 9601025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50181              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol V. Ward wardcv@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this study is to describe and analyze new fossils of the earliest
              human ancestors.  These fossils include numerous torso and limb bones of at
              least two species, Australopithecus afarensis and Australopithecus anamensis,
              from Ethiopia and Kenya.  These new postcranial fossils will reveal adaptations
              to posture and locomotion in these early hominids.  Thirty-seven new
              postcranial bones of A. afarensis have been discovered from Hadar, Ethiopia,
              dated to about 3.5 - 3 million years ago. These fossils include the first-known
              A. afarensis lunate; talus of a large A. afarensis individual, associated early
              australopithecine ulna and metacarpals, and many other discoveries.  In Kenya,
              a partial hand skeleton and associated toe phalanx of Australopithecus sp.
              indet were recovered from South Turkwel, West Turkana, and are dated to a
              similar time period. These are the first associated hand bones known for any
              early australopithecine.  The Kenyan team also has recently discovered the
              first tibia and phalanx of the earliest known australopithecine species,
              Australopithecus anamensis from Kanapoi, dated to 4.0 mya.  These new fossils
              will help resolve debate over the nature of early hominid locomotion. 
              Paleoanthropologists agree that the first major adaptive shift of our earliest
              ancestors was the adoption of upright, bipedal locomotion.  However,
              considerable debate remains about how important arboreality remained for the
              earliest hominids.  An accurate interpretation of the locomotor behavior of our
              earliest ancestors is critical for understanding human origins.  The proposed
              study will provide novel information about early hominid locomotor adaptations
              because it provides (1) New A. afarensis fossils from anatomical regions and
              functional complexes not previously sampled, (2) New fossils of the earliest
              australopithecine species, A. anamensis, (3) First analyses of the proportions
              and certain regions of the A. afarensis forelimb which have never been analyzed
              in detail, and (4) A consideration of the developmental basis of anatomical
              features when interpreting locomotor behavior.  Objectives of the proposed
              research are to:  (1)  Provide detailed anatomical descriptions and photographs
              of all new fossils, (2) Collect extensive standard metric, nonmetric, and long
              bone shaft cross-sectional data that reflect locomotor adaptation on a large
              sample of australopithecine, modern human and ape skeletons, (3) Conduct a
              pilot study on the anatomy of muscle insertions and its effect on the
              development of muscle scars on bones in apes and hominids, and (4) Test
              hypotheses of locomotion in A. afarensis, A. anamensis and other
              australopithecine species to assess locomotor evolution in our earliest
              ancestors.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
