Title       : Acquisition of a Computer Imaging System for Geological and Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9601600

Award Number: 9601600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61064              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Wall nancy.a.wall@lawrence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bart T. DeStasio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia Bjornerud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. De Stasio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Instrumentation requested in this proposal will provide a  comprehensive
              computer imaging and analysis system for use by the  faculty and students of
              Lawrence University in multiple research  projects. The proposed system will be
              based on a Macintosh  central processing unit (CPU) and will consist of
              software and a  number of peripherals that will allow for collection, storage, 
              analysis, and communication of experimental results. Such a  system will enable
              investigators in a biology and geology tm  utilize cuffing edge technology to
              enhance and extend existing  and planned research programs.        The CPU for
              the proposed system will have a 2GB harddrive  with 768MB RAM. A 21 inch high
              resolution color monitor will be  used with the CPU. A graphics card and DOS
              compatibility card  will be added to the CPU. Data collection peripherals will 
              include a digital color camera for field work and a CCD camera  for use with a
              compound and stereomicroscopes (these microscopes  will be dedicated for
              computer imaging use only), a flatbed color  scanner, a projection-slide color
              scanner, and a gel scanner.  Data storage peripherals will include a
              magneto-optical drive and  ten rewritable, magneto-optical cartridges. Various
              types of  software will be used for data collection and analysis as well as 
              communication of research results. Peripherals to be used for  production of
              various media for communication of research results  will include a projection
              slide printer, a laser printer, a  large-document color printer, and a
              photographic-quality color  printer.        Several investigators engaged in
              different types of  research would benefit from the use of a computer imaging
              system.  In biological research, applications will range from ecological  field
              studies to molecular biology. In ecological field studies,  digital image
              capture and morphometric analysis will enable  quantification of size and shape
              variations within Lake Winnebago  prey fish populations. In molecular biology
              applications,  densi tometry will be used to quantify the amounts of myosin
              mRNA  in wild type versus mutant C. elegans. Another research program  will use
              densitometry for quantification of gene induction in  chick embryos treated
              with the growth factor, bFGF. Additionally,  a number of future research
              applications will be possible, such-  as the use of morphometric analysis of
              histological preparations  from physiological research involving sex specific
              circadian  rhythms in crickets as well as from cell biological research 
              involving in vitro cell culture.        As is the case with biological
              research, the requested  equipment will have a wide variety of applications in
              geological  research. Applications will range from landscape to microscopic 
              scale. At the landscape scale, a specific use in ongoing research  will be to
              analyze satellite and aerial images to map the  distribution of late Quaternary
              landforms in eastern Wisconsin.  At the microscopic scale, computer imaging
              will be used to  quantitatively analyze microstructures in deformed rocks from
              the  upper midwest.
