Title       : Environmental Hazards and Pregancy Loss: Ethnographics in Three Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9601745

Award Number: 9601745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Layne laynel@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The term `mother nature` rests on culturally and historically specific notions
              of both motherhood and nature.  As we reach the end of the twentieth century,
              scientific and technological developments are influencing the meanings of both.
               This ethnographic study focuses on the issue of pregnancy loss in communities
              exposed to environmental toxins, in order to understand these changes.  
              Obstetrical textbooks, popular literature and pregnancy support groups commonly
              portray miscarriages and stillbirths as `acts of nature.`  This view obscures
              often relevant human impacts in communities and environments that influence
              these events.  This study focuses on five communities, in New York, Louisiana,
              and Massachusetts, which have experienced an unusually high rate of pregnancy
              loss, and where these losses have been attributed to environmental hazards. 
              The investigator will collect and examine oral, first-person accounts of these
              losses.  She will examine legal, scientific, social scientific, and
              journalistic accounts as well.  The stories will then be compared with those
              produced when pregnancy loss is not attributed to environmental hazards, to
              explore the ways in which the experience of reproductive loss is changed if the
              loss is perceived as the result of a humanly-corrupted nature.  Miscarriages
              and stillbirths are important human experiences to which the special tools and
              perspectives of anthropology and science and technology studies can contribute
              greater understanding. The experiences of pregnancy loss and toxic
              contamination each challenge persons' views of themselves, their communities
              and environments; the intersection presents an ideal site to investigate
              usually tacit, taken-for-granted assumptions about motherhood, nature and
              science and technology, as well as the potentially different perceptions of
              different socio-economic, ethnic, and racial groups.  The topic offers a
              valuable perspective to examine the lived experience of environmental crisis
              and can illuminate issues of equity and gender involved in environmental
              controversies.  Further, the study will address issues of broad cultural
              concern, including issues of responsibility and blame, and democratic decision
              making. Results of this research will be presented at professional meetings and
              developed into a book aimed at scholars and an educated lay audience.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
