Title       : The Inner City, Segregation, and Social Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9601764

Award Number: 9601764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Glaeser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This purpose of this research is to increase our understanding of  the economics
              of the inner city.  The common theme of this  project is that the poverty of
              the urban underclass is intimately  connected to, and even a result of, a
              dearth of positive social  interactions and role models.  This project has
              three sections.  The first primarily involves data collection.  The second 
              presents a concrete attempt to answer a crucial question in  America's cities:
              Why is there more crime in big cities?  The  third is primarily theoretical and
              methodological .    The first section will help to explain why ghettos are so 
              pervasive, despite their many problems.  The primary goal is to  build a
              century long data set on segregation by city, and when  possible by SMSA, for
              ethnic and racial groups.  Comprehensive  data on ghettos is itself a serious
              contribution, but this data  will also help determine why ghettos came about
              and why they  persist so much longer for African-Americans than for other 
              immigrant groups.  Micro-evidence will be developed as to why  ghettos are
              initially appealing, but end up being costly for  their settlers' descendants. 
                The second section will examine why crime is so much higher in  big cities
              than in small cities or in the hinterland.  Evidence  gathered so far ensures
              that the city effect increasing crime is  real and not merely a statistical
              artifact coming from more crime  prone individuals living in cities.  The urban
              crime effect is  also not the result of the poor being close to the rich in 
              crowded cities.  Less than 10% of the effect comes from lower  probabilities of
              arrest in big cities.  Approximately 20% comes  from higher returns to crime in
              cities.  Of the remaining 70%,  45% can be connected to variables describing
              family structure in  large cities.  This work also documents urban anonymity.  
               The last section addresses the empirical puzzle of the strikingly  large range
              of urban crime rates-- the variance of actual crime  rates is much larger than
              the varia nce of crime rates that would  be predicted based on the differences
              in other attributes across  cities.  This high variance is incompatible with
              individuals  making decisions about crime independently: there must be social 
              interactions.  A formal model connecting social interactions with  the variance
              of urban crime rates is used to create a natural  index of the degree of social
              interactions.  This index shows  that murder and rape have few interactions,
              but that larceny and  auto theft are highly interactive.  The research will use
              the  time patterns in urban crime rates, drug use and migration to  further
              examine the size and nature of social interactions.
