Title       : Cellular Mechanisms of Circadian Rhythm Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9601382

Award Number: 9601382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Roberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601382  Roberts    One of the most interesting features of the nervous system 
              is the fact that it is able to undergo functional changes.  These changes may
              occur due to experience - learning - or  may be based upon internally generated
              changes in nerve cell  physiology and biochemistry.  One common change in nerve
               cell function, that has been observed in virtually all  organisms including
              humans, are the changes that follow the  daily environmental cycle of light and
              darkness.  Interestingly, these daily changes in nerve cell function  are not
              reflexive responses to the environment, but instead  are regulated by an
              internal timing system.  The internal  timing system is controlled by circadian
              pacemakers (circa -  about dies - a day) or "biological clocks" located in the 
              brain or other neural structures.  Investigation of  circadian pacemakers over
              the past several years has  indicated that disruption in the function of the
              circadian  clock, and the circadian timing system, leads to multiple  problems
              in human physiology.  Furthermore, the interaction  between the circadian
              timing system (internal rhythmicity)  is of critical importance in gaining a
              full understanding of  an organism's relationship with its environment. 
              Finally,  it has been shown that biological clocks function through  the
              interaction of many intracellular biochemical processes  such as gene
              transcription, translation, and protein  modification.  The purpose of our work
              is to investigate the  biochemistry of circadian clock function in a model
              neural  system.  In these studies we will analyze the role played by  two
              specific classes of protein (cyclin-dependent kinases,  and mitogen activated
              protein kinases) that we propose are  important in the generation and
              regulation of the circadian  rhythm produced in the eye of the marine snail,
              Bulla  gouldiana.  Investigation of several different circadian  pacemakers has
              shown that clock function has been conserved  in a diverse group of organisms. 
              Thus, our studies should  pr ovide general insights concerning the biochemistry
              of  circadian rhythm generation.
