Title       : ARI: Advanced Post Processing Instrumentation for Miniaturization Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9601720

Award Number: 9601720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Vasile mjv@engr.latech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Warrington  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wayne Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Coane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Chaplin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig R. Friedrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9601720  Warrington  This Academic Research Infrastructure award provides
              funding to purchase an injection molding machine, electroplating stations, a
              scanning Auger spectroscope, and an optical interferometric microscope. The
              injection molding machine and electroplating stations will enable the mass
              fabrication of microparts.  The injection molding machine will replicate
              microparts in plastics, and the electroplating stations will allow for micro
              part production in a variety of metals.  The scanning Auger spectroscope and
              optical interferometric microscope will be used to analyze and test the micro
              parts themselves and the masks and molds that are used to make them.  The
              scanning Auger spectroscope will be used to determine surface/interfacial
              chemical composition, which is critical in the fabrication of masks, molds, and
              micro parts.  The optical interferometric microscope will be used to measure
              surface roughness and geometry.  This equipment will augment existing
              fabrication equipment at the Institute for Micromanufacturing and in the
              College of Engineering and Science at Louisiana Tech University.  The above
              equipment will enable and enhance research on the production and application of
              masks and molds used in micropart fabrication and will also enable the direct
              fabrication of microparts from these molds in a variety of materials.  Nine
              projects in the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technologies will take
              advantage of the equipment. In particular, the injection molding machine will
              be used to model and experimentally verify the micromolding process and will
              serve to rapidly fabricate microsystem packaging concepts.  The machine will
              also be used to develop methods for mass replication of microstructures and
              systems using polymer  molds.  The electroplating stations will be used to
              create microstructures in nickel, gold and other materials and for rapid,
              economical fabrication of micromilling tools. The scanning Auger spectrometer
              is an instrument for identifying surface and int erfacial contamination, which
              detracts from the quality of plating processes, photo resist, wafer adhesion,
              and multi-level structure fabrication.  This instrument will have use across
              the university.  The optical interferometric microscope will be used to
              quantify vertical and sloped surfaces up to 5 mm in height.  The proposed
              equipment will allow for the development of process technology unique in the
              world, and for the measurement, analysis, and replication of micro- to
              macro-scale devices from masks and molds with three-dimensional surface
              features.    ***
