Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Networked Analytical Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9601728

Award Number: 9601728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79801              (Estimated)
Investigator: Turner Collins collinst@evangel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. McCorcle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Tenneson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evangel University
	      1111 North Glenstone
	      Springfield, MO  658022125    417/865-2811

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Description of Instrumentation: Evangel College requests $210,884  from the
              National Science Foundation for the acquisition of a  system of analytical
              instruments to be used in environmental  research. This proposal addresses
              equipment requirements in the  environmental research program, which is a
              collaboration between  biology, chemistry, and environmental science faculty in
              the  Science and Technology Department. The project will be directed  by Dr.
              Turner Collins, Professor of Biology. He will be assisted  by Mr. Michael
              Tenneson and Dr. Michael McCorcle. The  environmental teaching and research
              experience of this will bring  a multidisciplinary approach to this project.
              This acquisition  will make possible a wide array of research training 
              opportunities for the Evangel College science student.    The  request is for a
              system of analytical instruments which will  be  networked  into  a Laboratory
              Information  Management  System  (LIMS). The system consists of three
              analytical instruments along  with  computer  hardware and software. Each  of 
              these  precision  instruments  integrates  with  a  networked  version  of  a 
              LIMS  software package. Evangel College already has installed a  campus 
              network;  the  equipment represented by  this  proposal  will  be  attached  to
               the existing network. When the complete  system  is  operational,  students 
              will analyze samples  in  the  instrument  room,  store the results on the LIMS
              database, and retrieve  data  for lab reports from any computer on the network.
                 Research  and  Research  Training: Successful  research  training  requires 
               a  capable  faculty,  energetic  and  gifted   science  students,  and
              technological tools in step with today's  research  profession. Evangel College
              possesses a capable faculty with both  research  and  research training
              experience.  Many  of  Evangel's  graduates  have  gone on to receive higher 
              degrees.  Of  the  22  private colleges and universities in Missouri, Evangel
              ranks  6th  in  the production of st udents who eventually receive Ph.D's.  In 
              addition,  Evangel has produced more teachers than any  of  these  other  
              Missouri  institutions.  While  Evangel's   Science   and  Technology 
              department has had some initial  success  in  forming  research  training,  the
               technological components  required  for  state-of-the-art research training
              experiences do not yet exist.    To  date,  scientific research and research
              training  at  Evangel  have  capitalized  on  regional environmental  issues 
              and  local  cooperative  alliances.  The  school  is  located  in  the  Ozark 
              Mountains,   a   recreational  region  with  great  environmental  concerns. 
              Evangel  College faculty and student  researchers  are  conducting
              environmental studies of the region's water  supplies.  In this process,
              cooperative arrangements exist with the Missouri  Department  of Conservation,
              the Missouri Department  of  Natural  Resources, and the City Utilities of
              Springfield, Missouri.    Activities Resulting from Funding: The current
              research  projects  have  been short term projects which have been severely 
              hindered  by  the  lack  of  modern and sophisticated instrumentation.  The 
              instrumentation from this proposal will permit the  modernization  of the
              Evangel College research labs, will permit the students to  participate in a
              meaningful long-term research project, and  will  contribute valuable
              information to the city and state agencies.
