Title       : RNA Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9601209

Award Number: 9601209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou King Mking@mednet.ned.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9601209  King    In the 1980's, a new area of investigation opened up with
              the discovery that specific mRNAs are targeted to given regions of the Xenopus
              (King and Barklis, 1985; Rebagliati et al., 1985) and Drosophila oocyte
              (Lehamann and Nusslein-Volhard, 1986; Driever and Nusslein-Volhard, 1988).  The
              consequences of RNA localization for development have proven to be profound. 
              In Drosophila, local RNA expression results in protein gradients that determine
              regional identity including head, thorax, and abdomen (Wang and Lehmann, 1991)
              as well as the germ cell lineage (Ephrussi and Lehmann, 1992).  More recently,
              a number of localized mRNAs have been described in somatic cells, and it is now
              clear that RNA targeting is an important regulatory mechanism for localizing
              particular proteins (St. Johnston, 1995).  However, little is known about how
              RNAs are selected for, transported to and anchored in specific subcellular
              domains.  Our lab has isolated and characterized seven RNAs which display two
              basic localization pathways to the vegetal cortex in Xenopus oocytes
              (Forristall et al., 1995).  In this proposal, the focus will be on analyzing
              Xcat-2, and VegT RNAs as representatives of the two pathways because of their
              importance in early developmental processes.  VegT encodes a protein that can
              regulate the activity of other genes.  It contains a domain that is 50%
              identical with the DNA binding domain of mouse brachyury (T gene), a
              transcription factor required for normal early development and highly conserved
              in other vertebrates (Kisper and Herrmann, 1993; Kispert et. al., 1995).  VegT
              RNA injection on the ventral side of Xenopus embryos induces a second dorsal
              axis.  Mis-expression of VegT results in headless embryos (Zhang and King,
              1996b).  Xcat-2 RNA encodes an RNA binding protein that may be essential for
              germ cell determination and gamete production.  Xcat-2 co-localizes with the
              germ plasm which contains the presumptive determinants for the germ cells.     
              Dr. King's working hypothe sis is that RNAs are selected for transport based on
              localization signals within their structure in the 3'UTR, together with
              specifically bound proteins.  She further hypothesizes that the component parts
              of the transport particle as well as the RNA localization motif are likely to
              be conserved among vegetally localized RNAs using the same pathway.  To test
              her hypostheses, she proposes to accomplish the following specific aims:  1. 
              To identify the RNA localization signal and inclusive functional elements for
              Xcat-2 and VegT.  2.  To determine what proteins bind the localization elements
              and to assess whether they are required for localization.  3.  To determine if
              there is a common localization motif among vegetally localized mRNAs using the
              same pathway in oogenesis.      Her approach takes advantage of the ability of
              in vitro synthesized RNAs to localize to the oocyte's vegetal cortex after
              microinjection.  A series of deletion mutants of the RNAs will be created to
              identify localization signals and elements and to assess the function of
              photocrossinked proteins to these signals.  Finally, she will use seven other
              localized RNAs that we have characterized to ask if a common localization motif
              can be identified.  Although oocytes will be employed in this study because
              they offer many distinct advantages, the mechanism of RNA localization is most
              certainly conserved among diverse cell types.  Therefore, her analysis should
              provide insight into how cells in general regionally target RNAs.
