Title       : ARI: Acquisition and Installation of a High Speed Server for the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9601493

Award Number: 9601493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84613              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Hartman jh219@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael I. Cragg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. John Hartman and Michael Cragg
              will purchase a an UltraSparc version of the Sun 1000E with 512m of RAM. They
              will also obtain two Sun Ultra 1 and one Sparc 5 desktop systems, a printer and
              a range of research software. Wiring necessary to support the system will be
              installed.  Columbia University has a very strong social science research group
              which consists of economists and sociologists and the computer network will be
              used by a large number of researchers to pursue a variety of research projects.
              In economics these include the development of dynamic index methods, studies of
              general equilibrium models and simulation studies of organizational complexity.
              Many of these projects use large scale data bases to examine issues such as:
              the economic and political impacts of government spending, regional economic
              adjustment in the face of technological change, the globalization of economic
              activity and estimation of environmental value. Sociological studies focus on
              issues such as: patterns of international policy convergences among nations,
              and the analyses of two large data bases, one based on survey research in the
              former Soviet Union and the other in New York City. Columbia University has
              been involved in extensive survey research in the former Soviet Union and
              collected data on topics which run the gamut from housing privatization,
              economic and political reform to religious and ethnic tolerance. These data
              form the core of unique survey material to which Columbia graduate students and
              faculty can access without the need to learn the Russian language. Columbia has
              also formed a New York City Social Indicators Survey Center which will collect
              information on a representative sample of at least 1000 households and families
              in New York city. Core measures of demographic characteristics, family
              composition, economic and income status, well-being and use of public
              assistance will be collected to permit researchers to follow families over
              time. This will serve as a valuable resource for the analysis of social
              problems and services within New York City.   Cutting edge research requires
              instrumentation which provides fast and easy analysis to large bodies of data
              as well as the tools necessary to analyze them. The instrumentation to be
              provided is important because it will increase the research productivity of a
              large numbers of both senior researchers and students.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
