Title       : Studies in the Analysis and Design of Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9601983

Award Number: 9601983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben S. Bernanke bernanke@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The core of the proposal consists of two broad projects relating to the
              analysis and design of monetary policy. The objective of the first project is
              to extend and apply my earlier work on the use of "semi-structural" vector
              autoregression (VAR) methods to measure the stance of monetary policy and the
              effects of monetary shocks on the economy. Among the planned extensions are 1)
              the use of these methods to study monetary policy in countries other than the
              United States; 2) empirical analyses of the 3-6 month "impact effect" of
              monetary policy on the economy, and of the role of money in general cyclical
              dynamics; and 3) a study of the effects of monetary policy on financial and
              real decisions in a large panel of manufacturing firms.     The second project
              studies the increasingly popular strategy of "inflation targeting". One
              component of this project will be a set of six case studies, which will
              document in some detail the adoptimn, implementation, and results of various
              forms of inflation targeting in Germany, Switzerland, New Zealand, Canada, the
              United Kingdom, and Sweden. The goal of the case studies is to draw practical
              lessons about institutional arrangements, political preconditions, etc., that
              affect the likelihood of success. The qualitative analysis will be supplemented
              by a more formal econometric examination of the effects of adopting inflation
              targets on inflation expectations, monetary policy actions, and the behavior of
              inflation itself. In separate theoretical papers I will also address 1) the
              relative advantages of inflation targeting and money targeting for central
              banks with imperfect credibility and 2) the feasibility and desirability of
              targeting private-sector inflation forecasts, rather than inflation per se.    
              Two additional empirical projects will 1) test the implication of the
              neoclassical growth model that a country's rate of TFP growth is strictly
              exogenous and 2) investigate whether the worldwide monetary contraction of the
              1930s can be rationalized as a switch am ong multiple equilibria
