Title       : Atmospheric Contamination of Russian Soils (1895-Present)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9601272

Award Number: 9601272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Lapenis alapenis@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret S. Torn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer W. Harden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9601272  Andrei Lapenis  SUNY-Albany     The research supported by this
              award aims to take advantage of the recent discovery of information that
              describes the location and circumstances of late-nineteenth-century soils
              samples from sites across Russia (across the East European Plain and in central
              and eastern Siberia). The study will:  measure the accumulation of atmospheric
              contaminants in Russian soils by comparing the 1893 and 1996/7 samples; 
              measure the changes in soil carbon stocks;  combine these analyses to assess
              the effect of climate and soil type on the presence of trace metals in the soil
              profiles;  and provide data to constrain models of atmospheric emission of
              these elements during Russian industrialization. The samples have been
              carefully stored, and with the help of a pilot award from NSF (as well as some
              institutional and some personal funds), the investigator has ascertained that
              47 samples are in exceptionally good condition, and that the locational and
              attribute information is sufficient to locate and access the sites for
              current-day sampling.  In addition, some of the sites are in environmentally
              protected or controlled locations.  The investigator has collected long-term
              weather records for some of the sites already.  The current research will focus
              on four sites, which have been located exactly from the documentation of the
              original samples.  Three of which have the same vegetative profile now as in
              the late nineteenth century.  All four sites will be resampled, and all eight
              samples will be analyzed for organic matter, radiocarbon content, trace
              elements, base cations, pH, and particular anthropogenic organic compounds. 
              These data will be used to:  measure the accumulation of radiocarbon and toxic
              metals, trace nutrients, and other atmospheric inputs;  model the rate and form
              in which these elements are processed in the different soils and ecosystems; 
              and relate the storage, depth distribution, and form of these constituents to
              climate and soils characteristics.  Th is should make small but substantive
              progress toward large-scale estimates of organic carbon dynamics and
              trace-element contamination of Russian soils.     The research promises
              advances in soils science, the interaction of climatological and ecological
              change, and the extent and nature of anthropogenic effects on the environment. 
              The period bracketed by the two sampling dates entails massive
              industrialization in Russia, widely understood to have affected the natural
              environment.  While the presence of only two sampling dates makes certain
              inferences difficult or impossible, the discovery of these samples and their
              documentation is a rich find.  This research offers an unprecedented
              opportunity to study long-term carbon cycling, pollutant loading in soils, and
              the nature of trace elements in Russian soils.
