Title       : Development of Segment Specificity in Identified Lineages of the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9601385

Award Number: 9601385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melody V. S. Siegler msiegler@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 9601385  PI: Melody V.S. Siegler    The nervous system has segmental
              populations of neurons that are diversified to meet the requirements of sensory
              and motor processing along the length of an animal's body. The work to be
              performed assesses the contributions of two cellular processes to segmental
              diversification and specialization during the course of embryonic development:
              cell proliferation and cell death. In a model system, Schistocerca americana,
              each segment of the central nervous system develops from an array of
              neuroblasts, each of which can be identified as an individual. Each neuroblast
              produces a "family" of clonally related neurons. For example, one neuroblast in
              each segment, called the median neuroblast (MNB), generates a family of neurons
              containing neurons of two different types, motor neurons, which innervate
              muscles, and interneurons, which interconnect sensory and motor neurons. In the
              thoracic segments the MNB families contain about 100 neurons, 20 of which are
              motor neurons. In the abdominal segments the MNB families contain about 50
              neurons, only 3 of which are motor neurons.  The idea  will be tested that the
              MNBs, and other neuroblasts in anterior segments, divide at about twice the
              rate of the comparable neuroblasts in the posterior segments, initially
              generating neuronal pools of larger or smaller sizes. In addition, the role of
              cell death in setting the final population size of neuroblast families  will be
              investigated . Cell death appears to remove many neurons in abdominal regions,
              but few neurons in thoracic regions, providing a second mechanism for
              generating larger thoracic and smaller abdominal segments.  Related studies
              will focus on the hypothesis that there are domains of cell death and of cell
              proliferation that correspond roughly, but not precisely, to thoracic and
              abdominal regions. Their imprecise overlap leads to three rather than two
              potential outcomes, thus: a large neuronal population results from high
              proliferation rates and low cell death, an int ermediate neuronal population
              results from high proliferation rates and high cell death, and a small neuronal
              population results from low proliferation rates and high cell death.  Knowledge
              of how these fundamental cellular processes shape segmental identity is crucial
              to an understanding of development of the mature central nervous system.
