Title       : Collaborative Research: Modeling Speed-Accuracy Tradeoffs of Aimed Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9601140

Award Number: 9601140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Wright cewright@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              WRIGHT  9601140    Aimed movements are a ubiquitous part of everyday life.  Of 
              particular importance is their central role in situations  involving the
              transfer of information between people and machines  (e.g., mouse movements by
              computer users, control stick movements  by pilots and heavy machine operators,
              etc.).  A  fundamental  constraint on the control of aimed movements is
              described by  speed-accuracy tradeoffs (SATs), i.e., faster movements are less 
              accurate.    Using the stochastic optimized-submovement model (SOSM) proposed 
              by David Meyer and his associates as a starting point, this  research will
              investigate the control of aimed movements in four  areas:  (a) the generality
              of SATs for multi-joint movements, (b)  transfer of practice effects across the
              SATs, (c) the existence  of corrective submovements during aimed movement, and
              (d) what is  learned as SATs improve.  The SOSM provides only one of several 
              theoretical frameworks within which the results of this research  can be
              interpreted.  The research is, therefore, intended to (a)  probe the empirical
              limits of these existing theories, (b)  resolve fundamental disputes among
              these theories concerning the  nature of the control of aimed movements, and
              (c) gather the  database required either to elaborate one of the existing
              models  or to propose a new theoretical framework, depending upon the  nature
              of the results.    Through a better understanding of aimed movements, this
              research  should provide insights into how to structure control tasks.  In 
              addition, because the research includes both studies of how  individuals differ
              in the nature and their use of submovements  and studies of how performance
              improves when individuals practice  aimed movements, it will shed light on
              issues such as personnel  selection and how to organize training for jobs
              involving person-  machine interaction through aimed movements.    ***
