Title       : Development of a Non-Linear Optical Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9601609

Award Number: 9601609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $634294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie M. Loew les@volt.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra Roychoudhuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project is to develop a user friendly  nonlinear optical
              microscope to be housed in the Center for  Biomedical Imaging Technology (CBIT)
              at the University of  Connecticut Health Center. This will be a cooperative
              project  between Health Center faculty, the CBIT staff, and the University  of
              Connecticut Photonics Research Center. The CBIT and Photonics  Research Center
              staff will work together to couple new laser  technologies to a scanning
              confocal microscope. The Health Center  faculty who currently use laser
              scanning confocal fluorescence  microscopy will be able to explore innovative
              biological  applications with this emerging technology. An integral component 
              of our approach is the synthesis of new nonlinear optical dyes by  the CBIT
              staff for specific labeling of biological molecules.       Although confocal
              microscopy has proven to be a powerful  technique, nonlinear or two-photon
              excitation of fluorophores  avoids many of the inherent disadvantages of
              traditional  fluorescence confocal microscopy. In particular, out of plane 
              photobleaching, photodamage and background fluorescence are  greatly reduced in
              nonlinear excitation. In addition, this method  has greater sensitivity and
              affords better depth discrimination  and light penetration into thick samples.
              These properties make  nonlinear microscopy an excellent method for the study
              of living  cells.       There are currently seventeen academic laboratories at
              the  Health Center who utilize confocal microscopy and this improved 
              methodology is expected to be used by many of these groups. The  research of
              Carson, Cowan, Jaffe and Terasaki, Koppel, and Loew  are highlighted in this
              proposal; the nonlinear microscope will  improve the quality and capabilities
              of their current experiments  on a variety of living cells.       Loew and CBIT
              will design and synthesize new dyes to be used  in two photon fluorescence and
              second harmonic generation to  measure membrane potential. The photophysics of
              these dyes will  be charac terized with the new laser systems. In addition,
              some of  the local pharmaceutical companies are active confocal users and  are
              expected to takes advantage of the new instrument.        The CBIT Bio-Rad
              MRC600 confocal microscope is being  dedicated to the development of this
              instrument. The project will  begin by modifying this microscope for nonlinear
              absorption and  detection. High peak power pulsed lasers are required for 
              nonlinear absorption and both commercial and custom laser systems  will be
              utilized in this project. A commercial Titanium Sapphire  femtosecond laser
              system will provide wavelength coverage from  720-900 nm for absorption from
              360-450 nm. Concurrently the  Photonics Research Center will develop
              user-friendly fiber-optic  based modelocked lasers which will operate at 1064
              nm and 1500  nm. These lasers will be integrated into the nonlinear microscope 
              as the technology become available.        The first generation of fiber lasers
              will initially be  actively modelocked since this technology is expected to be 
              straightforward to implement. The next generation will be  passively modelocked
              and is expected to be very robust. Initially  these lasers will provide pulse
              widths of less than 100  picoseconds and the developmental process will include
              efforts to  further reduce these widths. In the long term, these lasers are 
              expected to be more cost effective than Titanium Sapphire systems  and easier
              for the casual user to operate. To provide a wide  range of wavelengths, and
              thus usable fluorescent labeling dyes,  the Titanium Sapphire and fiber lasers
              can be used together for  sum-frequency excitation allowing coverage of a broad
              range of  fluorescent probes absorbing from 350 - 750 nm.        It is hope
              that this combination of fiber optic lasers and  nonlinear microscopy will
              become a standard experimental method,  much like laser scanning confocal
              microscopy has emerged as such  in the last decade. Indeed, the advantages of
              2-photon and other  non-linear microscopies are so s ignificant that the
              development  of reasonable lasers might very well breach the only barrier to 
              having this new technology completely replace confocal  microscopy.
