Title       : Physiological Mechanisms in the Control of Bioluminescent Camouflage Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9601069

Award Number: 9601069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Latz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9601069  Latz    In the midwater depths of the ocean, the largest habitat on
              earth, there are few refuges from predation. Some animals have evolved an
              extraordinary anti-predation behavior using bioluminescent countershading to
              help them remain cryptic to visual predators. This strategy, called
              counterillumination, involves the biological production of dim light from the
              ventral surface of many fishes, squids, and shrimps in order to disrupt their
              silhouette. As yet Dr. Latz does not have a comprehensive understanding of the
              physiological pathways that regulate how vision mediates the production of
              bioluminescence for countershading. In the midwater penaeid shrimp Sergestes
              similis, a common member of the midwater community off the west coast of the
              U.S., the interaction of both hormonal and neural systems may be involved in
              the control of counterillumination.    The goal of the present study is to
              obtain pilot data from which to develop a model for the physiological control
              of luminescent countershading behavior in Sergestes similis. His previous work
              has demonstrated that S. similis is a stable laboratory preparation; it
              counterilluminates in response to downward-directed illumination, detected by
              the eyes, with light emission from five light organs that are modified portions
              of the hepatopancreas (liver). Dr. Latz has suggested that two control systems,
              one hormonal and the other neural, regulate the induction and control of
              counterillumination. In the present study the following hypotheses will be
              addressed: (1) the induction of bioluminescence involves a hormonal pathway,
              (2) a hormone which helps regulate the intensity sensitivity of the eye is
              responsible for the induction of bioluminescence, so that (3) the induction of
              bioluminescence is linked to light adaptation of the eye, and (4) once induced,
              the control of counterillumination involves a neural pathway. The main area of
              study will identify the physiological mechanisms controlling light emission.
              Tests using extracts of the eyestalk s and purified hormones will determine
              whether a hormonal component is involved in bioluminescence induction, and if
              so, identity the hormone. Bioluminescence will be used as a behavioral assay of
              the color and intensity sensitivity of the eye. Collaborative work will compare
              the sensitivity of the photoreceptors with behavioral tests of visual
              sensitivity.    The importance of studying the physiological mechanisms of
              bioluminescence in Sergestes similis extends beyond understanding how midwater
              animals control luminescent countershading behavior. If a hormone is involved,
              this would be the first documentation of hormonal control of bioluminescence in
              any animal, and a significant contribution to the field of endocrinology by
              identifying an entirely new target system. Because counterilluminating animals
              directly respond to their optical environment, an understanding of the control
              of bioluminescence also provides an insight into the poorly understood vision
              of deep-sea animals. Overall, this study will be a major contribution toward
              understanding the physiological control of bioluminescence, one of the most
              widespread yet enigmatic behaviors in the ocean.
