Title       : Development of Crystallographic Data Acquisition Systems for Biological and
               Chemical Research at the Advanced Photo Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9601657

Award Number: 9601657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1026068            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfried Schildkamp wilfried@carsl.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Moffat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. James Viccaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                    Third generation synchrotron radiation facilities, such 
              as the Advanced Photon Source (APS) presently under commissioning at  Argmnne
              National Laboratory, will be the world's leading sources of  x-rays for
              scientific research. The greatly increased spectral  brilliance and unique
              spectral properties of the APS insertion device  x-ray sources in the
              intermediate and hard x-ray regions offer the  possibility to significantly
              advance existing scientific frontiers and,  more important, to open new
              research areas. The concurrent development  of x-ray optics technology ensures
              that x-ray beams which parallel  those properties of the source can be
              delivered to the sample. However,  in order to take full advantage of these
              opportunities, similar  development of data acquisition instrumentation must
              take place. Source  and optics developments allow researchers to take their
              data faster, to  examine much smaller (and hence more readily available)
              crystals, and  to study time-resolved scattering phenomena. As a consequence
              the data  acquisition rate has increased dramatically thus requiring novel 
              diffractometer and detector systems.        New detectors such as the emerging
              CCD-based systems have the  potential to meet the new demands. However, all of
              these systems can  only be used optimally if they are carefully integrated into
              dedicated  x-ray experimental stations. We propose to develop integrated data 
              acquisition systems, comprised of fast and reliable  diffractometers,  and
              optimized detectors and read-out systems with understandable  instrument
              control software, that allow researchers at all level of  expertise to focus on
              their experiments rather than operation of the  system. Particular emphasis
              will be placed on system integration,  equipment protection and reliability,
              since expensive area detectors  can be ruined in seconds when inadvertently
              exposed to high-powered  f  x-ray beams. These instruments share a common
              research focus in  structural biology ~\/ and related a reas of chemistry. The
              data  acquisition systems are composed of:  - development of novel fast
              diffractometers which address the  particular need for research on small
              samples and which can accommodate  large and heavy detector systems, and
              essential peripheral equipment  such as cryostats and single crystal
              micro-photospectrometers;  - acquisition of four state-of-the-art detectors,
              their optimization  for particular experiments, and characterization of these
              detectors to  eliminate artifacts;   - development of display software and a
              graphical user interface,  which aids researchers to assess initial cr~stal and
              data quality in  real time and hence to make sensible on-line decisions in the
              conduct  of their experiments.          The APS and associated x-ray beamlines
              represent a large national  investment from many funding agencies, namely the
              US Department of  Energy, the National Science Foundation, the National
              Institutes of  Health, the State of Illinois, private foundations and
              institutions.  The research effort at The University of Chicago is organized in
              the  Consortium of Advanced Radiation Sources (CARS), comprising the Geo-, 
              Soil-, and Environmental Sciences (GSECARS), the Biological Sciences 
              (BioCARS), and Chemistry and Material Sciences (ChemMatCARS).        The
              proposed total project cost is estimated to be $ 2.05M. One  half of the
              funding is requested in this proposal and the other half  will be provided as a
              nonFederal match from funds granted by the  Australian Nuclear Science and
              Technology Organization (ANSTO) to The  University of Chicago acting for and on
              behalf of CARS.
