Title       : Development of a Great Lakes Bioenergetics, Physiology, and Behavior Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1998   
File        : a9601941

Award Number: 9601941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John W. Cross                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal J. Snyder snyderrj@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jiangang Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kyle Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hunter Carrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      The Great Lakes Center of Buffalo State College requests funds to 
              develop the laboratoryinstNmentation for experiments on the  bioenergetics,
              physiology and behavior of freshwater fish and plankton.  The experiments
              conducted with these instNments will be coupled to our  existing modeling
              programs in fish bioenergetics, spatial modeling of  habitat quality, 3-D
              foraging models and individual-based models of  fish populations and
              ecosystems. The new laboratory equipment will  provide a tight coupling and
              feedback between laboratory  experimentation and model development that will
              produce an integrated  empirical and theoretical approach to studying
              freshwater ecosystems.          The core equipment enhancement requested in
              this proposal is a  computer controlled water quality control system for
              bioenergetics,  behavior and physiology experiments and for culturing and
              maintenance  of fish and plankton in the laboratory. The Great Lakes Center of 
              Buffalo State College has the only modern Aquatic Research Laboratory  (opened
              1994) located on the lower Great Lakes (ol Lake Erie) capable  of supporting
              experimental aquatic research with lake water. The  Aquatic Research Laboratory
              is a new 7,000+ sq. ft. facility equipped  with fish and zooplankton culture
              rooms, experimental laboratories with  flow-through water systems (well water
              and lake water), a workshop,  classroom, biological sorting center and direct
              access to Lake Erie.  Experimental work at the Aquatic Research Laboratory has
              suffered from  an inability to maintain water temperature and water quality at
              levels  required for bioenergetics, behavioral and physiological experiments.  
                     Equipment for laboratory experimental facilities is requested to 
              collect detailed, speciesspecific data required for studies of  freshwater
              ecosystems and for the associated modeling efforts. The  equipment will provide
              facilities needed for experiments on metabolic  rates, consumption rates,
              predator-prey interactions, reactive  distances, and  physiological responses
              to stress in both fish and  plankton. These data will provides full sets of
              parameter values for  species-specific models (bioenergetics, foraging, etc.)
              and eliminate  the need to "borrow" data from unrelated species in model
              development.  In addition, the data will allow for measures of fish and
              plankton  physiological responses to changes in environmental conditions that
              may  occur naturally or result form anthropogenic effects on the ecosystem.    
                   The instrumentation we have requested will add to the Great Lakes 
              Center's Aquatic Research Laboratory by enhancing our training of  students
              (undergraduate and graduate) and researchers (postdoctoral and  visiting
              research scientists). Research training programs will benefit  by adding a
              laboratory experimentation component to our already strong  field and modeling
              programs. The Great Lakes Center has recently begun  the only Graduate Program
              in Great Lakes Environmental Sciences in the  country, and the requested
              laboratory facility would be a fertile  training ground for students enrolled
              in this program. In 1995 the  Great Lakes Center hosted visiting scientists
              from Canada, Israel, and  other institutions within New York to train them on
              the techniques we  have developed for integrating our field sampling and
              spatial modeling  programs. The laboratory instrumentation will provide a
              sorely needed  component to the Great Lakes Center Aquatic Research Laboratory
              for  training and research on freshwater ecosystems.
