Title       : Computer for DNA Sequence Informatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9601678

Award Number: 9601678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Sederoff volvo@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Weir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ben-hui Lui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Wiegmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Atchley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This  proposal  is  a  request  for  partial  funding  of  a  DNA  sequencing
              and DNA informatics facility. The funds requested from  NSF  will be used to
              provide computers for this facility and  for  associated  research in DNA
              informatics. Funds have already  been  obtained  to purchase two automated
              sequencers. This facility  is  intended to become a nucleus for research and
              teaching of Genomic  Sciences on the NCSU campus.    Significance  of  the 
              proposed activity to  the  advancement  of  knowledge  and  education:  New
              advances  in  the  automation  of  sequencing technology have created a new
              paradigm for research on  organisms of long term scientific or commercial
              interest. In this  new  paradigm,  DNA  sequence is the primary basis  for 
              defining  function  of  the  expressed genes in a tissue, organ  or  entire 
              organism.  It is now necessary and feasible to obtain far  larger  amounts  of 
              sequence information to address a  wide  variety  of  important  biological
              problems. These areas include:  development  and physiology of experimental
              organisms, the genetic engineering  of agricultural plants and animals, and the
              fundamental issues of  population biology, systematics and biodiversity that
              are  needed  to   understand  the  mechanisms  of  biological  adaptation  and 
              evolution.  A  major  barrier  to the  application  of  this  new  paradigm in
              all areas of basic and applied biology is the lack of  adequate computational
              and statistical tools for the analysis  of  DNA   sequences.   Methodology  for
               DNA   sequence   information  acquisition   and   analysis  is  important  for
                our   nation's  intellectual resource base, our research capability, and for
              long  term industrial development.    Statement of Objectives: High throughput
              sequencing, and advanced  computational  analysis  of  sequence information 
              are  essential  technologies  for  NCSU  to advance our position  as  leaders 
              in  Biotechnology  of Agriculture and Forestry. The purpose  of  this  proposal
               is to create  a facility for DNA sequencing and sequence  analysis  through
              the cooperation of the College  of  Agriculture  and Life Sciences, the College
              of Veterinary Medicine, College of  Physical  &  Mathematical  Science, and 
              the  College  of  Forest  Resources.  This  facility will provide "state of 
              the  art"  DNA  sequence  and gene mapping, and computational technology  at 
              low  cost  to  NCSU  faculty  and the larger research  community.  One  project
               to  be  carried out at the facility is  the  "Pine  Gene  Discovery Project"
              that will identify all of the expressed  genes  of  pine,  a  project  of great
              importance  for  systematics  and  biodiversity  and  also  for  the  wood 
              products  industry.   In  addition,  the  facility  will  serve  an 
              educational  role   by  introducing  automated sequencing and DNA  informatics 
              into  the  curriculum.    Research  and  Academic Infrastructure: NCSU has a
              long  standing  reputation  for  excellence in statistical  analysis  of 
              genetic  information,  population  genetics,  quantitative  genetics,  and 
              plant  molecular  biology. In addition to the immediate  need  to  fund 
              computational  capability for the DNA sequencing  facility,  our  most 
              advanced  research programs in  the  analysis  of  DNA  sequence information
              are already nearing the limitations  of  the  existing  computational
              equipment. The establishment of a  strong  informatics component with a DNA
              sequencing facility, integrating  existing  programs of quantitative and
              molecular genetics  should  lead to important new information and technology.  
               This  is a joint proposal by 47 investigators from 20 Departments  and  five
              Colleges of NCSU. These investigators represent a broad  spectrum of scientific
              knowledge, skills and experience  and  who  all  share  a  need  for a local
              high-throughput  DNA  sequencing  facility  with  advanced computational
              capability.  $184,000  has  been  awarded  by the North Carolina Biotechnology
              Center  toward  the  establishment of this facility. The U niversity  has  made
               a  commitment  for  space,  salary for a Lab  Manager,  and  support 
              facilities  to  maintain  the  sequencing  center.  $162,622   is  requested 
              from NSF for computing equipment. The  total  cost  to  establish  the 
              facility  in year 1  is  $621,  211.  The  amount  requested from NSF is 26% of
              the total cost.
