Title       : Religious Movements in Algeria and Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9601439

Award Number: 9601439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61818              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansoor Moaddel SOC_moaddel@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of religious movements in Algeria and Jordan. These countries
              are additional cases to the list of countries included in an earlier
              comparative project (SES-  9213209) on "Episode and Discourse: Islamic
              Modernism, Liberal-Nationalism, and  Fundamentalism in the Contemporary Middle
              East."  This larger project is a study of: (i) the determinants of ideological
              production; (ii) the connection between macro social change and the rise or
              decline of ideological movements; (iii) the specific manner in which ideology
              is produced, its themes are formulated, and its social and political
              orientations take shape; (iv) the factors explaining variations in the success
              and level of institutionalization of ideological movements; and (v) the
              relationship between ideology and interest.  These theoretical issues are
              addressed in the analysis of: (i) the rise of Islamic modernist movements in
              India, Egypt, and Iran in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries; (ii)
              the rise of liberal-nationalism in Egypt, Iran, and Syria in the 1920s to
              l950s; and (iii) the rise of Islamic fundamentalism in Egypt, Iran, Pakistan,
              and Syria in the post 1950s.  Drawing from John Stuart Mill's methods of
              experimental inquiry, the comparative logic employed in this project required
              the addition of Algeria and Jordan to fully assess the explanatory power of the
              project's causal model and to partial out the confounding effects of other
              factors: (i) To what extent does Shi'i institutional development explain the
              strength of fundamentalism in Iran? (ii) To what extent do Western cultural
              infiltration and the ruling elite's close ties with the West explain the rise
              of Islamic fundamentalism?            Analyses of ideological movements in
              Algeria and Jordan are important in their own right, because these nations are
              influential in the Islamic world, having noticeable impacts on world politics. 
              Revolution in Algeria has inspired many revolutionary movements in the region.
              Algeria is currently experiencing an upsurge of a  strong fundamentalist
              movement on a par with Iranian fundamentalism.  Jordan is a secular state which
              has not faced a serious challenge from the fundamentalist groups and is
              developing democratic institutions and pluralist politics.  From the study of
              each of these countries one can therefore draw critical lessons that have both
              scientific merit and practical significance for peace.
