Title       : Sustainable Knowledge About the Global Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9601987

Award Number: 9601987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clark A. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith V. Reppy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Hilgartner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,1317,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Effective international policymaking about global change requires `sustainable`
              scientific knowledge that can 1) promote shared and robust understandings of
              nature and society across disparate cultures and political demands, and 2)
              create a long-term balance between human and natural systems while accomodating
              social and environmental change.  The task is further complicated by the
              proliferation of new international expert bodies and advisory processes in
              which many domestic tools used to incorporate scientific knowledge into policy
              decisions are weak or absent.  Problems of data quality and standardization,
              and related issues of trust and accountability, are intensified in the arena of
              global policymaking.  To assess these difficulties and assist in their
              consideration, this project undertakes a comparative study of the way
              scientific knowledge develops and is used in four international treaty
              frameworks:  climate change, ozone depletion, endangered species, and
              biodiversity.  Preliminary work will also be done on conceptual underpinnings
              for research on the environmental dimensions of two further treaties:  NAFTA
              and GATT.  In testing and developing their theoretical position on the
              co-production of knowledge and social order, leading to new forms of politics
              and science, the investigators expect to refine concepts -- including
              participation and governance -- currently used in different ways in the
              literatures of science studies, international relations, and environmental
              policy.  The study focuses on two distinct but interconnected questions:  one
              concerning understanding in the social sciences about the processes by which
              scientific knowledge and social order evolve and sustain each other in
              international environmental politics, and another asking how this understanding
              should influence future institutions and processes for undertaking and
              disseminating science relevant to international policy.  It examines knowledge
              production in each of the regimes, investigating:  the development of
              international expert committees; procedures for standardizing assumptions,
              parameters, techniques, and methods; the incorporation of knowledge into new
              market arrangements; legal decisions involving scientific knowledge; and public
              participation in expert institutions.   The project team uses a variety of
              qualitative research methods, including archival research, textual
              interpretation, legal analysis, case studies, elite interviews, and participant
              observation, in a cross-temporal and cross-sectoral comparison.  As a
              cooperative team, they will exchange information throughout the grant period
              and meet once each summmer for intensive review. Advisors at Cornell and other
              institutions will also provide critical guidance.  The project will create and
              maintain an archive of the materials relevant to each of the four treaty
              regimes, and make an electronic index of archived materials available to
              interested outside users.  Project results will be presented at professional
              and policy meetings, and in peer-reviewed journals as well as more widely
              circulated publications.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
