Title       : Acquisition of 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer for High Resolution Solution Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9601705

Award Number: 9601705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Gettins pgettins@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiubei Liao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Introduction  For the ten research projects described  here,  the  role   of 
              NMR  spectroscopy  ranges  from  an  extremely  useful  complement  to other
              spectroscopic and biochemical approaches  to  being the sine qua non for
              accomplishment of the project specific  aims.   In   each  case,  however,  a 
              sophisticated,  sensitive,  high-field  spectrometer is essential for the NMR 
              components  of  the project. Such equipment is not available at the University
              of  Illinois at Chicago (UIC) and this situation has led either to an 
              interruption of on-going projects, to acquisition of  data  on  a  limited 
              scale  elsewhere, or to an external collaboration  as  a  default.  This  is 
              clearly unacceptable for a major  Research  I  university  such  as  UIC  and
              must be  urgently  remedied.  This  proposal  for  a  new  500MHz NMR
              spectrometer  to  be  used  for  solution  structural  studies on proteins,
              peptides  and  complex  natural  products therefore represents part of a
              broader plan  to  address  the  major deficits in NMR spectroscopic  facilities
               at  UIC. The second part of the plan, to be dealt with separately, is  to 
              acquire  additional NMR instrumentation  equally-focussed  to  satisfy   the 
              needs  of  solids  researchers.  This  two-pronged  strategy was partly
              prompted by very sensible reviewers' comments  on  an  earlier  unsuccessful
              proposal to NSF-ARI  for  a  600MHz  spectrometer.  That  single  instrument 
              proposal  attempted   to  satisfy  both solids and bio-macromolecule
              researchers. We  think  that  the present bipartite, focussed-use strategy is
              both a more  cost effective and efficient one. Proposed Instrumentation We are 
              requesting  50% matching funds for the purchase of a narrow  bore  500MHz NMR
              spectrometer optimized for solution structural studies  on   low  
              concentrations  of  bio-macromolecules   and   complex  plant-derived natural
              products. The spectrometer will consist of:  1.  Basic  two-RF  channel  (with
              lock) 500MHz  spectrometer  and    standard  bore ( 52mm) superconducting
              magnet with host computer    and  software,  temperature control unit and
              vibration  damping    unit. 2. Additional two RF channels and 2H-decoupling
              hardware.    3.  5mm pulsed field gradient inverse triple resonance (13C and   
              l5N) and inverse broadband       (15N to 31P) probes. 5mm 19F-lH dual probe. 
              4. Additional temperature stabilization unit to give control of  better than
              0.1 C.  Price  quotes  have  been received from the  two  major  vendors, 
              Bruker  and  Varian. Although a detailed budget has been  written  for  Bruker 
              (p  31),  the  choice of instrument  will  be  based  principally  on 
              comparative performance, in  addition  to  other  considerations  such as cost
              and future technical  and  equipment  support. All available instruments will
              be evaluated.  Research  and  Training  to  be  Conducted  The  research  to 
              be  conducted  all  relates  to NMR solution  structural  studies  on 
              biomolecules.  The  studies fall into two  main  categories.  (i)  Structure
              elucidation of medium sized proteins, protein  domains,  and their complexes
              with DNA, with other protein domains and with  peptide or polysaccharide
              ligands. Such studies benefit from  the  highestfield,   most   sensitive   and
                experimentally-versatile  spectrometer  available.  (ii)  Structure 
              elucidation  of  novel  complex  plant-derived  natural  products,  which 
              requires   the  sensitivity  of a 500MHz spectrometer and the versatility  of 
              an  instrument with up-to-date multi-channel pulse capabilities.        Both 
              graduate  students and postdoctoral fellows  will  be  trained  in the theory
              and application of modern NMR spectroscopy  by   the  core  of  six 
              investigators  with  expertise  in   NMR  spectroscopic  methods.  A  joint
              bi-weekly  NMR  users  research  meeting  is  planned as a forum for
              dissemination of new  methods  and critical evaluation of acquired results. 
              Activity  resulting from funding State-of-the-art high field  NMR 
              instrumentation  will  have a profound  and   positive  effect  on  structural 
              research  on campus. In addition  to  permitting  the  successful   completion 
              of  on-going  projects  it  will   allow  researchers who must now go elsewhere
              to carry out their  studies  on  campus.  This in turn will increase the local 
              visibility  of  structurally-oriented research and help both  in  recruitment 
              of  structurally-oriented  faculty, postdocs  and  students,  and  in 
              fostering collaborations between faculty within the university.
