Title       : Acquisition of Electrophysiological Equipment to Study the Modulatory Influence
               of Circulating Hormones on Well-DefinedNeural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9601528

Award Number: 9601528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Norris bnorris@mailhost1.csusm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U San Marcos Fdn
	      435 East Carmel Street
	      San Marcos, CA  920784362    760/750-4700

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This grant will be used to acquire equipment with which to  conduct
              neurophysiological experiments. The equipment will  consist of a vibration
              isolation table, micromanipulators,  oscilloscope, appropriate amplifiers, tape
              and chart recorders,  and stimulator.        The research conducted with this
              equipment will determine  the precise influences circulating hormones have on a
               well-defined neural network. The preparation used will be the  Stomatogastric
              Nervous System (STNS) of the spiny lobster  Panulirus interruptus. The STNS
              controls all movements associated  with the stomach. In lobsters, chewing
              occurs internally, in the  gastric mill region of the stomach. The
              stomatogastric ganglion  (STG) in particular produces two distinct motor
              patterns  associated with the stomach movements.        Molting in lobsters is
              controlled by two types of  circulating hormones - a collection of steroid
              hormones  collectively called ecdysteroids, and a peptide hormone called  Molt
              Inhibiting Hormone (MIH). During the molt cycle, the  circulating levels of MIH
              decrease, and this triggers a rise in  ecdysteroids (Figure 1). Molting occurs
              once ecdysteroid levels  have reached a peak and begin to decline. The lobster
              stops  eating prior to molting and sheds the lining of the stomach  during the
              molt. My working hypothesis thus is that MIH plays an  essential role in
              maintaining the day-to-day functioning of the  STNS. I further expect that
              declining levels of MIH, or  increasing levels of ecdysteroid, will initially
              inhibit the  motor patterns of the STG. The subsequent drop in ecdysteroid 
              levels that triggers the molt will in turn elicit a novel motor  pattern
              associated with shedding the lining of the stomach.  Molting in crustaceans can
              be induced by removing the eyestalks  of juvenile animals. The eyestalks
              contain the neurosecretory  cells that release MIH. Eyestalk ablation leads to
              an increase in  ecdysteroids. Because the animal itself is making the hormones,
               the appropriate ecdysteroids are pro duced in the proper ratios.        I will
              use anatomical and physiological techniques to  examine the effects of
              circulating hormones on the STNS. My  specific aims will be: Aim 1: Determine
              the precise  concentrations of circulating ecdysteroids during the molt cycle 
              in the spiny lobster. I have already initiated a collaboration  with Dr. D.
              Watson at the University of Alabama, Birmingham in  which he will run
              radioimmunoassays to determine the circulating  levels of ecdysteroids during
              induced molts. Serum samples will  be withdrawn from animals during various
              stages of the molt cycle  to determine the time-course for hormonal changes
              during molting.  Aim 2: Examine the change in expression of modulatory 
              neurotransmitters. A single result from an early experiment in  Cancer borealis
              suggests that the expression of certain  modulatory transmitters is
              downregulated during natural molts. I  will use anatomical and
              immunocytochemical techniques to measure  the expression of identified
              transmitter substances within the  STNS in eyestalk ablated and control
              animals. Aim 3: Examine  changes in STNS motor patterns and individual network
              neurons  prior to and during molts. To do this, I will use a combination  of
              intracellular and extracellular recordings to monitor rhythmic  motor patterns.
              Preliminary work will consist of extracellular  and intracellular monitoring of
              the STG motor patterns in  molt-induced and control animals. In later
              experiments, I will  use voltage clamp techniques to monitor changes in ionic 
              conductances in individual neurons. Aim 4: Characterize changes  in the effects
              of modulatory inputs to the motor pattern  generating network. Previous
              research I conducted suggests that  the effects of modulatory inputs to the STG
              is altered prior to a  spontaneous molt. I will use bath application of
              identified and  characterized neuromodulators as well as stimulation of 
              individual inputs to compare effects during and between molts.        The work
              will initially be conducted by myself  and 2 or 3  undergraduates. When CSU San
              Marcos begins its Master's degree  program in 1997, I hope to have at least 2
              graduate students  (Masters) working in the lab. I also teach courses in
              Comparative  Physiology, Human Physiology, Neurobiology, and Endocrinology. 
              The equipment purchased with this grant will be used for  demonstrations in
              conjunction with these courses. California  State University at San Marcos has
              committed itself to offering a  program in the Biological Sciences that
              stresses the use of  modern equipment and the latest techniques. This
              commitment is  shown in part by the generous set-up funds for a University of 
              this size. However, the costs of acquiring the equipment  necessary of
              neurophysiological research are beyond the  capability of this institution. I
              therefore hope the NSF will  support the university in its endeavor.
