Title       : RUI: Regulation of Bacillus subtilis SOS Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9601398

Award Number: 9601398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lovett clovett@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Lovett  9601398  The objective of this research is to elucidate the mechanisms
              involved in the induction of Bacillus subtilis SOS genes following DNA damage
              and during competence development.  Previous results indicate that induction of
              B. subtilis SOS genes by DNA damage follows the RecA-mediated cleavage of the
              SOS repressor (DinR) whereas during competence development the induction of at
              least one SOS gene (recA) appears to involve repressor displacement, but not
              cleavage. We will use a combination of mutational analysis, protein
              cross-linking, NOR spectroscopy, and kinetic analyses to investigate the
              molecular details of RecA-mediated DinR cleavage that occurs following DNA
              damage. We also will test the hypothesis that induction of the recA gene (and
              perhaps other SOS genes) in competent cells is due to the displacement of the
              DinR protein from the SOS operator by the competence transcription factor,
              comic. Specifically, we will examine the effect of ComK binding on the binding
              affinity of DinR to the recA operator using quantitative hydroxyl radical
              footprinting analysis with purified proteins. To establish the biological
              relevance of this binding analysis, we will conduct similar studies using crude
              extracts from fractionated competent cells and study the effects of ComK and
              DinR on transcription from the recA promoter in vitro. Since a complete
              understanding of the B. subtilis SOS response will ultimately require the
              characterization of over SOS genes that are induced by DNA damage and
              competence development, we will use the binding activity of the DinR protein to
              search the B. subtilis genome for other SOS genes.  The results of this
              research will elucidate the way in which DNA repair genes in the
              bacteriumBacillus subtilis are turned on in response to DNA damaging treatments
              (e.g. exposure to carcinogenic agents); these results should have a significant
              impact on the understanding of similar DNA repair systems in other organisms.
              This work will focus primarily on the interactions that o ccur between the two
              proteins that regulate the expression of DNA repair genes-- an activator and a
              repressor. Our results are expected to provide molecular pictures of the
              sequence of events leading from the activation of the activator protein to the
              destruction of the repressor protein that results in the induction of DNA
              repair activity. Because the destruction mechanism is a biochemical strategy
              that is apparently used extensively in biological systems, our results will
              also inform the understanding of similar processes. In addition, the study of
              inducible DNA repair in B. subtilis is particularly important because there is
              a link between the regulation of inducible DNA repair and the regulation of a
              developmental stage that specializes in genetic recombination (i.e. the
              transfer of DNA from one individual to another). Our results will elucidate the
              way that certain DNA repair genes are turned on, in the absence of DNA damage,
              during this developmental stage.
