Title       : Development of Atomic Force Microscopic Instrumentation for the Detection of
               Chemical and Biological Forces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9601789

Award Number: 9601789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Henderson eric@bioforcelab.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc D. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This proposal seeks to establish an interdisciplinary  research program
              at Iowa State University (ISU) in the detection  of biomolecular forces using
              the principles of atomic force  microscopy (AFM). This goal will be
              accomplished by the formation  of a collaborative research group at ISU that is
              composed of  scientists from the Department of Zoology & Genetics and the 
              Department of Chemistry, evolving to include collaborations with  investigators
              in other ISU departments. The central focus of  research will be the detection
              and measurement of the binding  forces operative in the interactions between
              relatively simple  (e.g., amino acids) and more complex (e.g., short peptides, 
              protein/nucleic acid, antibody-antigen) biomolecular systems. The  information
              gained from these investigations will provide  important insight into the
              binding modes related to the molecular  recognition, self-assembly, and folding
              of biomolecular systems.  Furthermore, these studies will enhance the
              implementation of  emerging molecular force detection techniques in
              bioanalytical  diagnostics.           The development of this program is
              divided into three  interrelated projects, all of which seek to take advantage
              of the  ability of AFM and its variants to probe interfacial  architectures at
              nanometer length scales. The three projects are:    Project 1: Tip-Substrate
              Modification Methods. This project  focuses on the development of new, or the
              extension of existing,  methods for the chemical and biological modification of
              AFM tips.  Approaches will also be devised for the construction of spatially 
              patterned surfaces as platforms for the preparation of small,  localized arrays
              of different molecular species.    Project 2: Molecular Force Interactions.
              This project  investigates the molecular level interactions of biological 
              materials through AFM-force characterizations using the materials  created in
              Project 1. The project starts with characterizations  under a variety of
              contacting liquids (e.g., organic sol vents and  biological media) of model
              chemical systems (e.g., -CO2H, -CH3),  progresses to increasingly complex
              systems (e.g., amino acids,  short peptides), and culminates with studies of
              the biomolecular  force interactions between supermolecular domains (e.g., the 
              leucine zipper) and whole molecules (e.g., antibody/antigen  complexes).   
              Project 3: The BioMolecular Force Microscope (BMFM). This project  entails the
              construction of a first generation AFM that is  designed specifically for the
              detection and measurement of forces  between biological materials. The BMFM
              will be based on  established design principles for molecular force detection
              and  on the findings in Projects 1 and 2.           To carry out the above
              projects, funding is requested for  instrumentation acquisition and
              construction, and for partial  support of personnel and supplies associated
              with the design,  development, operation, and maintenance of the
              instrumentation.  As part of the institutional costsharing, ISU will provide 
              support for instrumentation and for several of the research and  training
              activities for the development of this program. This  support extends well past
              the recommended 50% cost share by NSF,  demonstrating the high level of
              commitment by ISU to the  initiation and growth of the program.
