Title       : Acquisition of NMR and X-ray Instrumentation for Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9601661

Award Number: 9601661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur G. Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      Structural biology and biophysics using NMR spectroscopy  and x-ray
              crystallography are historic strengths of Columbia  University. Research
              interests range from the development of new  techniques, to the determination
              of the structural and dynamical  properties of proteins and nucleic acids, to
              the structure-based  investigation of fundamental biophysical and chemical
              properties  of biological macromolecules. Future continuation and expansion  of
              Columbia University's seminal contributions to structural  biology and
              biophysics is threatened by the increasing age and  inadequacy of the existing
              NMR and x-ray instrumentation. The NMR  Center presently houses three Bruker
              NMR spectrometers with  proton resonance frequencies of 300 MHz, 400 MHz and
              500 MHz. The  spectrometers were installed in 1985; only the 500 MHz instrument
               has been upgraded to any significant extent since the original  installation.
              The age of the NMR spectrometers precludes  performance of critically important
              modern experiments. The  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics
              x-ray  facility houses two Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode x-ray  generators, two
              Huber precession cameras, one Rigaku RAXIS-II  imaging area detector, one
              Xuong-Hamlin multiwire area detector  served by a Rigaku AFC-6 goniormeter, and
              three cryogenic  systems. The Xuong-Hamlin multiwire detector is no longer 
              suitable for current research projects. For both the NMR and  x-ray facilities,
              backlogs for scheduling critical experiments  ranges from one to two months
              with current users.          To address evident needs, a new 600 MHz NMR
              spectrometer  will be purchased and consoles upgrades will be purchased for the
               500 MHz and 400 M-Hz instruments .These decisions are based on  the following
              considerations: (1) an additional high field  spectrometer is necessary to
              provide timely access for the  (burgeoning) research groups of the present
              faculty and to make  possible recruitment of one or two additional junior
              faculty  members. (2) An upgr ade of the 500 MHz console is required for 
              performance of state-of-the-art experiments. (3) An upgrade of  the 400 MHz
              spectrometer will allow methods development,  preliminary data collection to
              evaluate sample integrity, and  training to be performed at lower field. This
              will have the  effect of significantly leveraging production on the 500 MHz and
               600 MHz spectrometers.          To alleviate the limitations of the present
              x-ray  crystallographic instrumentation, two imaging plate area  detectors
              systems (including detector, focusing mirrors and cryo  delivery system) and
              one Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode x-ray  generator will be purchased. Following
              the requested  acquisitions, the x-ray facility will house three x-ray 
              generators, three area detector systems, and two Huber precession  cameras.
              Each x-ray generator can support two precession cameras  or area detectors;
              therefore, two of the x-ray generators will be  equipped with a precession
              camera and an area detector. The third  generator will be equipped with an area
              detector, leaving one  slot for future expansion. The Xuong-Hamlin detector
              will be  decommissioned. The following advantages will accrue from the 
              requested instrumentation: (I) the approximate doubling of the  capacity of the
              x-ray facility will permit existing research  groups to perform experiments in
              a timely fashion; (2)  recruitment of an additional faculty member in
              biomolecular x-ray  crystallography will be facilitated by the availability of 
              sufficient x-ray instrumentation to support another beginning  faculty research
              group; and (3) the increased sensitivity of the  new detectors (and optics)
              will permit performance "in-house" of  experiments that previously have been
              performed at synchrotron  sources.
