Title       : Organization of the Pathway of Urea Synthesis In Situ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9601421

Award Number: 9601421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalie S. Cohen ncohen@hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601421  Cohen  Evidence from several laboratories has shown that the cell is a
              highly structured system, in which the cytoskeleton and intracellular membranes
              form a scaffold for the attachment of organized arrays of functionally related
              enzymes. The purpose of this project is to identify some of the mechanisms
              underlying the intracellular organization of soluble enzyme systems, using the
              urea cycle as an experimental model. The pathway of urea synthesis in mammalian
              liver consists of five enzymes, which operate in two cellular compartments; the
              first two reactions are catalyzed by enzymes in the mitochondrial matrix, and
              the next three by cytoplasmic enzymes. Although all the enzymes are soluble
              (they go into solution when cells or organelles are disrupted in the absence of
              detergent), the pathway is highly organized in situ; it behaves as a functional
              unit within which intermediates are channeled between enzymes and compartments,
              and the three cytoplasmic enzymes are sequentially organized at the
              mitochondrial membrane. In addition, like their respective proteins, the mRNAs
              of two of the cytoplasmic enzymes, argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) and
              argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) are localized next to mitochondria, indicating
              that the translation of these proteins occurs at their final intracellular
              site. The aims of this research are: 1) To investigate the mechanisms
              underlying the localization of ASS and ASL mRNAs, by: a) determining if these
              mRNAs are enriched in a particular polysome population, some of which may be
              associated in situ with mitochondria, and/or with a specific component of the
              cytoskeleton; b) identifying the mRNA sequences involved in targeting; and c)
              identifying the cellular component(s) that serve as the target for these mRNAs.
              2) To determine how the localization of ASS and ASL protein is maintained.
              Protein-protein interactions of ASS and ASL with each other, or with a
              component of the mitochondrial outer membrane, or of the endoplasmic reticulum
              or cytoskeleton in the m itochondrial vicinity, will be studied in situ using:
              a) reversible cross-linking reagents and immunological methods; and b) the
              two-hybrid system of gene expression. The aim is to identify the specific
              protein regions participating in the interactions, and to detect and
              characterize any other proteins involved in anchoring the enzymes.  %%%  Living
              cells are highly structured systems, in which certain enzyme proteins that are
              related in their overall function are organized into multicomponent complexes
              in specific locations in the cell. Because it allows them to function more
              efficiently, the intracellular organization of soluble enzyme systems is a
              significant and basic feature of cells. Identification of the mechanisms
              underlying that organization is an important matter of general interest for
              many aspects of cell function. This research will increase our knowledge and
              understanding of the regulation of urea synthesis, a major function of
              mammalian liver. It will also provide basic information directly relevant to
              other enzyme pathways whose function may be dependent on specific intracellular
              organization and localization.  ***
