Title       : U.S.-Turkey Workshop on 'Descriptive Models of Engineering Design' - Istanbul,
               Turkey, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9601999

Award Number: 9601999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer Akin oa04@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1039,5940,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports participation of six American scientists
              in a U.S.-Turkish binational workshop on `Description Models of Engineering
              Design` to be held at the Faculty of Architecture of Istanbul Technical
              University, in Istanbul, Turkey in the Fall of 1996.  This project brings
              together a number of experts from the U.S. and from Turkey, as well as a number
              of experts from few other countries.   The purpose is to encourage
              inter-disciplinary interaction and collaboration between researchers interested
              in describing engineering design for a variety of purposes, including :
              understanding, prediction, explanation, formal modeling, simulation, decision
              support, design assistance, and automation.  Formal methods and tool
              development in the area of engineering and building design have had limited
              success.  For example, computer assisted building design (CABD) has made little
              impact in the design delivery process or the actual performance of building or
              similar structures.  Recently there has been an increase in the attention paid
              to understanding how humans design and how they use tools-especially electronic
              ones- while they design.   Efforts in this area are carried out by the NSF
              supported Engineering Design Research Center, at Carnegie Mellon University, to
              develop design tools and understand their use, to improve performance in
              industry.   Scope:  This project supports a new idea for a workshop dealing
              with design as multidisciplinary endeavor applicable to many engineering fields
              such as in structures, machines, and other engineering  systems.  The workshop
              will serve as a medium for interdisciplinary exchange of findings and ideas
              between international participants who will be distributed between several key
              disciplines such as mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, building
              engineering, and architecture.  The meeting will produce publications including
              pre-proceedings, and selected publications in the international journal of
              Design Studies, and later in an edited book.  The meeting also is to forge a
              plan of cooperation among participating individuals and institutions.  The
              cooperation will target key concepts: practice, tool, inter-disciplinary
              transfer, productivity and creativity.  This project allows a U.S. team of
              eminent scientists to work in an international setting with foreign colleagues
              to stimulate this important area of improvement in design.  The project meets
              the objectives of the Division of International Programs (INT).  The Division
              of Civil and Mechanical Systems and INT are jointly funding this project.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
