Title       : Acquisition of Automated Genotyping and Sequencing Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9601476

Award Number: 9601476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Kreitman mkre@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joy M. Bergelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Unprecedented growth in the use of molecular methods by the  ecology,
              population genetics, and plant molecular genetics  groups in Hull Gourt,
              representing three biology departments,  motivates this proposal for support of
              automated equipment for  DNA sequencing and molecular genotyping. This growth
              has been  propelled by three forces, the exciting scientific  possibilities
              made accessible with sequence data - many of  which are being charted for the
              first time by the proposed  users, technological innovations in automated
              sequencing, and  the strategic growth of the three biology groups at the 
              University of Chicago. To further enhance research excellence  and leadership,
              and to provide research training opportunities  we have developed a plan for a
              "hands-on" multi-user facility  that will contain equipment needed to carry out
              all steps in  DNA sequencing and genotyping. The facility will include two  new
              DNA sequencers and a workstation for automated sample  processing, in addition
              to an existing ABI 373A sequencer. The  facility will also have high capacity
              temperature cycling  machines for carrying out sequencing reactions,
              centrifuges,  and other equipment needed for this work. To accommodate the 
              requirements for data editing, statistical analysis and  database comparisons
              generated by the research, the facility  will house four Macintosh PowerPC and
              two Silicon Graphics  workstations. The computing speed afforded by these 
              workstations will assure the group's leadership in the rapidly  growing field
              of simulating molecular population genetics and  evolutionary processes. It
              will also promote the synergistic  interaction of complementing strengths -
              computation  (population geneticists) and informatics (molecular  geneticists).
              The facility will be managed by Dr. L-W Zen,  under the supervision of Dr. M.
              Kreitman and a three person  Instrument Policy Committee.      These modern
              instruments will have broad impact on the  University community. The 13 primary
              faculty users belong to  si x graduate training programs, and currently have 22
               postdoctoral research associates, 39 graduate students, and 26  undergraduates
              working in their labs, including 34 women and  eight members of minority
              groups. The nine secondary users have  14 postdoctoral research associates, 28
              graduate students and  13 undergraduates. All qualified users will have access
              to the  sequencing facility 24 hours a day. More than one hundred 
              undergraduates, over half of whom are women, will use the  instrumentation
              annually through required courses, independent  research, and other training
              opportunities. The University is  an NSF REU site, and also supports summer
              undergraduate  research with grants from Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the 
              Pew Foundation, and the Biological Sciences Division. The  Biological Sciences
              Division also participates in the Summer  Research Opportunities Program (SROP)
              and the DBS Minority  Summer Fellowship Program, both of which provide research
               opportunities for minorities.      The use of naturally occurring DNA sequence
              variation in  the analysis of biological processes is a common theme that 
              unites the three areas of research represented by the primary  users -
              molecular population genetics, molecular ecology, and  plant molecular
              genetics. The ability to automate data  acquisition is leading to dramatic
              scientific advances in all  three areas of research, and at the same time is
              promoting  interdisciplinary interaction on an unprecedented scale. 
              Interdisciplinary research and graduate training have been  hallmarks of the
              University of Chicago's educational  philosophy. The recent growth of
              interdisciplinary evolutionary  genetics and ecology groups in the Department
              of Ecology and  Evolution, the creation of a developmental evolutionary 
              genetics group in the Department of Organismal Biology and  Anatomy, and the
              joint expansion of plant genetics by the  departments of E&E and Molecular
              Genetics and Cell Biology  (MGCB), all build on this philosophical foundation,
              and pro vide  strategic opportunities for innovative new research.      The
              successful recruitment of two senior faculty in  molecular evolutionary
              genetics by the E&E department several  years ago, M Kreitman and C-I Wu, have
              catalyzed the conversion  of research by other groups to incorportate molecular
               approaches. At the same time, E&E has embarked on a strategic  plan to develop
              research excellence in ecology by recruiting  six faculty members, S
              PruettJones, M Leibold, E Simms, C  Pfister, T Wootton and J Bergelson. Several
              are using molecular  methods in their research, and J Bergelson's work is being
               acknowledged as defining a new field of molecular ecology. At  the same time,
              MGCB has recruited into Hull Court two excellent  plant molecular geneticists,
              B Keith and D Preuss, and is  currently searching for a senior plant
              developmental  geneticist, who will also be housed in Hull Court. Crucial to 
              the fulfillment of research potential of these expanding groups  is the
              development of a Genotyping and DNA Sequencing Facility,  a point of
              convergence for all these research groups.
