Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Image Analysis and 3-D Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9601487

Award Number: 9601487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Leaf leaf@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This proposal is for the acquisition of equipment to support two 
              facilities using image analysis; an image analysis core facility and a 
              three-dimensional reconstruction facility. These facilities will be  housed in
              separate spaces on the third and fourth floors in a new  80,000 square foot
              networked Biology Building.        The image analysis core facility will be
              able to acquire  macroscopic and microscopic images. Equipment for this
              facility include  a camera stand, stereo microscope, CCD camera, framegrabber
              and Pentium  computer with Image Pro Plus software, video monitor, and
              vibration  isolation table for a new Olympus BH40 epifluorescent microscope. A 
              portable x-ray machine (housed in a research lab) will be used to  produce
              x-ray images of bone sizes and angles and egg size and number  in living
              reptiles. Radiographs measurements will be taken and analyzed  with the image
              analysis system. Data will be stored on Iomega 100 MB  zip drives. A separate
              Pentium computer with Image Pro Plus and Zip  drive will be housed in a
              computer lab to allow analysis of archived  images.        This facility will
              support research programs of several Biology  faculty across several
              disciplines. Roger Anderson and Herb Brown will  be using this facility for
              individual and collaborative projects to  examine skeletal elements and
              ecological performance in reptiles from  the wild. Giselle Muller Parker and
              Emily Peele will use image analysis  to count and size autofluorescent algae
              and fluorescently-stained  bacteria. June Ross will use the image analysis to
              measure  morphological features of fossil bryozoans.        The
              three-dimensional reconstruction facility will be used for  the optical
              sectioning of fluorescently-stained embryos, the removal of  out-of-focus
              fluorescence, the reconstruction of three-dimensional  structures, and the
              analysis of three-dimensional data. Equipment  include a vibration isolation
              table for a Leica DMRB rnicroscope, a  high resolution 40X oil objective,
              CellScan System  for  three-dimensional reconstructions, Pentium computer,
              Tektronics  printer, and a lGBJaz drive for data storage.        This facility
              will support research programs of two Biology  faculty. David Leaf will use the
              three-dimensional facility for  immunofluorescent localization of a rab
              GTPbinding protein in sea  urchin embryos. Mary Anne Pultz will use the
              facility for  immunofluorescent stainings of Nasonia wild type and mutant
              embryos  with cross-reactive antibodies against Drosophila developmental 
              regulatory proteins. Both projects are supported by NIH-AREA grants.  This
              facility will also support a collaborative project of Mary Anne  Pultz and
              David Leaf to analyze gene expression of the Nasonia  homologue of Caudal by in
              situ hybridization and immunofluorescent  staining. Finally, the facility will
              be used to start a long-term  project on producing a comparative
              three-dimensional atlas of gene  expression in Drosophila and Nasonia.
