Title       : Hudson Ethnographic Papers Documentation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9601131

Award Number: 9601131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherrie Smith-Ferri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City of ukiah -- Grace Hud
	      431 South Main Street
	      Ukiah, CA  954824923    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                With National Science Foundation support, the Grace Hudson Museum, which is
              located in the city of Ukiah, California, will curate the Pomoan materials
              collected during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Pomo Indians
              inhabited this region of California to the North of San Francisco and Grace
              Hudson, her father and later her husband collected Pomoan materials in a
              careful and systematic fashion. The documentation which accompanies the
              collections is, in most cases, detailed and the scientific value of the
              materials is increased by photographs, systematic ethnographic investigation,
              field notebooks and related correspondence. Unfortunately the collection
              suffers from disorganization and a lack of cataloguing and cross-referencing
              that renders much of these important holdings inaccessible to all but the most
              knowledgeable and persistent researchers. NSF has already awarded a grant to
              re-transcribe linguistic manuscripts, catalogue and annotate photographs and
              catalog ethnographic artifacts. This current award will allow MS Smith-Ferri to
              continue this process. Written materials and photographs will be correlated,
              annotated, indexed and cross-referenced. The information and papers themselves
              will be made available to interested users, institutions with related
              collections and Indian communities through the use of both microfilm and CD-ROM
              technology.  The last native speaker of Pomo is extremely old and much of what
              is known of early historic Pomoan lifeways is contained in the collections of
              the Hudson Museum and a few other institutions. Not only are these materials of
              great historical significance, but they are also invaluable scientific
              resources. In the current condition however they are very difficult to use and
              this grant will significantly increase their access to the scientific
              community.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
