Title       : Research in High Energy Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9601277

Award Number: 9601277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Boris Kayser                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carleton E. DeTar detar@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yong-Shi Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research will be carried out in two subfields of theoretical  elementary
              particle physics.       One project will deal with string theory, the most
              promising  candidate for the unification of all the fundamental interactions 
              in nature.  Particular attention is paid to models that can be  exactly solved
              to extract physical insights and to apply them to  the real world.  The
              strategy is to search for exact relations  between apparently different models,
              which will be then used to  solve more difficult and realistic models.  This
              project will  also investigate the theoretical basis of novel phenomena in 
              materials physics, observed in interfaces at high magnetic field.  The
              phenomena of interest are associated with a class or quantum  statistic,
              extending ideas associated with researchers such as  Bose, Einstein, Fermi and
              Dirac.  Understanding the theoretical  basis for the rich variety of complex
              phenomena in the behavior  of materials strengthens our ability to develop new
              materials and  applications.       A second project will continue first
              principle studies of  quantum chromodynamics (the theory of the strong nuclear 
              interactions) through the use of high performance computer  simulations. 
              Emphasis is to be placed on testing and refining  improved methods of
              computation that promise to extend  dramatically the power of numerical
              simulation at a vastly  reduced computational cost.  The new methods will make
              it  possible, starting from experimental results, to extract the most  precise
              information to date about the fundamental interactions in  nature.  They will
              also be used to explore the high temperature  phase transition between quarks
              and gluons confined in nuclear  particles such as nucleons and the free
              quark-gluon plasma.  Such  a phase transition occurred in the evolution of the
              early  universe and is thought to be achievable in the laboratory in 
              collisions of heavy ions at the RHIC accelerator currently under  construction
              at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.  These  studies are important for
              extending our understanding of the most  fundamental basis of our physical
              world and of the origins of our  universe.  Ideas concerning new computational
              methods are likely  to have applications in other computational fields.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
