Title       : HCI: Community, Neighborhood, and Family Influences on the Development of
               Inner-City Minority Youth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9601157

Award Number: 9601157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60332              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Gorman-Smith debgs@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick H. Tolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed study is to test a theory of the influence of
              community, neighborhood, and family functioning on the social development of
              African-American and Latino male adolescents living in inner-city and other
              urban poor communities.  Research in child and adolescent development has long
              recognized the family as the most proximal and perhaps primary influence on
              child behavioral and emotional development.  However, there is increasing
              recognition that families' ability to provide necessary functions for social
              development such as modeling of behavior, consistent care, and emotional
              support is constrained or enabled by characteristics of the neighborhood and
              community in which they live.  Parental styles and beliefs do not merely
              reflect individual proclivities, but also are shaped by considerations outside
              the family, especially the social organization of the community.  This study
              uses existing data from a four-year longitudinal study that has tracked
              multi-level indicators of adjustment and promising predictors for 300
              inner-city male youth and their families to test the impact of community
              structure (e.g., mobility, poverty, heterogeneity) on neighborhood social
              organization (e.g., support, involvement, resource use) and family functioning
              and relate these influences to adequacy of social development as indicated by
              involvement in criminal behavior, educational attainment and employment of
              inner-city youth. The nature of the transaction between communities and
              families over time and variations in relations across ethnic groups are also
              examined.  The hypotheses and related models to be tested can direct risk
              identification efforts (e.g., focus on community vs. neighborhood vs. specific
              families), prevention programs (identify which aspects of social context are
              necessary and sufficient program targets), and policy (the likely benefit and
              limitation investments in community economic and social resources to decrease
              youth risk).  %%%  The purpose of the proposed study is to test a theory of the
              influence of community, neighborhood, and family functioning on the social
              development of African-American and Latino male adolescents living in
              inner-city and other urban poor communities.  Research in child and adolescent
              development has long recognized the family as perhaps the most important
              influence on child development.  However, there is increasing recognition that
              families' ability to provide necessary functions for social development is
              strongly influenced by the neighborhood and community in which they live. 
              Parental styles and beliefs do not merely reflect individual proclivities, but
              also are shaped by considerations outside the family, especially the social
              organization of the community.  This study uses existing data from a four-year
              longitudinal study that has tracked 300 inner-city male youth and their
              families to test the impact of community structure (e.g., mobility and poverty)
              on neighborhood social organization (e.g., support, involvement, resource use)
              and family functioning.  The study examines such outcomes as criminal behavior,
              educational attainment and employment.  The model developed in this research
              holds promise in helping to identify problems for which inner-city youth are at
              particular risk, to develop prevention programs, and to inform policy on
              community economic and social resources.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
