Title       : Development of a Fisheries Acoustic Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9601948

Award Number: 9601948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Brandt   (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Horne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josef M. Jech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     We request funds to purchase an integrated package for acoustic  data
              collection, modeling, and visualization. Instrument components  include two
              4-frequency, digital acoustic systems for data acquisition,  a large
              measurement tank for instrument calibration and parameter  estimation, a
              portable soft, x-ray machine for organism anatomy  measurements, and a computer
              workstation for data management, modeling,  and visualization. When  combined,
              these instruments will form a Fisheries Acoustic Center with  enhanced computer
              power and memory; high resolution, multi-frequency  acoustic measurement and
              calibration facilities; and state-of-the-art  interactive acoustic modeling and
              visualization capabilities all housed  at a new shore-based laboratory. This
              instrumentation package will make  the Great  Lakes Center at Buffalo State
              College one of the premier institutes in  acoustic research and modeling. It
              will form a major research focus of  the Principal Investigators over the next
              5-10 years and will be a core  instrument in academic course development and
              research recruitment at  the newly reconstituted Great Lakes Center at Buffalo
              State College.         Over the past three years, we have developed a new
              analytical  approach to examine the spatial ecology and production of pelagic 
              organisms in aquatic environments. We combine the strengths of  underwater
              acoustics to measure fish abundances at high spatial  resolution, bioenergetic
              models to measure fish consumption and growth,  and spatial modeling to define
              the relationship between observed  distribution patterns and causative
              processes. This approach has been  used to assess the effects of fine-scale
              changes in the spatial  pattering of biotic and abiotic habitat on the feeding
              ecology, growth,  and production of fishes in freshwater and estuarine
              environments.  Creation of a Fisheries Acoustic Center will complement ongoing 
              ecological research by quantifying species-specific parameters used in 
              foraging and spatial models.         Th e types of ongoing and projected
              research that will use this  equipment include the field of aquatic ecology
              (acoustic assessment of  the abundances, production, distributions, sizes and
              behavior of fishes  and invertebrates in systems ranging in size from small
              lakes to the  Great Lakes and oceans), acoustical oceanography (acoustic
              measures of  swimming speeds, target strength, and identity of acoustic
              scatterers)  and spatial ecology (spatial modeling in two or three dimensions
              of the  effects of fine-scale spatial and temporal processes on large scale 
              phenomena). Training will be done at the undergraduate, graduate and 
              postgraduate levels through a combination of individual 'on-hands'  research
              experience, specialized courses, visiting scientists and  remote internet
              access.
