Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Plant and Soil Nutrient Analysis in
               Ecological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9601773

Award Number: 9601773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60511              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. May may@marshall.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank S. Gilliam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Studies of plant nutrient dynamics and ecosystem cycling  require rapid,
              accurate analytical instrumentation for  dependable, routine elemental
              analyses. Plant ecologists and  their graduate and undergraduate students at
              Marshall University  (a non-Ph.D. granting institution) have been conducting
              this type  of research for at 1east the past six years. To date, however,  the
              scope of many of these projects has been significantly  constrained by the
              limitations of our current instrumentation--  ion-selective electrode (ISE)
              meters--or by the considerable cost  of shipping samples to other laboratories
              for analyses. Funds are  therefore requested in the amount of $60,511 toward
              the purchase  of (1) a computer-controlled, continuous-flow, wet chemistry 
              analytical system, (2) a multisample block digestor for preparing  plant
              tissues and soil samples for analysis by wet digestion  techniques, and (3) two
              area meters (one portable, the other a  benchtop model) for measuring leaf
              areas as a comparative base  for determining foliar nutrient contents and
              fluuxes.       Automated wet chemistry analysis (auto-analysis) provides  the
              level of accuracy and efficiency required in nutrient  research in ecology. The
              high degree of accuracy is the result of  several advantages over other
              analytical systems, including the  ISE technology currently available at
              Marshall University. The  mixing of reagents and samples in auto-analysis is
              continuous and  uniform from sample to sample, reducing human error. The 
              colorimeter receives a continuous flow of reagent-sample and  reagent-blank
              mixtures, rather than one-at-a time analyses which  can introduce further
              error. In addition, auto-analysis is far  more time-efficient than ISE when
              numerous specimens are being  analyzed, and requires very little sample in
              order to obtain an  accurate reading. These latter factors permit many more
              samples  to be analyzed, allowing better replication and making possible a 
              number of projects that would be impractical with more   time-intensive
              methods. The smaller sample requirements also make  possible the analysis of
              tissue nutrient content in plant species  that occur infrequently in the field.
              Wet digestion and  auto-analysis thus comprise an accurate, efficient, reliable
               method for plant tissue and soil organic nutrient analysis.       The ability
              to measure leaf areas using the requested area  meters would further enhance
              the accuracy of plant nutrient flux  measurements. Because overall leaf mass
              can decline by more than  20% during senescence, when important foliar nutrient
              movements  are taking place, changes in simple nutrient concentrations  provide
              a misleading picture of nutrient flux. On the other hand,  structural
              components of leaves tend to maintain consistency in  leaf area throughout
              senescence, providing a significantly more  stable basis for ascertaining
              actual foliar nutrient contents and  fluxes.       The following two research
              projects could be initiated  shortly after acquisition of the requested
              instrumentation. (1)  The first study would assess the importance of nitrogen
              and  phosphorus resorption to the growth of a spring ephemeral plant  community
              in a nearby forest, with implications for the "vernal  dam" hypothesis.
              (Resorption is the mobilization of foliar  nutrients during senescence and
              their transfer into storage  tissues for subsequent re-use.) If these plants
              resorb strongly,  and if their early spring growth depends largely on stored 
              nutrients rather than on concurrent uptake from the soil, then  their role as a
              vernal nutrient dam may be quite limited, adding  to recent evidence that the
              soil microbial community may be the  primary agent in early spring retention of
              soil nutrients by  forest ecosystems. The additional labware and chemicals
              required  to complete this project can be funded by Marshall University lab 
              fee moneys, with much of the work being carried out by students  in Marshall's
              Principles of Ecology (primarily undergraduate  students) and Plant Ecology
              (primarily  graduate students)  courses, under the guidance of the PI and
              Co-PI. (2) The second  project would seek to determine the role of nutrient
              dynamics in  sustaining the health of central Appalachian forests, and would 
              be carried out at the Fernow Experimental Forest, Tucker County,  WV. This
              study is motivated partly by recent increases in  mortality among native trees
              of this region, and would examine  specifically the relationships of soil
              nitrogen dynamics to the  flux of soil base cations (primarily calcium and
              magnesium), and  the response of these relationships to timber harvesting, 
              nitrogen amendments, and base cation additions, administered  alone or in
              combination. Funding to support this research is  being sought through a grant
              application submitted by the CoPI to  the NSF/DEB Ecological Studies
              (Ecosystems) program in December  1995.       The requested instruments are of
              great relevance to  enhancing plant ecological research at Marshall University.
              In  addition, their acquisition would strengthen our ability to  compete
              effectively for funding on other research projects of  interest to us. These
              instruments would also expand the ability  of Marshall University to provide
              graduate and undergraduate  students with practical experience in applying
              state-of-the-art  research technologies to answering significant ecological 
              questions.
