Title       : Dissertation Research: A Quantitative Assessment of Variability in the
               Australopithecine, Human, Chimpanzee and Gorilla Face
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9601031

Award Number: 9601031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Smith rjsmith@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The interpretation of human evolution depends upon analysis of the behavior and
              ecology of  several extinct hominid species.  However, the number of fossil
              species represented by known  specimens remains controversial, as does the
              assignment of many individual specimens to  particular species.  A basic
              unresolved problem concerns the range of diversity of individual  species: At
              what point are the differences between any two or more specimens sufficient to 
              suggest that they are from different species, as opposed to simply representing
              the differences  found among individuals from a single species?  Using new
              computer digitizing technology and three-dimensional analyses, measurements
              will  be taken from the facial bones of virtually all available
              australopithecine fossils, and  measurements of the identical facial structures
              will be taken on large samples of skeletal  material of modern humans,
              chimpanzees, and gorillas.  The range of variation in facial  morphology of
              these three modern species will be used as a basis of comparison for the ranges
               of variation among australopithecine specimens.  These results will provide
              important insights into population structure and sexual dimorphism of  early
              human ancestors. The extant data will serve to both evaluate the categorization
              of  australpithecine specimens into species groups, as well as to establish
              whether or not  australopithecine species as currently defined are more or less
              variable than modern analogues.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
