Title       : Storage Improvement and Catalog Upgrade of Middle Woodland Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9601256

Award Number: 9601256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93611              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Adair madair@falcon.cc.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Museum of Anthropology at the
              University of Kansas will upgrade the level of curation for archaeological
              materials from 23 sites in Missouri and Kansas. All date to the Middle Woodland
              period and the collections were acquired by the museum from 1963 to 1975. In
              their current state, the materials are subject to deterioration, accompanying
              information is vulnerable to potential destruction and the collections are not
              readily available for scientific study. Specimens are currently stored in paper
              bags in overcrowded boxes. Accompanying provenience information is available
              only in paper form. To remedy these problems, the project will include:
              repacking all artifacts into polyethylene bags and acid free boxes; labeling
              all boxes with specific content information; labeling all artifacts currently
              missing this information; recording the provenience information from these
              artifacts as well as all existing catalog information directly onto a
              relational database file for easy access to students and researchers. 
              Anthropologists wish to understand how complex societies develop and many have
              focused on the Hopewell phenomenon in the midwest United States. Long before
              the arrival of Columbus, Native American groups established a village way of
              life, developed long distance trading systems which brought salt water shells
              and other exotic objects into the region and built large earthen mounds which
              served religious functions. The materials held by the Museum of Anthropology
              can shed light on how this phenomenon developed and therefore are of great
              anthropological interest. However the materials are difficult to access and
              lack of a computerized index makes them difficult to find. Therefore they are
              not readily available for scientific study. This award will remedy the
              situation.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
