Title       : Visual Control of Posture Within the Normal Range of Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9601351

Award Number: 9601351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Stoffregen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601351  STOFFREGEN    Most people don't have to think about standing up; we
              just do it  and are very successful at it.  We are not aware of our stance,  so
              much so that the average person is unaware that s/he sways  very slowly back
              and forth 1-2 inches. The control of posture,  unconscious for most of us, is a
              critical issue for many people.   People with neurological problems sometimes
              have unusual postural  motion, or increased instability.  In addition, postural
               instability is a cause of falling in elderly persons.  This can  have
              catastrophic effects, since it often leads to broken hips  and lengthy
              hospitalization.  At the beginning of life, toddlers  fall frequently in the
              process of learning to stand and walk.    How does postural control work?  A
              common belief is that postural  motion is perceived by the inner ear (the
              vestibular system).   However, scientists have learned that vision plays an
              important  role in the perception and control of our own movement.  This is 
              most clear to people at Omnimax or Imax theaters, in which visual  stimulation
              causes a powerful feeling of self-motion.  This  visual-based feeling of self
              motion is critical in state-of-the-  art flight simulators used in civilian and
              military aviation.    This research will investigate relations between vision
              and the  control of ordinary standing posture.  People will stand inside a 
              "moving room", a large box mounted on wheels and moved back and  forth under
              computer control.  The moving room does not have a  floor; subjects stand on
              the concrete floor of the laboratory.   Thus, motion of the room produces only
              visual stimulation.  The  visual stimulation is similar to what we normally
              create during  ordinary postural sway in stationary rooms.  Earlier research
              has  shown that visual motion can cause people to sway, fall down, or  develop
              motion sickness.  But that research has used very large  visual motions,
              sometimes several feet, motions which are not  representative of the visual
              stimulation caused by ordinary  sway,  in which the body moves less than two
              inches.  This research will  investigate relations between vision and posture
              when visual  stimulation is nearly identical to the natural stimulation caused 
              by our own movements.  Motion of the participant will be compared  to motion of
              the room to determine how closely the body responds  to different kinds of
              visual motion.    A fuller understanding of the control of ordinary postural
              sway  should help us to develop interventions to prevent falls in the  elderly.
               This research also has promise for understanding the  development of stance in
              children, particularly in special  populations, such as children with physical
              or mental  disabilities.  Finally, this research will help us to understand 
              perception and control of body motion in general, so that we can  design
              better, more effective simulations of self-motion,  especially in the area of
              flight training.    ***
