Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Chromophore-Quencher Complexes for Studies
               in Photochemical Redox Splitting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9601048

Award Number: 9601048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510305   Photocatalysis                          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9601048  Meyer    This award, for a duration of three years, partially
              supports  a cooperative research activity between Dr. Thomas J. Meyer  of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of North  Carolina and Dr. F. Richard
              Keene of the Department of  Molecular Sciences at James Cook University of
              North Queensland.  The funds will primarily be used to support the travel
              expenses  yearly for two graduate students from the University of North 
              Carolina to spend two months in Dr. Keene's laboratory.  The  project focus is
              the design, preparation and exploitation of  molecular systems which take
              advantage of new techniques   developed at James Cook University.    The new
              synthetic methodology allows the preparation of ruthenium  complexes
              incorporating three different bidentate ligands.  Using  separate and
              overlapping electronic transitions involving each of  the three ligands,
              molecules will be developed which absorb light  from the UV through the visible
              and into the near-infrared.  The  collaborative development of novel
              chromatographic protocols will  allow the preparation of molecular assemblies
              incorporating these  antenna chromophores and energy transfer quenchers in a
              spatially  defined manner, with an eye toward practicality in light to 
              chemical energy conversion.  The collaboration builds upon the   expertise of
              Dr. Keene's laboratory which has developed synthetic  techniques utilized in
              the manipulation of isomeric octahedral  complexes and the North Carolina group
              under Dr. Meyer with  expertise in molecular design and photophysical
              characterization.   The combination of the two group's strengths should
              contribute to  advances in understanding the conversion of light to chemical 
              energy.  The work in Australia is supported through the  Department of
              Industry, Science and Tourism (DIST).
