Title       : Cahokia Mounds Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9601082

Award Number: 9601082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin L. Fowler Fowler@csd.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Melvin Fowler will conduct one
              field season of archaeological field research at the site of Cahokia. In recent
              decades Cahokia has been recognized as the premier archaeological manifestation
              of pre-Columbian American Indian culture north of Mexico. No other
              archaeological zone within the present United States was as geographically
              large, the seat of as large a population, or has as many manmade features as
              does the Cahokia site. While total agreement has not been achieved, a consensus
              is growing that Cahokia can best be described as a complex chiefdom. Recent
              studies have shown that its origin can be dated to approximately 1,000 A.D. or
              slightly earlier. Cahokia is known for its large impressive earthern mounds
              which include elaborate burials as well as many smaller mound features. Due in
              good part to Dr. Fowler's work archaeologists have come to realize that many of
              the smaller features contained very large wooden posts and they have found both
              the now empty postholes and remains of earthern ramps used to raise the posts
              into the ground. It also appears that these posts were arranged in large
              circles to form `woodhenges`, analogous in some ways to stonehenges in Europe.
              Through plots of post positions, it is very likely they served astronomical
              functions. The goal of Dr. Fowler's work is to further test this hypothesis. He
              has located  small unexcavated features and predicted, on the basis of the
              astronomic hypothesis where postholes and ramps should be located. Through
              careful stratigraphic excavation he will search for them.  The underlying issue
              which Dr. Fowler and many other archaeologists wish to address concerns how
              preliterate societies with simple levels of technology were able to organize
              and maintain large scale social units such as the one represented at Cahokia.
              Many believe that stonehenges and similar structures served to establish and a
              cosmological order, the purpose of which was to reflect and reinforce a set of
              social and status organizations. For example one wishes to know where elite
              structures were located in relation to significant astronomical points on the
              woodhenge. This research is important because it will provide data of interest
              to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on one of the premier
              archaeological sites in the United States and will increase our understanding
              of underlying principles of social organization.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
