Title       : Protein Isoprenylation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9601064

Award Number: 9601064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dring N. Crowell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Randall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601064  Crowell   In plants, the mevalonate pathway leads to the synthesis of
              cytokinins, abscisic acid, gibberellins, ubiquinones, plastoquinones,
              dolichols, sterols, carotenoids, chlorophylls, and numerous other isoprenoids. 
              Derivatives of mevalonate have also been found to be incorporated into a
              variety of plant cell proteins, but little is currently known about the
              function of these isoprenylated plant proteins.  Since isoprenylated proteins
              are involved in a number of fundamental process in mammalian and yeast cells,
              including signal transduction, cell cycle regulation, cytoskeletal
              organization, and vesicular transport, it is likely that they serve important
              roles in plants.  Preliminary data indicate that plants contain both known and
              novel isoprenylated proteins with probable functions ranging from regulation of
              actin polymerization to mediation of vesicle fusion.  The objective of this
              project is to demonstrate the isoprenylation of these proteins in plant cells,
              to elucidate the role of isoprenylation in protein targeting and function, and
              to characterize the developmental regulation of the corresponding plant genes. 
              This research will further our understanding of this important class of
              proteins and provide critical insights into their roles in plant growth and
              development.  %%%   Plants are the 'producers' of the biological world. 
              Because of their ability to utilize sunlight and inorganic carbon in the
              production of energy-rich organic compounds, they constitute the biological
              foundation upon which all animal life depends.  Accordingly, it is essential
              that we understand plant growth and development (cell cycle regulation,
              cytoskeletal organization, and vesicular transport) and the mechanisms by which
              plants interact with their environment (signal transduction).  Plant responses
              to environmental or developmental stimuli result in remarkable changes in plant
              growth, habit, and ultimate biomass production.  In this project, the role of
              several isoprenylated proteins, likely to be i nvolved in these processes will
              be characterized.  By characterizing in detail the molecular events that
              influence these processes, we will be able to maximize the efficiency and
              utility of this natural process.  ***
