Title       : Landscape Ecology and Hominid Land Use in the Lowermost Bed II Olduvai Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9601065

Award Number: 9601065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fidelis T. Masao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                With National science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Blumenschine and his
              colleagues will continue their archaeological research at Olduvai Gorge in
              northern Tanzania. Over the course of two seasons' of fieldwork, they will
              focus on a stratigraphic horizon which dates to just under 2 million years ago
              and which preserve traces of human activity. Dr. Blumenschine and colleagues
              will continue to sample this horizon through carefully controlled excavation
              and will collect both stone artifacts and faunal remains. Because it extends
              over a considerable horizontal distance, through comparison of samples, the
              team will be able to reconstruct a broad range of hominid (and likely
              non-hominid) activities, gain insight into geographically varied behavior, and
              place this in an environmental framework. To further the environmental aspect
              of the research, the team will collect sediment, paleosol and carbonate samples
              from the excavations for analyses of grain size, mineralogy, stable carbon and
              oxygen isotopes. Laboratory analyses of these geological samples will provide
              contextual information for interpreting archaeological patterning. Single
              crystal laser fusion argon-argon dating and trace element analyses will serve
              to establish finer temporal control within the target unit.   This research is
              significant for two primary reasons. First it will shed new light on the
              emergence of human cultural capabilities. Olduvai Gorge has yielded not only
              important hominid fossil remains, but also numerous assemblages of stone tools
              and apparently associated fauna. These materials have provided a focus for
              examination of the cultural capacities of early hominids. Using data from the
              Olduvai sites paleoanthropologists have speculated on issues such as the role
              of meat in early hominid diet and questioned whether such peoples had the
              ability to hunt. Most of the available data comes from `sites` or dense,
              spacially clustered groups of stone and bone remains. Archaeologists however
              have come to realize that such clusters represent only one aspect of hominid
              behavior and that smaller less dense scatters and areas which have no material
              at all can also provide important relevant information. Dr. Blumenschine and
              colleagues will focus their attention in a systematic fashion on both the
              `clusters` and the scatter between the sites. Secondly, this work will help to
              pioneer the field of `landscape archaeology.` The team will develop techniques
              for the collection and analysis of non-site data and these methods will be
              applicable in a wide variety of archaeological situations.  This work will
              provide insight into early hominid behavior. It will yield data of interest to
              many archaeologists and assist in the training of Tanzanian researchers. It
              will serve to strengthen the scientific ties between African and United States
              scientists.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
