Title       : Upgrade and Development of Advanced (Electron Paramagnetic
               Resonance/Electron-Nuclear Double Resonance/Optically Detected Magnetic
               Resonance) EPR/ENDOR/ODMR Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9601864

Award Number: 9601864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Angerhofer alex@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Vala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Weltner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601864  Angerhofer        A state-of-the-art electron paramagnetic resonance
              facility will  be established at the University of Florida. The facility will 
              support the research of seventeen  faculty members from several  departments
              and colleges at the University. A unifying theme of  the research is the common
              goal to understand the structure and  dynamics of paramagnetic states in the
              various materials of  interest. Major instrumentation proposed includes the
              upgrade of  an existing EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance) spectrometer, 
              acquisition of pulsed ENDOR (electron-nuclear double resonance)  capabilities, 
              and development of a commercially-not-available  ODMR/ODENDOR
              (optically-detected magnetic resonance / optically-  detected electron-nuclear
              double resonance) spectrometer and of a  portable helium-three refrigerator for
              very-low-temperature EPR  applications. The instrumentation will be used to
              study a variety  of material systems, including photochemical reactants and
              matrix-  isolated molecules (Chemistry), rare-earth-doped semiconductors 
              (Materials Science and Engineering), low-dimensional ferromagnets  (Physics),
              and biological macromolecules (Pharmacology and  Therapeutics). A total of
              twenty-four  students and post-doctoral  associates (38% female participants)
              will be involved in training  and use of the instruments. The educational
              activity will be  formalized through a special topics course involving
              laboratory  work along with theoretical background for students from the 
              various colleges involved.  %%%  The facility will have a large impact on the
              research  infrastructure of the Southeastern region by creating a center of 
              excellence in the area of electron paramagnetic resonance. It  will complement
              the instrumentation available at the National  High Magnetic Field Laboratory
              (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, and serve  as a staging post for the high field and
              high frequency  experiments being done at the NHMFL.  ***
