Title       : Sensory Exploitation and Epigamic Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9601042

Award Number: 9601042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott K. Sakaluk sksakal@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT                                              
                                    PI:  Sakaluk  Proposal Number:  9601042    Insects have a
              profound impact on the human condition as vectors of disease organisms, pests
              of stored products and agricultural crops, and pollinators of plants.  An
              important facet of the biology of insects that accounts for their remarkable
              abundance and diversity is their ability to respond genetically to novel
              environmental challenges, be they natural or man made (e.g., pesticides).  This
              ability is predicated in part on the extent to which females of a wide variety
              of species retain control of gamete transfer and usage, and thereby influence
              the paternity and genetic makeup of their  offspring.  But what characteristics
              of males influence this cryptic selection process by female insects, and how do
              offspring benefit from their particular genetic endowments:  The proposal seeks
              to understand those aspects of the reproductive physiology and behavior of
              female insects that leads to increased survival and fitness of offspring. 
              Although an understanding of these reproductive processes has obvious practical
              ramifications for the management and control of insects, they also address
              important biological hypotheses concerning the coexistence of male traits and
              female reproductive processes.  One hypothesis proposes that certain male
              traits arise because they exploit built-in sensory biases of females.  A
              competing hypothesis suggests that male traits arise because they accurately
              signal a male's genetic makeup.  These hypotheses will be tested through
              experimental exploitation of female sensory makeup.  These hypotheses will be
              tested through experimental exploitation of female sensory capabilities, and by
              examining the reproductive success of females whose offspring have been sired
              by different males and hence, differ in their genetic makeup.
