Title       : Acquisition of Essential Monitoring and Control Equipment for a Long-term,
               Multi-institutional Free-Air Carbon Dioxide and Ozone Enrichment Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9601942

Award Number: 9601942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250973             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Karnosky karnosky@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Kubiske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret R. Gale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt S. Pregitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                  We are in the process of developing a
              state-of-the art free-air  carbon dioxide enrichment(FACE) facility in northern
              Wisconsin to  examine the interacting effects of elevated CO2 and O3 on a 
              Populus tremuloides forest ecosystem. The FACE system will allow  study of
              community level forest responses to elevated CO2 and O3  under natural,
              nonchambered conditions. We have assembled a  multidisciplinary team of
              scientists to examine responses from  the molecular to the ecosystem levels.
              Our long-term goal is to  examine the interacting effects of elevated CO2 and
              O3, alone and  in combination, on the productivity, competitive interactions, 
              and carbon and nitrogen fluxes in a regenerating aspen ecosystem.         Three
              replicate FACE rings will be established in each of  four treatments (CO2, O3,
              CO2 + O3 control) in a randomized  complete block design. Rooted cuttings from
              nine P. tremuloides  clones previously characterized for their O3 and/or CO2 
              sensitivities will be planted at 0.5 m x 0.5 m spacing across  each FACE ring.
              The close spacing will simulate a naturally  regenerating aspen forest.
              Fumigation with elevated CO2 (550 ppm)  and O3 (50 ppb above background during
              photosynthetically active  daylight hours to a target of 80 ppm-hr seasonal
              exposure) will  be conducted over the approximately 100-day growing season. 
              Growth measurements (height, diameter, biomass, leaf area, root  production and
              root mortality), physiological measurements  (photosynthesis, respiration,
              stomatal conductance, chlorophyll  content), plant nutrient status (nitrogen),
              foliar biochemistry  (carbohydrates, phenolic glycosides, and antioxidants),
              litter  decomposition rates, and soil respiration will be made throughout  each
              growing season.         The establishment and operation of this FACE system is
              an  expensive, capital-intensive research project. Therefore, we will 
              encourage multiple use of the research site by researchers and  their students.
              We currently have some 14 in vestigators and their  graduate students involved.
              Thus far, we have three years'  support from the U.S. Department of Energy, the
              U.S. Forest  Service Northern Station's Global Change Program, the National 
              Council for Air and Stream Improvement of the Pulp and Paper  Industry, and
              Michigan Technological University. In addition, we  have significant in-kind
              contributions by the U.S. Forest Service  and Brookhaven National Laboratory.
              However, we are still short  of capital for critical air and meteorological
              monitoring  equipment, the related data acquisition systems, and ozone 
              generation.    This proposal seeks support for high resolution, rapid-response 
              instrumentation for the ozone, CO2, and meteorological  monitoring, and for the
              ozone generation needed for the facility.  We seek $251,671 from the National
              Science Foundation Academic  Research Infrastructure (ARI) Program; we have
              matching  contributions of $59,955 from the National Council for Air and 
              Stream Improvement of the Pulp and Paper Industry (NCASI) and  $44,896 from the
              host institution, Michigan Technological  University.
