Title       : Genetics and Behavior of Mate Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9601560

Award Number: 9601560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Borgia borgia@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    PI:  Borgia  PROPOSAL NUMBER:  9601560    
                 Nonresoruce-based (NRB) mating systems are often associated  with
              exaggerated male display traits.  Studies of the  evolution of these traits
              have taken a prominent place in  behavioral and evolutionary biology.  Little
              is known,  however, about the genetics, dispersal and female searching 
              behavior in NRB mating systems.  Here we propose an  integrated study of  the
              genetics and behavior of the NRB  mating system of the satin bowerbird
              (Ptilonorhychus  violaceus).  We will identify patterns of dispersal and 
              factors affecting patterns of female visitation at bowers,  test sexual
              selection models, measure heritability of male  display traits and
              repeatabilities of female preferences for  males, and evaluate the role of
              genetic relatedness in  female choice, male learning of display elements and
              male  interactions.  We will use newly developed microsatellite  genetic
              markers to score relatedness and will determine  patterns of dispersal using
              blood samples from past and  present members of a natural population of
              resolution satin  bowerbirds one generation apart.  New camcorders will allow 
              high resolution monitoring of 40 bowers for accurate  identification of banded
              females as they visit display  courts and mate.  By radio-tracking females and
              monitoring a  primary food source, we will be able to determine if there  is an
              effect of resources on female choice of nest sites and  bowers that they visit.
               This study will provide the most  comprehensive view of the process of mate
              selection in any  avian species with an NRB mating system.  We will test 
              current models of mate selection and our findings will aid  in the development
              of realistic new models for the evolution  of exaggerated male display.   This
              work should improve our  general understanding of the genetics of mate choice
