Title       : Acquisition of Electron Microscope for High Resolution Structural Studies of
               Membrane Protein Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9601943

Award Number: 9601943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sriram Subramaniam sriram@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Min Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Agre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Agnew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This proposal seeks to initiate efforts at The Johns  Hopkins University
              to carry out high resolution structural  investigations of membrane proteins
              with the acquisition of a CM  120 Philips electron microscope system. The CM
              120 is a high  quality transmission electron microscope which is suitable for 
              studies of biological specimens at atomic and near-atomic  resolution. Our goal
              is to use both the electron diffraction and  imaging capabilities of the CM 120
              microscope to understand the  structural basis for the function of a variety of
              membrane  proteins.          Membrane proteins play a central role in executing
              key  cellular functions such as energy conversion, signal transduction  and ion
              transport. Yet, the structures of only seven membrane  proteins are known at
              atomic resolution, in contrast to the  nearly one thousand structures known for
              water-soluble proteins.  Recent developments in high resolution electron
              microscopy have  the potential to alter this situation dramatically. Of the
              seven  membrane protein structures known at atomic resolution, two have  been
              solved recently by applying new techniques in high  resolution microscopy to
              two-dimensional, rather than  three-dimensional protein crystals.          We
              anticipate that our use of the CM 120 microscope for  structural studies will
              occur in two phases. In the first phase,  we will initiate work on the
              following five projects, four of  which represent direct extensions of
              experiments already being  carried out in collaborative efforts with external
              electron  microscopy centers:      Structural "snapshots" of steps in energy
              conversion by   bacteriorhodopsin, a light-driven proton pump (S. Subramaniam, 
               with Dr. R. Henderson at MRC, Cambridge, England)      Structural basis of
              water transport by aquaporin, the water   channel in red blood cells (P. Agre,
              with Dr. A. Engel at the   Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland)      Structural
              basis of the association of myosin-I with the cell   membrane (T. Pollard, with
              Dr. R. Milliga n at the Scripps   Research Institute, La Jolla, CA)     
              Structure of the voltage-gated potassium channel from   Drosophila (M. Li, with
              Dr. N. Unwin at MRC, Cambridge, England)      Structure determination of the
              IP3 receptor, a ligand-gated   calcium channel (W. Agnew and S. Subramaniam)   
                    From these initial efforts, our goal is to lay the  foundation for an
              institutional resource to carry out high  resolution electron microscopy. A
              number of biologically  important membrane receptors including a variety of
              sensory  transducers and ion channels are currently being studied in 
              laboratories at Johns Hopkins University. We fully expect that in  the second
              phase of research facilitated by the the microscope,  the structures of these
              receptors, as well as those of a variety  of other cellular components can be
              successfully analyzed.
