Title       : Advanced Power Electronics/Motor Control Testing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9601818

Award Number: 9601818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shy-Shenq P. Liou ssl@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9601818  Liou         This grant will establish a simulation and testing
              facility  for motion control and power electronic technology.  It will 
              support:     *    One HP Engineering Workstation with peripheral devices to 
              run SABER system simulation software;  *    A three-year SABER system
              simulation software maintenance   agreement;  *    Three Yokogawa high
              bandwidth, three-phase power analyzers  to measure voltage, current, and power
              of tested power  converter or machine;  *    One four-quadrant Dynamometer for
              loading of rotating  machine under test (MUT);  *    Two LeCroy high sampling
              frequency digital oscilloscopes for   data acquisition of experimental results;
               *    Two digital signal processor (DSP)-based developmental  systems for
              implementing various control algorithms in  motion control applications;  *   
              Voltage and current transducers for measuring and isolating   experimental
              voltage and current signals.         Existing research in this PI focuses on
              the rotating machines used in various motion control applications, especially
              squirrel cage induction SCI machines and switched reluctance machines (SRM).   
                  The new instrumentation will increase the capability and  efficiency of is
              research efforts and enable him to train more  graduate students.  With the
              proposed SABER system simulator,  design mistakes can be found and corrected
              easily by conducting  simulation runs before building a prototype in the
              laboratory.  A  four-quadrant dynamometer will provide all kinds of load
              profiles  for a machine under test.  Accurate data collection is vital in 
              verification of efficiency and performance improvements made  possible by
              innovations.  High bandwidth voltage, current, and  power meters and digital
              oscilloscopes can enable him to conduct  experiments on the prototypes with
              both accuracy and ease.  Since  there is no such motion control testing
              facility available for the general research community in the San Francisco Bay,
              he also plans to reorganize short courses using this pro posed facility for
              professional enhancement of motion control engineers and  engineering faculty. 
              ***  ??
