Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Sea Breeze Convection, Storm Surge Modeling and
               the Land/Ocean Processes AssociatedWith the Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9601472

Award Number: 9601472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sethu Raman sethu_raman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Pietrafesa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support a collaborative research between Drs.
              Sethu Raman and Leonard Pietrafesa of the North Carolina State University
              (NCSU), Raleigh, and Dr. P.A. Aswathanarayana of the Indian Institute of
              Technology, Madras (IITM), India.  These scientists, in collaboration with  the
              Indian National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) on the IITM campus, plan
              to study Indian sea breezes, atmospheric convection along the see breeze front,
              and to also study the storm surge processes along the East coast of India (Bay
              of Bengal).  In the first part, the scientists plan to investigate the
              horizontal extent of the sea breezes in relation to land-sea temperature
              differences and the ambient wind, and to study the formation of deep convection
              along the sea breeze front and its dependence on other factors such as land use
              pattern and upper air stability.  They plan to primarily use a hydrostatic
              numerical model developed at NCSU and transferred to the IITM.  This model will
              be extended to a 3-dimension state and used with atmospheric observations in
              India that is taken every three hours, and dating back for 30 years.  The model
              may be supplemented with a non-hydrostatic model as needed.  In the second
              part, the scientists will utilize a storm surge model available at the NIOT and
              based on Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model originally
              developed in the United States.  They will develop methods to prescribe
              meteorological forces that drive the ocean model, and will also use a simple
              hydrodynamic model developed at NCSU and used in North Carolina during the
              occurrence of Hurricane Emily in 1993, with satisfactory results, in predicting
              this tropical storm surge.  Scope:  This award is to allow cooperation between
              a U.S. team that is quite active in modeling various atmospheric-sea-land
              phenomena, and an Indian team at the Madras campus that has excellent
              analytical capability as well as access to extensive data sources from numerous
              Indian research organizations. These governmental organizations operate radar,
              satellite, and other atmospheric and ocean measurement instrumentation on a
              continuous basis.  The research is of significant scientific benefit to the
              United States and India, and is of particular importance to the meteorological
              activities of the Indian authorities in predicting severe climatic and weather
              conditions.  The project involves eminent scientists and graduate students on
              both sides.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
