Title       : Automated DNA Sequencer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9601840

Award Number: 9601840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Schedl pschedl@molbio.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During the past ten years DNA sequencing has become one of the  major
              cornerstones of biological and biomedical research.  Although more than 40
              research groups on the Princeton campus  must sequence DNA as part of their
              ongoing research programs, the  procedures currently used by these groups are
              inefficient, time  consuming, and increasingly antiquated. For this reason, the
               Department of Molecular Biology is requesting funds for the  purchase of
              automated DNA sequencing instrumentation. This  instrumentation includes the
              following items:   ABI Prism Automated DNA Sequencer, Model 377-01, including 
              installation and on-site training, data collection software,  Macintosh power
              Mac, two (2) Gel Cassettes, top and bottom gel  pouring mixtures (1 set), and
              user manual   Sequencing software module, including sequencing analysis 
              software, Manual and Chemistry Guide, two (2) 36 Well Sharkstooth  combs, and
              the sequencing installation kit   Fast sequencing or high resolution GeneScan
              glass plates/  spacers kit, including 36cm W-T-R Glass plates (2 front/2 back),
               and 36cm Spacers   HP 1200c Printer   GeneAmp PCR System 9600, including user
              manual, Quick Reference  Manual, Instructional Video, Consumables Start-up kit 
               Auto Assembler, 5-pak, user installed, includes Factura and Auto  Assembler
              Application software, tutorial, User and Reference  Manuals, On-line animation
              software, reference mouse pad   Sequence Navigator 5-pak DNA and Protein
              Sequence Comparison  Software, including Factura and Sequence Navigator
              application  software, tutorial, User and Reference Manuals    This
              instrumentation will be housed in an existing Departmental  Service Facility,
              and it will be operated by specially trained  personnel in this facility.  The
              daily operation of the  instrumentation will be under the direct supervision of
              the  Syn/Seq Facility Director, Mr. S. Kyin. The automated DNA  sequencing
              instrumentation in the Syn/Seq Facility will be used  to achieve four major
              goals.  The first is to provide efficien t  and rapid DNA sequencing.  The
              second is to provide a DNA  sequencing service that will benefit the entire
              Princeton  biological and biomedical research community.  This will include 
              not only all members of the Molecular Biology Department, but  also biological
              and biomedical research scientists in several  other Departments on campus. 
              These departments include  Chemistry, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Physics
              and Material  Sciences.  The third is to substantially reduce the time and 
              effort that scientists and technicians must now devote to DNA  sequencing.  The
              aim here is to enable members of our research  community to direct their
              efforts along other potentially more  productive, technically difficult and/or
              innovative lines of  investigation.  Fourth, the DNA Sequencing Facility will
              also be  incorporated in our undergraduate training programs.
