Title       : ARI: Acquisition of Anechoic Test Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9601965

Award Number: 9601965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Cunefare ken.cunefare@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishan K. Ahuja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yves H. Berthelot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9601965  Cunefare  This Academic Research Infrastructure Grant provides funding
              for the construction and instrumentation of an integrated structural acoustic
              research facility, including an anechoic chamber, at the Georgia Institute of
              Technology.  The anechoic chamber will provide an echo-free environment for
              acoustic research.  The associated instrumentation and equipment, along with
              the chamber, are intended to provide an integrated design, analysis and
              experimental capability directed toward structural acoustics.  The facility
              will include: a scanning laser-bibrometer; a scanning acoustic intensity probe;
              a high-speed multi-channel data acquisition and control system; engineering
              workstations for modeling, control, and data acquisition; data acquisition and
              numerical modeling software, microphones; accelerometers; structural exciter;
              and signal conditioning components.    The facility is intended for research
              and education into the design of quiet, low vibration products.  Vibration and
              noise are significant contributors to perception of quality.  Excessive
              vibration and noise can lead to premature component failure, user fatigue, and
              stress.  The facility will provide the capability to numerically model the
              noise vibration, and determine means to control or tailor these
              characteristics. The benefit of this research is anticipated to be a better
              understanding of the generation and control of noise and vibration.  This
              improved understanding, if exploited by U.S. manufacturers in the design of
              their products, should improve the competitive position of their products. 
              Other intended research uses include experimental work related to the
              propagation mechanisms; transducer design and testing for the development of
              new instruments and sensor; active structural control, directed toward
              alternative means to control noise processes, and acoustic emission studies,
              for improved condition monitoring of equipment.
