Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Study of Macromolecular Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9601486

Award Number: 9601486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon G. Churchward   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Lucchesi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The aim of this proposal is to establish a core facility which  will
              provide the necessary instrumentation for state of the art study  of
              protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions. This facility  will
              support the research programs of faculty in the Department of  Biology of Emory
              College, and the Department of Microbiology and  Immunology of the School of
              Medicine of Emory University. These two  Departments are located on successive
              floors of the Rollins Research  Center, a modern building less than five years
              old. Faculty whose  research efforts form the basis of this proposal include R.
              Ahmed  (Micro.), J. Boss (Micro.), G. Churchward (Micro.), R. Compans 
              (Micro.), G. Crouse (Biol.), D. Falls (Biol.), H. Ellis (Biol.), A.  Glasgow
              (Micro.), S. L'Hernault (Biol.), G. Jones (Biol.), J. Lucchesi  (Biol.), S.
              Jinks-Robertson (Biol.), C. Moran (Micro.) and K Ziegler  (Micro.). There are
              already extensive interactions between these  faculty members because they are
              members of the interdepartmental  graduate programs in Genetics and
              Microbiology, and share common  research interests and teaching duties. The
              core facility will consist  of a Biacore 2000 biomolecular interaction analysis
              system, a Beckton  Dickinson FACSCalibur flow cytometer and cell sorting
              system, 2  Molecular Dynamics Storm phosphorimagers with autoradiography and 
              fluorescent detection capabilities, an ABI Prism automated DNA  sequencer and a
              Pharmacia ALF Express automated DNA sequencer. This  equipment will allow this
              varied group of well funded investigators to  perform state of the art studies
              of macromolecular interactions that  occur in many fundamental biological
              processes. These processes include  DNA replication, recombination and repair,
              transcription and the  regulation of gene expression, the development of
              multicellular  organisms and the basic functioning of the immune system. The
              types of  interactions that are being studied include the interactions between 
              cell surface receptor proteins and their  ligands, protein-protein 
              interactions that occur in the assembly of complex protein machines  such as
              RNA polymerase holoenzymes, the interactions between these  protein machines
              and their regulatory proteins, and the binding of  recombination and repair
              enzymes, nucleic acid polymerases and  regulatory proteins with their nucleic
              acid substrates. The  investigators included in this proposal currently have
              $1,899,888 in  direct costs for the current year, of which $170,457 is from
              NSF. These  figures include only funding for basic research and do not include 
              funding for disease-oriented research. The goal of this application  matches
              NSF goals as follows. Some of the items of equipment proposed  in this
              application are not currently available on campus and will  allow the
              development of completely new experimental approaches. Access  to other
              existing items of equipment is becoming increasingly difficult  because of the
              expansion of research activities at Emory University.  The proposed facility
              will therefore improve accessibility to and  greater utilization of modem
              research instrumentation. All of the  investigators listed in this proposal
              train graduate and undergraduate  students. Together, they supervise in their
              laboratories 12  postdoctoral fellows, 31graduate students and 20 undergraduate
              students  and so the instrumentation will be used in the training of future 
              scientists. Matching funds (50%) for this proposal will be available.
