Title       : Acquisition of Diffraction Equipment for Interdisciplinary Research at
               Northwestern University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9601479

Award Number: 9601479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso Mondragon a-mondragon@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Ibers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tobin J. Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne F. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore S. Jardetzky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                            This proposal requests funds for the acquisition of an  X-ray
              diffractometer to be located in the Analytical Services  Laboratory (ASL) at
              the Evanston Campus of Northwestern  University and for data collection
              equipment for the  macromolecular/small molecule crystallography station at the
               Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory.  These
              instruments will greatly facilitate the research and  teaching efforts of
              Northwestern University researchers in two  very basic ways. First, the ASL
              X-ray diffractometer will greatly  improve productivity by providing the
              numerous advantages of  "electronic film", including significant reduction in
              data  collection times. Second, the APS equipment will provide a unique  tool
              not only for the rapid collection of data from  macromolecular crystals but
              also for the collection of data from  microcrystals of inorganic and organic
              materials.         Structure determinations of a wide range of inorganic and 
              organic materials with the use of our present X-ray  diffractometers typically
              require several days to several weeks  for data collection, limiting the number
              of structures that can  be analyzed. A more severe problem arises owing to the
              inherent  limitations in signal-to-noise of our point detectors in front of 
              sealed tubes. The major users listed in this proposal all  encounter
              "difficult" problems: the availability of only very  small crystals,
              superlattice/sublattice considerations, twinned  crystals, diffuse scattering,
              crystals with very large unit  cells, and crystals that are sensitive to
              radiation. With the  current diffractometers many of these problems are not
              resolved.         An X-ray diffractometer equipped with a lK CCD or 
              image-plate area detector and a rotating anode generator is  ideally designed
              to address the crystallographic needs of the  major users. With the increased
              signal-to-noise available from  such an instrument, data collection times for
              routine crystals  will be greatly reduced. This will significa ntly improve 
              turn-around time for most samples, will reduce the costs  involved, and hence
              will make the facility available for a wider  range of problems to a larger
              number of users. This is especially  important to our students, who will have
              far greater access to  modern X-ray instrumentation than they do at present. In
               addition, most of the "difficult" problems will be amenable to  solution on
              such an instrument. Some will remain, for example the  existence of only
              microcrystals, and these will be addressed at  the APS facility.         The
              APS facility is also used for macromolecular  crystallography. The requested
              CCD detector will enhance and  upgrade the current capabilities of the beam
              line operated by the  Collaborative Access Team formed by Northwestern
              University in  collaboration with DuPont de Nemours & Co. and The Dow Chemical 
              Co. (DND-CAT). At present, there are no facilities for  macromolecular
              crystallography at the DND-CAT beam line. The  proposed two-dimensional data
              collection instrument will be  mounted on a kinematic table that will have
              built-in capabilities  to accommodate a CCD detector. The necessary computer
              hardware to  operate the detector and to process data on-site are also part of 
              the proposed facility.         Indeed, these complementary facilities will
              provide a  truly one-of-kind learning environment for both students and 
              faculty. Personnel from the Department of Chemistry and the  Department of
              Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology  on the Evanston Campus and
              the Department of Molecular  Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry of the
              Medical School  Campus in Chicago will interact with both academic and
              industrial  scientists from a variety of fields.
