Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning System for Imaging Living, Voltage
               Clamped Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9601682

Award Number: 9601682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney L. Parsons   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     Stimulus-induced  alteration  in  the   concentration   of  intracellular
              second messengers is a key mechanism by which  cell  function  can  be
              regulated. With the development of  fluorescent  probes,  it  became possible
              to directly measure changes  in  the  concentration  of a number of second
              messengers such  as  calcium  and  hydrogen  ions in both resting and
              stimulated  cells.  Until  recently,   fluorometric  measurements  of  
              intracellular   ions  monitored   generalized  changes,  but  were   not  
              sufficiently  sensitive  nor had adequate temporal resolution to  measure  very
               brief, localized ion release from internal stores. However,  with  laser
              scanning confocal microscopy, it now is possible to measure  elevations in
              intracellular ions or pH changes within micron-thin  optical  sections through
              living cells. For example,  the  brief,  localized  elevation of intracellular
              calcium, that results  from  the   opening   of   calcium   channels   in   the
                sarcoplasmic  reticulum/endoplasmic  reticulum  can  be  measured  as 
              "calcium  sparks"  (3,8).  These  local  calcium  sparks  have  a  profound 
              influence  on  muscle  function by  summing  to  cause  a  global  elevation 
              of  intracellular calcium leading  to  contraction  in  heart  muscle (3) or by
              activating surface membrane  K+  channels  leading  to  vasodilitation in
              smooth muscles (8). Calcium  spark  activity,  in  turn, is intimately
              controlled  by  local  calcium  entry  through  surface  membrane channels. 
              These  extraordinary  insights into fundamental mechanisms of cardiac muscle
              and smooth  muscle  control were permitted by the unparalleled resolution  of 
              the  laser-scanning  confocal  microscope  (3,8).  This  approach  permits  one
               to  follow the fate of key ions, such  as  calcium,  which after crossing the
              cell membrane are then sequestered  into  internal stores. Although calcium
              sparks occur as random  events,  their  frequency and kinetic properties
              commonly are affected  by  cell  voltage.  Cons equently, the local changes in 
              intracellular  calcium,  monitored as calcium sparks, must be measured in 
              cells  with  membrane  voltage  controlled. It is  proposed  that  these 
              fluorescence  measurements will be made on cells voltage  clamped  with  whole
              cell patch clamp techniques. Also, these measurements  will  be made under
              conditions which allow for rapid exchange  of  bathing solutions.        A 
              Major  objective  of  five of the  six  projects  is  to  establish the
              relationships between calcium entry through surface  membrane  calcium channels
              and activation of calcium  sparks  and  then subsequent effects on membrane
              ionic conductances in neurons  and   in   different  smooth  muscle  cells. 
              The  last   project  investigates  the  role  that  intracellular  pH  plays, 
              in  the  regulation  of  chemotaxis  in  Paramecium,  by  measuring  local 
              intracellular changes in proton concentration. Each project  asks  a  very 
              specific question concerning the role of  brief,  highly  localized  changes in
              calcium or pH which may be  critical  to  a  specific  cell  function. Further,
              the requested  equipment  will  permit  the  investigation  of other key 
              issues  such  as  local  homeostatic  regulation of intracellular ionic
              concentrations  by  extrusion  mechanisms. The critical requirement  of  all 
              of  the  proposed  studies  is the ability to measure very  rapid,  highly 
              localized  changes  in the concentration  of  calcium  or  pH  in 
              voltage-clamped cells.        Funds   are  requested  to  create  a  multiuser 
               facility  comprised of three closely integrated components: a Noran Odyssey 
              XL  digital  confocal  laser scanning  imaging  system,  a  Nikon  Diaphot  200
               inverted  microscope and an Axon  Instrument  based  voltage  clamp  system.
              The presence of this highly sophisticated  instrumentation will greatly enhance
              the research capabilities of  the  project  directors  and also will  provide 
              significant  new  training  opportunities  for  our  current  and  future 
              gradua te  students and postdoctoral fellows.
