Title       : Energy Conservation as a Form of Technological Citizenship: Implication for the
               Energy Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9601555

Award Number: 9601555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Zimmerman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This planning grant will enable the investigator to develop further the concepts
              and methods to guide an evaluation of energy conservation as a form of
              technological citizenship, and support conclusions about the roles lay citizens
              could perform in shaping the energy future.  The long term research goal is to
              formulate strategies for energy citizenship based on environmental, political
              and social values consistent with a sustainable energy future and democratic
              participation in the governance of the energy system.  In this planning period,
              the following conceptual areas will be further developed:  characterization of
              the energy system as a political system or system of governance; consideration
              of how the technological citizenship framework could be adapted to studying the
              beliefs, attitudes, values and behaviors of energy users; compilation of the
              range of meanings which are given to the practice of energy conservation;
              incorporation of sociopsychological knowledge about the relationship between
              attitudes and behavior into the technological citizenship model; and an
              elaboration of what is known about processes of energy choice and energy
              transitions.  The methodological tasks to be undertaken involve development of
              survey instruments and implementation plans for two surveys:  a survey of key
              informants; and a national survey of energy users.  The first survey would be
              relatively unstructured and assist in identifying areas of knowledge, attitudes
              and behavior most directly associated with the notion of energy citizenship. 
              Planning would identify the appropriate sample, important questions, and weight
              to be given to this input versus other input.  The second survey would be more
              structured; the planning phase of its design involves answering questions such
              as how to operationalize indexes of `energy citizenship;` what sample is
              appropriate; what socioeconomic variables to include for individual and
              institutional respondents; and how to undertake the analysis.  Results of the
              planning grant should include several presentations and publications.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
