Title       : Global Partners?: Transnational Environmentalism and In Country Environmental
               Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9601552

Award Number: 9601552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla Weeks weeks@cl.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Clear Lake
	      2700 Bay Area Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  770581098    281/283-3015

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Using ethnographic methods and document analysis, this project will analyze how
              cultural differences affect the construction of environmentalism and how these
              differences affect collaboration between transnational and in-country
              non-governmental environmental organizations.  The movements and organizations
              comprising environmentalism are exceptionally diverse and dynamic.  They
              describe environmentalism in different ways and attach different meanings to
              the term.  There is little research on the ways in which this conceptual
              diversity facilitates or constrains environmental advocacy.  Specifically, this
              project will compare five Indian and two transnational environmental
              non-governmental organizations (NGOs) which are located in the North.  It will
              focus on the differential use of scientific and social justice concepts to
              frame environmental action and examine how conceptual and organizational
              diversity affects the global environmental movement.  The social movements and
              science studies literatures frame the research questions, and methods from
              interpretive communication studies will be used to gather and analyze data. 
              Publications, mission statements, project and annual reports, organizational
              charts will be collected when available from all organizations. The two
              transnational NGOs have published numerous reports, books, and treatises with
              their views on the nature of environmentalism.  Textual analyses will be done
              on these materials, and the analyses will be used as a `yardstick` by which to
              gauge differences between national and transnational environmentalism.  Field
              visits and long interviews will be conducted and tape recorded with staff of
              Indian NGOs.  A network chart will be made for all organizations, chronicling
              their collaborations with government and private organizations and donors.  In
              conjunction with information on collaborations, funding sources, and
              organizational history and structure, field notes, project visits, and informal
              interaction with staff will provide background information for thematic
              analyses and analyses of metaphor clusters, that can then be compared to the
              chart of collaborations.  Results will be prepared for journal publication and
              presentations at professional meetings.  They will be useful to local and
              transnational environmental organizations and to policy makers seeking to
              understand their priorities and concerns.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
