Title       : Development of Instrumentation for Measuring the Atmosphere Ar/N2 Ratio and
               Acquisition of Instrumentation for Automated Analysis of the Isotopes of
               Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9601722

Award Number: 9601722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph F. Keeling rkeeling@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Keeling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will purchase and adapt a commercially available isotope ratio mass
              spectrometer to measure variations in the Ar/N2 radio of air samples.  The PIs
              expect this ratio to vary due to air-sea exchange of Ar and N2 driven by
              temperature-induced solubility changes.  Once detected, such variations could
              help to determine climatically relevant heat exchanges between the atmosphere
              and oceans.    The technique involves a dynamic on-line isotope dilution method
              in which a rare stable isotope of argon is blended with a sample at the inlet
              of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer.  Critical aspects of the on-line
              dilution method have been tested and proven using a mass spectrometer
              temporarily available at the University of Rhode Island.  The PI will obtain a
              dedicated instrument at Scripps to develop an integrated measurement system
              consisting of a switching stage and gas dilution stage connected to the mass
              spectrometer.  He will test gas handling and calibration procedures with this
              system.  Finally, the PI will equip the mass spectrometer to analyze isotopes
              of carbon dioxide and acquire equipment for its automatic extraction from the
              samples for isotopic analysis.  This facility will allow analysis of carbon
              dioxide isotopes from air samples from the same flask program, thus allowing
              further characterization of the processes of heat and gas exchange in the world
              oceans.      The research is important because it will provide estimates of
              ocean and atmospheric charges relevant to global climate processes.
