Title       : Shape Determinants of Protein Structure and Function: A New Approach Based on
               Ray-Representation Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9601399

Award Number: 9601399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Prisant prisant@chem.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Questions  of chemical reactivity can often be cast as  questions  of 
              molecular geometry. In particular, space filling  models  are  often  invoked
              to rationalize the chemical behavior of  proteins.  Some of the physio-chemical
              properties which have been treated by  geometric  methods include: packing
              density, folding  energetics,  and molecular recognition.    New  methods  are 
              presented - based  on  the  idea  of  the  ray  representation - for
              manipulating molecular shapes and  computing  their  geometric  properties. 
              The ray  representation  formalism  provides  a  unified  means of dealing with
              geometric  issues  in  molecular modeling. Computation of ray-representations
              for use in  molecular analysis were initially accomplished on special purpose 
              computers in the Principal Investigator's laboratory. However  it  has  been 
              recently shown that molecular ray-reps can be computed  with  high  speed  on
              general purpose single and  multi-processor  work-stations.    The   proposed  
              work  will  further  develop  ray-representation  techniques  for  the  study
              of proteins structure  and  function.  Three   separate  areas  of  research 
              will  be  pursued.  First,  algorithmic  enhancements to rayrepresentation
              calculations  will  be  studied.  There will be particular focus on 
              improvements  in  accuracy  and  speed. General purpose tools based on 
              ray-casting  algorithms  will  be  developed for use  in  molecular  modeling. 
              Second, working with ray-representations, the details of building 
              space-filling   models  for  predictive   analysis   of   protein 
              physio-chemical properties will be studied. In particular, models  will  be 
              calibrated with respect to prediction of water  bearing  cavities  and surface
              solvation potentials. A survey  of  protein  packing  properties  based  on 
              high  resolution  data  will   be  undertaken. Third, simulations will consider
              the role  of  cavity  dynamics in protein ligand uptake.
