Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Confocal Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9601599

Award Number: 9601599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel B. Sheffield jbs@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Z. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                PROJECT SUMMARY                The Biology Department of Temple University
              requests funds to  support the purchase of a scanning confocal laser
              microscope,  which will be used to complement the other facilities that we 
              have available for a combined research/training program in  advanced
              microscopy. For many years, we have been assembling the  components of a
              "virtual laboratory" for advanced biological  microscopy. These components
              include electron microscopes, low  light fluorescence microscopes, DlC/Side
              band microscopes, and a  variety of image analysis systems which are run on
              PC's,  PowerMacintosh, and Silicon Graphics computers. This distribution  of
              the components will be discussed in the management section of  this
              application. It is our goal to complete this laboratory by  adding a scanning
              confocal system, which will allow us to add  three dimensional analysis to our
              repertoire. This laboratory  will be used in both research and training at all
              levels within  the department.    1. Research.          Drs. Gruberg, Myers,
              Hilfer, Tompkins and Sheffield are  interested     in using a scanning confocal
              microscope to  visualize biological     materials in three dimensions during 
              development. Drs. Gruberg, Myers,  Sheffield and Tompkins are  particularly
              interested in nerve development,     using several  model systems, and Dr.
              Hilfer is interested in the     cellular  basis of shape determination in
              embryos, with particular  reference to components of the sensory system. All of
              these  investigators have established research programs and significant 
              publication records.          This instrument will be an important resource for
              the  University     Neuroscience Program, which shares faculty from  the Health
              Sciences      Campus and this one.    2. Training.            The microscope
              will support our training mission as a       component of formal classes and
              the training of graduate and       undergraduate students. a. It will be
              incorporated into an       undergraduate/graduate course i n advanced
              microscopy. This       course was recently added to our curriculum, using the  
                  existing equipment. The confocal microscope will be a       critical
              addition to the available instrumentation .         b. It will be available for
              undergraduate and graduate       student use during independent study/research
              courses, and       during thesis research. We have an active research program  
                  supporting graduate students (about 50), and undergraduates       (about
              30). In the undergraduate program, students work       individually with
              faculty for periods that average two       years, during which they carry out
              independent research       projects. Many of these projects have resulted in
              the       publication of research papers with the student as       co-authors.
              The undergraduate research program has been       supported by the NSF Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates       program for the past six years, and we
              have recently       received a three year grant to continue this effort. In    
                addition, the major portion of the grant that we have just       received
              from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute is       designed to support student
              research.          The major component of our graduate program, at both the    
                Master's and Doctoral level is research, carried out in       close
              association with a faculty advisor. The five faculty       who are
              participating in the current application currently       supervise research of
              23 graduate students.
