Title       : Environmental Regulation of Biodiversity: An Integrated Multilevel Training
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1998  
File        : a9355032

Award Number: 9355032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $587500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathew A. Leibold mleibold@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne Altmann  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A pressing crisis in environmental biology today is that the  accelerating
              loss of biodiversity, globally and nationally, has  outrun our fundamental
              knowledge of its causes and consequences.   We are little able to predict or
              manage the future of most  ecosystems and populations largely because our
              understanding of  the complex environmental processes that generate and govern 
              biodiversity is grossly incomplete and depends on a number of  interacting
              taxonomic, temporal, and spatial scales.  We focus  our proposal for graduate
              training in environmental regulation of  biodiversity on three major components
              of biodiversity:  genetic  diversity, species diversity, and habitat diversity.
               The  University of Chicago's CEB provides and integrated,  interdisciplinary
              PhD training program with participation arising  from every Division of the
              University and three major non-  academic Chicago research and educational
              institutions, the Field  Museum, Brookfield Zoo, and Argonne National
              Laboratories.  The  environmental biodiversity training program will capitalize
              on  our quantitative, empirical and theoretical strengths in ecology, 
              biogeography, systematics, genetics, paleontology, behavior, and  function.  It
              will produce the next generation of leaders who can  address the complexity and
              intrinsically interdisciplinary  problems in this priority area.  The CEB's
              deep-seated commitment  to increasing recruitment and maintaining participation
              of  underrepresented populations into environmental biology is  represented by
              a range of innovative initiatives that utilize our  unique structure and are
              based on personal, individualized  efforts.
