Title       : Training in Environmental Science: Linking Basic Ecology with Social Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a9355056

Award Number: 9355056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda B. Casper bcasper@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil H. Shubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The next generation of ecologists and organismal biologists will be called upon
              to link their  basic-science focus with other skills necessary to solve major
              environmental and social problems.   These skills--in public policy,
              environmental law, management, and scientific communication--  are severely
              lacking in our current graduate training.  We propose a cross-disciplinary
              training  program that will provide students with a rigorous introduction to
              the methods of environmental  science and exposure to the tools necessary to
              apply the fruits of their research to attack major  social and environmental
              issues.  Before initiating their diqsertation research, students will  complete
              a two year curriculum consisting of new lecture, seminar and field courses. 
              Field and  management courses will draw on personnel and resources of the
              Conservation Research Center  of the Smithsonian Institution.  Seminar courses
              on scientific communication, current  environmental issues, and environmental
              law and policy will draw on faculty from other graduate  schools at the
              University of Pennsylvania and other professionals actively involved with these
               issues.  These courses, together with basic science research will provide
              trainees with exposure  to the methods needed to affect scientific and social
              solutions to environmental problems.
