Title       : Maryland 'Virtual High School of Science and Mathematics'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9355806

Award Number: 9355806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1580040            (Estimated)
Investigator: MaryEllen Verona mverona@mvhs1.mbhs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Waveline T. Starnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montgomery Co Public Schs
	      850 Hungerford Drive
	      Rockville, MD  208501744    301/279-3381

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355806  Schlenker    The goal of the proposed project is to establish a
              community of  scientists, teachers and learners who are investigating real
              world  problems in science using a variety of innovative tools.  These  tools
              will include computational tools which will allow  participants to model
              scientific processes as well as communication  tools which will allow
              participants at multiple locations to work  together, to share information, and
              to retrieve information from  remote sources.  Implementation of the 'virtual
              high school'  project will help us determine how peer and mentor support, 
              additional technical advice and technical resources, and a source  of
              problem-solving activities related to science and mathematics  can help
              teachers adapt to new technology and methods, and help to  equalize the
              learning opportunity for all levels of students at  diverse schools.   
              preparing students to "do" science in the real world of the future  means
              guiding them in "doing" science now.  This project entails  bringing to the
              classroom the same team problem solving, technology  rich approaches currently
              used in research and business.   Computational science has become a powerful
              paradigm to complement  other approaches.  Computational tools, ranging from
              spreadsheets  on microprocessors to advanced molecular modeling tools on 
              supercomputers, are allowing scientists to model processes too  costly or
              impossible to investigate in other ways.    This project will support the
              creation of the 'virtual high school'  in two ways.  Interdisciplinary problems
              requiring many levels of  expertise and solvable with computational techniques
              across a  communication network will be developed by a team of teachers who 
              are interested in using these problems in their classroom.   Workshop training
              will enable these teachers to lead their students  and other teachers through
              the team building and content learning  necessary to create computational
              models.  Secondly, the  computational, communication, and teaming tool s will
              be evaluated  in a testbed environment involving selected school sites and 
              industry.  Use of these tools and the global Internet will enable  schools to
              leverage the use of 'low end' microcomputers currently  available in schools to
              achieve access to databases and more  powerful high performance computers.   
              As the project matures, the schools in Maryland will be linked  together
              solving 'realworld' problems.  Students from different age  groups, with
              varying mathematical and scientific backgrounds, with  all levels to computer
              expertise, and from schools geographically  distant from one another will
              collaborate on problems of common  interest.  Students will no longer wonder
              why they are learning  disjointed facts nor will they wait impatiently to see
              the uses of  their high school education.  Instead, they will be motivated to 
              learn because they are solving 'real' problems now.  ***
