Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships: Environmentally Friendly Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9355079

Award Number: 9355079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Veronica A. Burrows burrows@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Applicants to Arizona State University's graduate programs in  Chemical
              Engineering have expressed increasingly strong interest in  environmental
              topics.  A graduate training/research program is  described in the focus area
              of Environmentally Friendly Technology,  emphasizing Environmentally Benign
              Chemical Processing.  Arizona  State University's existing expertise,
              experience, and interest in  environmental aspects of chemical engineering
              provide the necessary  research and teaching base from which to pursue this new
              area of  graduate training.  A program in Environmentally Benign Chemical 
              Processing will utilize both traditional chemical engineering  training -
              process engineering, optimization and control - and  newer, more specialized
              topics including air and water quality  measurement, recycling technologies,
              hazardous materials handling,  and risk assessment.    Topics including
              point-of use abatement, sensor technology, shared  load separations, process
              integration for pollution prevention, and  biosynthesis will be the basis of
              the trainees' research  experience.  Local industry will support this effort: 
              Motorola has  agreed to provide seminar speakers, advise on coursework 
              development, and begin planning for internships in appropriate  areas within
              the company.  Existing and new courses and activities  will comprise the
              teaching component of the program.  Minority  recruiting activities through the
              Coalition to increase Minority  Degrees will include faculty visits to schools
              and applicant visits  to ASU.  A structured program of peer and faculty
              mentoring will  promote student retention.
