Title       : Workings of Science: Interactive Natural History Museum Keystone Exhibit to
               Enhance the Public's Understanding of the Processes of Science through
               Application of These ...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9355530

Award Number: 9355530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249954             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Hackbarth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary S. Korenic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Carl Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee Public Museum
	      800 West Wells Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  53233    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355530  Hackbarth    The Milwaukee Public Museum will develop two test
              stations: A  Wetland/Wood Station and a Mobile Testing Station that will be
              used  to evaluation how hands-on activities that incorporate scientific  tools
              and methods can be applied to supplement the educational  experience of
              traditional natural history museum dioramas.  As a  result of the MPM's work,
              visitors will become engaged in a "field  experience" by means of techniques to
              encourage observing,  recording of data, and hypothesizing using tools that a
              scientists  might use to study the natural environment such as a hand lens, 
              radio telemetry receiver, scales, rulers, and/or calipers.   Visitors will also
              have the opportunity to investigate further in  the "lab".  Here visitors will
              use such tools as a computer,  microscope, measuring grid, and they will be
              encouraged to  experiment, infer, predict, and classify.  The intent is to have
               the visitor discover how scientific information is used to support  decisions
              in every day life.  The development of these stations  will be accompanied by
              considerable formative and summative  evaluation studies.  The results will be
              disseminated in order that  other natural history museums with dioramas may
              replicate these  ideas in order that visitors might move beyond the primary
              "animal  identification" phase in their examination and enjoyment of  dioramas.
