Title       : Frontiers in Physiology: An Enhancement Program for Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9355658

Award Number: 9355658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1174699            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha L. Matyas mmatyas@aps.faseb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physiological Soc
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355658  Matyas    Theis project will improve science education by building the 
              scientific research community into the support infrastructure for  teachers. 
              Specifically, it will:         create ongoing relationships between researchers
              and teachers       through research and inservice experiences and computer     
               networks; and         promote the adoption of K-12 national standards through 
                   activities developed collaboratively by teachers and       researchers.   
              These goals will be met via 1) the Summer Research in Physiology  Program; and
              2) the Joint Teacher-Researcher Physiology Inservice  Program.  During the
              Summer Research Program, teachers conduct  research in physiology laboratories
              and participate in additional  professional activities.  In the Inservice
              Program, teachers and  researchers develop lab/lessons for physiology inservice
              workshops,  focusing on effective pedagogical techniques.  Teachers will be 
              involved in project activities over a full academic year.  More  than 500
              teachers, nationwide, will participate in the three-year  project.    Special
              features of the program include: connecting teachers to  global resources via
              computer networks; producing a videotape  modeling effective pedagogical
              techniques; developing an INTERNET-  accessible databank of physiology lessons;
              and focusing throughout  the project on gender and racial/ethnic equity.    The
              project will serve as a model for professional organizations  and provide
              materials and methods for inservice providers (e.g.,  State Systemic and Urban
              Initiatives).  Most significantly, it will  provide a model for building
              long-term relationships between  teachers and researchers, thus building the
              research community into  the support infrastructure for K-12 science education.
