Title       : Princeton Earth Physics Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9355805

Award Number: 9355805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1864985            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guust M. Nolet nolet@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Phinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355805  Nolet    PEPP aims to install an array of seismographs in high schools
              and  colleges nationwide, to create a computer network to share  seismological
              data and information, to develop a series of Earth  science and physics
              curriculum modules around analysis of  seismological data, and to form a
              network of supporting members  of IRIS (Incorporated  Research Institutions for
              Seismology, an  NSF-supported consortium of more than 80 universities - see 
              Appendix A) to train and support science teachers.   The main goals of the
              project are:    - The develop "hands on" seismological data acquisition
              equipment  for use at high schools and colleges, to increase the curiosity  of
              students to explain nature,  - To increase the understanding of Earth science
              and physics  concepts through connected lab experiments in seismology, while 
              developing a sense of familiarity with the seismometer as an  instrument for
              using these concepts,  - To support teachers to do real "classroom science"
              with their  students and provide scientific back-up for teachers as they 
              undertake these activities with their students,  - To stimulate interaction
              between teachers in Earth sciences and  physics with researchers in geophysics,
               - To give teachers organizational and intellectual support by  providing
              curriculum materials, computer networking as well as  research opportunities, 
              - To disseminate PEPP nationally and build a unique seismological  array that
              allows students and teachers to share data over  Internet and to make real
              discoveries,  - To stimulate developments in instrument design that improves 
              the sensor to be used in this project.    PEPP is rooted in the recent
              developments that have  revolutionized observational seismology.  New networks
              of high  quality, digital seismographs are being installed right now, both  on
              a national scale by the USGS, as well as on a worldwide scale.   IRIS, a
              consortium of (mostly academic) seismological  institutions in the US is the
              driving force behind the  installation of  a worldwide network.  The school
              network  supplements this in the US.  It not only provides real data for  use
              in the classroom - it has unique scientific potential because  it provides a
              station density that could never be obtained using  purely professional
              resources.  In the final stage of the  project, research workshops for teachers
              will be developed in  which the data are used.  This project will enable
              secondary  science teachers to undertake long-term, networked seismic 
              monitoring that will contribute seismology research while  supporting the
              reform of science education through the infusion  of teacher-led, student-based
              scientific research.  By locating  this scientific research in schools,
              participants will help shift  science instruction in their schools toward a
              more project-  oriented, inquiry-based paradigm.
