Title       : Graduate Training in evolutionary ecology at the University of Kentucky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9355093

Award Number: 9355093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund D. Brodie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott K. Gleeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth F. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. McLetchie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose to implement a new, multidisciplinary training program  in
              Environmental Biology at the University of Kentucky, focusing  on evolutionary
              ecology.  Our program will provide a unique blend  of integrative training in
              modern concepts and methodologies,  teaching students to think analytically and
              synthetically across  levels of study.  Our students will learn to utilize both
              parts  of the "theory/experiment loop" and to integrate them effectively  in
              answering front-line research questions.    Key features of the proposed
              training include:    (1)an emphasis on collaborations among peers in a highly 
              interactive research environment;  (2)mentoring from both a faculty members and
              postdoctoral  personnel--and the opportunity to provide some mentoring for 
              undergraduate researcher;  (3)short-course workshops led by distinguished
              scientist; and  (4)innovative training in research methodology, combining 
              exposure to contemporary techniques (e.g. molecular methods,  quantitative
              genetics, field/semi-field experimentation,  modeling) with first-year research
              projects.    Our proposed GRT project represents the culmination of the 
              EPSCOR-initiated establishment of the Center for Evolutionary  Ecology at the
              University of Kentucky.  The requested support,  extensively matched by UK,
              will allow us to increase the  opportunities for individuals from
              under-represented groups in  our field and to help meet the nation's need for
              integratively  trained environmental biologists.
