Title       : Facilitating Systemic Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1994  
File        : a9355831

Award Number: 9355831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane M. Armstrong jarmstrong@ecs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educ Commission of States
	      
	      Denver, CO  80295    /   -

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7360,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Education Commission of the States, in   collaboration with the Association
              of State Supervisors of  Mathematics, the Council of State Science Supervisors,
              and the  Mathematical Sciences Education Board, will host a three-day 
              learning, networking, and planning event designed to further  statewide
              systemic change efforts in mathemantics, science, and  technology education.   
              Key objectives of this event include facilitating cross-group  collaboration
              and communication, and promoting policy and resource  alignment within states.
              Participants will be provided with  opportunities to learn about successful
              models and key elements of  systemic change in mathematics, science, and
              technology education.   There will also be time for participants to share
              information,  acquire new skills and tools, discuss alignment of resources, and
               refine state action plans for implementing systemic change.  To  ensure that
              the event responds to the needs of the participants, a  design team of
              participants will develop the event agenda and  format.    Intended outcomes
              for the event include improved communication  within and across states,
              increased collaboration within and across  states, alignment of initiatives and
              supporting resources, and  continued progress toward statewide systemic change.
               The  organization of this event will also advance federal-state  relations by
              serving as an effective model of large-scale  collaboration.
