Title       : Studies of Middle to Upper Cretaceous Ferns from the Dakota Formation (Biotic
               Systems and Resources)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9002663

Award Number: 9002663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Skog   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Fossil ferns of the Dakota Group will be studied in morphological            
              detail to determine their possible relationships.  The material will           
              be uncovered and macerated to extract the ferns, then the remains will         
              be subjected to various types of treatment to prepare them for light,          
              scanning electron and transmission electron microscopy.  As much               
              morphological information as possible will be obtained from these              
              ferns.  The localities will be recollected to obtain more material for         
              possible bulk maceration and then sorted for any fragments of plant            
              remains.  Once the information has been collected for the ferns, they          
              will be compared to closely related extant ferns and an analysis of            
              characters using cladistic methods will be done.  This analysis will           
              aid in assessing possible relationships, primitive character states,           
              and possible phylogenetic trees.  Relating this study to previous              
              studies of the ferns from the lower Cretaceous will make possible a            
              hypothesis as to the changes in the fern flora throughout the                  
              Cretaceous and the potential impact of the angiosperms upon these fern         
              floras.                                                                        
                The interactive component involves a combination of activities as a          
              professional researcher at the Florida State Museum and a professor in         
              the Department of Botany.  A seminar series cosponsored by the two             
              groups will be used to bring women scientists in plant evolution to            
              the university to present professional talks and to interact with the          
              students and staff.  Courses will be taught in the Department of               
              Botany and interpretative programs aimed at school students will be            
              offered at the Florida State Museum.                                           
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
