Title       : PRF/J: Measuring Aggregation in an Aphid Parasitoid: Individual Behavior to
               Population-level Pattern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9002315

Award Number: 9002315
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Settle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   Parasitoids (insect parasites that invariably kill their                  
              hosts) often aggregate their attacks where their hosts are most                
              abundant.  The degree to which attacks are aggregated, however,                
              is highly variable--rates of parasitism (on a per victim basis)                
              sometimes decrease with increasing host density.  Mathematical                 
              models have shown that the response to the density of their hosts              
              has profound consequences for the dynamics of the interaction.                 
              However, the mechanisms underlying aggregation are poorly                      
              understood.  The proposed research is intended to examine how an               
              aphid parasitoid alters its foraging in response to variation in               
              host density.  The goal of the research is to  develop a                       
              sufficient understanding of the microscale behavior of an aphid                
              parasitoid that can predict within-generation population-level                 
              patterns in the field.  Most behavioral work to date on host-                  
              parasitoid interactions has been restricted to observations in                 
              simple laboratory environments or, if in the field, to                         
              observations of foraging on a single plant.  In contrast,                      
              although population studies of host-parasitoid interactions often              
              include information on spatial patterns, they rarely attend to                 
              the details of parasitoid behavior.  This project consists of lab              
              and field experiments closely coupled to mathematical models,                  
              which are used to extrapolate from individual behavior to                      
              patterns at the population level.
