Title       : Studies in Optical-Microwave Interaction and Fiberoptic Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9002289

Award Number: 9002289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tomas E. Gergely                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11478              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Herczfeld herczfeld@ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Afshin S. Daryoush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1493,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research in electrical                         
              engineering to be conducted by Peter Herczfeld of the Center                   
              for Microwave-Lightwave Engineering (CMLE) at Drexel                           
              University and Alvaro De Salles of the Center for Studies in                   
              Telecommunications (CETUC) of the Catholic University in Rio                   
              de Janeiro.  The scientific areas of the cooperative research                  
              are the interaction of high frequency electromagnetic and                      
              light waves in semiconductor devices and fiberoptic sensors.                   
              Drexel has an active program studying the interaction of                       
              lightwaves and high-frequency electromagnetic waves in semi-                   
              conducting materials and devices.  These studies include the                   
              nonlinear behavior of semi-conductor lasers with external                      
              cavities and the performance of monolithic microwave integrated                
              circuit (MMIC) components under optical illumination.  In                      
              addition CMLE has an active program in fiberoptic sensor                       
              devices.  In Brazil, CETUC has well established programs in                    
              the same technical areas.  At CETUC, research is progressing                   
              on sensors for the Brazilian power industry.  The proposed                     
              cooperative work will adapt the methods developed at CMLE for                  
              voltage and current sensing, which is of interest to CETUC,                    
              and expand on the basic understanding of modal coupling in                     
              fibers.  Both experimental and analytic research are planned.                  
                                                                                             
              Previous contacts between the researchers at CETUC and CMLE                    
              have included exchange of scientific information and sample                    
              devices, exchange of graduate students, visits and lectures                    
              at each institution and collaboration on scientific articles                   
              and books.  This work represents the culmination of a                          
              previous informal cooperation.  The proposed research will be                  
              a natural extension of present activities and will emphasize                   
              the overlapping interests of these two collaborating partners                  
              in the fundamental, generic aspect of the research topics                      
              identified above.
