Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research on Characterization of the Human Peroxisomal
               Membrane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1993      
File        : a9002001

Award Number: 9002001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Lazarow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Mt Sinai Sch of Med
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    212/650-6500

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research in cell biology to                    
              be conducted by Paul Lazarow of Mt. Sinai School of Medicine                   
              in New York collaborating with Manuel Santos of the Catholic                   
              University in Santiago, Chile.  The research will involve the                  
              study of subcellular organelles, peroxisomes, that participate                 
              in lipid metabolism and cellular respiration.  The peroxisomal                 
              proteins seem to be formed from pre-existing organelles by                     
              synthesis on free ribosomes and imported into the organelle.                   
                                                                                             
              Recently a series of human genetic disorders involving                         
              peroxisomal functions has been described.  Some of these                       
              peroxisomal disorders are thought to be the consequence of a                   
              failure in the peroxisomal biogenetic mechanisms, in which                     
              the peroxisomal membrane plays an essential role.  Unfor-                      
              tunately, the human peroxisomal membrane has been poorly                       
              studied: its protein composition is largely unknown, there                     
              are not antibodies available against its proteins, that can                    
              be used to study some aspects of peroxisomal biogenesis.  This                 
              research will obtain a battery of polyclonal and monoclonal                    
              antibodies against the proteins of the human peroxisomal                       
              membrane, which can be used as reagents to evaluate the                        
              presence, abundance and subcellular localization of these                      
              peroxisomal proteins in fibroblasts derived from patients                      
              affected by disorders of peroxisomal biogenesis.  The                          
              information obtained in this project will contribute to the                    
              knowledge of the structure, composition and function of human                  
              peroxisomes and to knowledge of the mechanism of peroxisome                    
              biogenesis.  In addition, it will contribute to the under-                     
              standing of the role of peroxisome in genetic pathology.
