Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Physics): Multi-Particle Correlations in
               Relativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9002961

Award Number: 9002961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Declan F. Keane keane@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Y. Fung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University Fdn
	      
	      Kent, OH  44242    /   -

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 1230,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two.year collaborative project between                               
              Declan F. Keane of Kent State University and Liu                               
              Yiming of the Harbin Institute of Technology.  The                             
              project is sponsored by NSF and the National                                   
              Natural Science Foundation of China.                                           
                                                                                             
              This is a project involving the resources of the                               
              newly.established heavy ion research group at the                              
              Harbin Institute of Technology to analyze existing                             
              data from experiments at Lawrence Berkeley                                     
              Laboratory's BEVALAC accelerator.  The goal of the                             
              project is to attain a better understanding of                                 
              nuclear matter that is far from its equilibrium                                
              state, an objective that has been identified as top                            
              priority in the subfield of nuclear physics.  The                              
              proposed work will include interpretations of                                  
              results using collision simulation codes based on                              
              the most recent developments in nuclear transport                              
              theory.  Much of the work will be conducted using a                            
              dedicated computer facility at the Harbin institute.                           
              The Chinese researchers will re.analyze existing                               
              BEVALAC data containing multi.particle correlation                             
              information for both pions and nucleons.  Based on                             
              the Hanbury.Brown Twiss (HBT) effect, the correlation                          
              function or relative momentum distributions can be                             
              used to extract the spacial extent of the source of                            
              these particles.
