Title       : Research Toward the Application of Real-Time Gas Electron Diffraction as a
               Detector for Open Tubular Capillary Gas Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9002677

Award Number: 9002677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161520             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Ewbank   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lothar Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose to investigate enhancements of real-time                            
              Gas Electron Diffraction (GED) leading to                                      
              application of this structure-analytic technique to the                        
              detection of effluents from Open Tubular Capillary                             
              Gas Chromatography (OTC-GC) columns.  Our                                      
              group was the first to successfully detect diffracted                          
              electrons by a phosphor screen coupled to a                                    
              photodiode array.  Our procedures are unique in the                            
              use of multichannel detection to obtain direct real-                           
              time structural information on molecules in the vapor                          
              phase.  Later, we identified improvements in design                            
              that extend serviceability of GED to the study of                              
              analytes leaving the column of a gas chromatograph.                            
              GED affords a universal detector with relatively                               
              uniform sensitivity for diverse molecular species.  The                        
              most singular feature is that it yields information on                         
              the structural makeup of those species.  By combining                          
              the two techniques, GC and GED, we have pioneered                              
              a new area of structural chromatography.  We now                               
              propose detector enhancements aimed at extending                               
              the applicability of this new method from the current                          
              nanoliter requirement of sample size to the picoliter                          
              domain, which would enable investigations with OTC-                            
              GC.  This tool may find considerable importance,                               
              potentially as a standard instrument for analytical                            
              applications.  In addition, the detector enhancements                          
              will pay secondary benefits in other ongoing                                   
              experiments:  in determining the structures of                                 
              transient species and in kinetic studies with time                             
              resolution in the nanosecond regime using real-time                            
              electron diffraction with pulsed electron beams.
