Title       : Artificial Neural Networks and Decision Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9002087

Award Number: 9002087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ishwar K. Sethi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is aimed at developing a systematic                      
              artificial neural network (ANN) design and training methodology                
              and exploring its applications in robotics.  The salient feature               
              of the research is the use of statistical pattern recognition                  
              techniques to solve some key aspects of ANN and learning                       
              procedures.  One major limitation of present ANNs operating under              
              the supervised mode of learning is that these networks are unable              
              to self-configure the architecture for a given classification                  
              problem.  A solution to this problem is to establish a direct                  
              relationship between a class of nonparametric classifiers, i.e.                
              decision trees, and the multilayer neural networks.  It can be                 
              shown that a decision tree can be restructured as a three layered              
              neural net.  Exploiting this restructuring allows neural network               
              design and training methodology to have self-configuration                     
              capability.  The tree-to-network mapping also provides a solution              
              to the credit assignment problem thus making it possible to                    
              train each layer separately and progressively.  The research will              
              explore automatic tree generation, incorporation of incremental                
              learning, and adaptability in such networks.  The proposed                     
              methodology will be applied to robot learning where networks are               
              required to perform regression rather than classification.  The                
              main expected benefit of the proposed research is that it will                 
              make available an ANN design and training procedure that is                    
              systematic.  This should result in many more applications for                  
              artificial neural networks.
