Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1992     
File        : a9002744

Award Number: 9002744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerd Faltings   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the research in arithmetic algebraic                  
              geometry of Professor Gerd Faltings of Princeton University. Dr.               
              Faltings's research will be centered on questions about p-adic                 
              analysis and Diophantine geometry. He has recently discovered p-               
              adic symmetric domains, and plans to study their cohomology and                
              construct their Satake compactifications. In Diophantine                       
              geometry, he plans to use new methods, in particular the Product               
              Theorem that he has recently proved, to reformulate the classical              
              theory of Diophantine approximations.                                          
                   This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic                     
              geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic                  
              geometry and number theory. In its original formulation,                       
              algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the                
              plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number                    
              theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as                    
              divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects,               
              seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from                
              the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual                 
              influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic                       
              algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern                      
              mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own              
              borders.
