Title       : Biomaker and Carbon Isotope Geochemistry of Pyrolytic and Chemosynthetic
               Processes in Sedimented Hydrothermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9002366

Award Number: 9002366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd R. Simoneit simoneit@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a continuing and collaborative research effort with                    
              biologists on the hydrothermal emanations, primarily in Guaymas                
              Basin, with follow up studies on material from the Northeastern                
              Pacific (Middle Valley, Juan de Fuca and Gorda Ridges), African                
              Rift Valley (Lake Tanganyika), and a hot spot under a continent                
              (Yellowstone Park).  The organic matter (petroleum) brought to                 
              the seabed by hydrothermal circulation represents the rapidly                  
              generated pyrolytic products from organic detritus at depth and                
              is a carbon source for the hemosynthetic food web.  This type of               
              carbon cycling and its geological fate will be studied in a                    
              sedimented rift system which is hydrothermally.active, receiving               
              primarily terrestrial organic detritus (Escanaba Trough).  This                
              will be done by coupling organic and isotope geochemistry to                   
              examine interrelationships between post.depositional pyrolytic                 
              alteration of organic matter (petroleum),                                      
              biodegradation/weathering processes and chemosynthetic carbon                  
              fixation.  Chemical reactions (e.g. aromatization, dehydration,                
              isomerization) with temperature constraints also will be studied               
              to define formation "windows" for different compound classes.                  
              The environmental fate of these compound classes will be examined              
              to assess solubility, oxidative weathering and biodegradation.                 
              Key reactions and processes will be simulated in the laboratory                
              by hydrous pyrolysis experiments.  Carbon.14 dating of different               
              organic matter fractions will place constraints on the sources                 
              and subbottom depths of the alteration of carbonaceous materials.              
              Thus, molecular and isotopic signatures will be able to be used                
              to trace the transfer of carbon from sources through these                     
              hydrothermal environments.
