Title       : Root Carbon Costs and Water Uptake for Desert Succulents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9002333

Award Number: 9002333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Park S. Nobel psnobel@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the last major frontiers in understanding how plants function           
              deals with their roots.  The roots benefit a plant by obtaining water          
              and nutrients from the soil and at the same time they impose a cost on         
              the plant, which can most readily be appreciated by considering the            
              carbon incorporated into their structure as well as expended by                
              respiration for their growth and maintenance.  Thus, the overall               
              objective of the research is to determine the carbon requirements of           
              water acquisition for the root systems of Agave deserti (an agave              
              native to the southwest of the U.S.), Ferocactus acanthodes (a cactus          
              sympatric with A. deserti), and Opuntia ficus-indica (a cactus that is         
              cultivated worldwide as a vegetable, for cattle fodder, and for its            
              fruits).                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The responses of the shoots of the three species to environmental              
              conditions have been extensively studied in Dr. Nobel's laboratory over        
              the past 15 years, providing valuable ecological information and also          
              demonstrating that the productivity of O. ficus-indica exceeds that of         
              most conventional agronomic crops.  Moreover, the high productivities          
              of such desert succulents are achieved at a very low cost in terms of          
              transpired water, because all three species employ Crassulacean acid           
              metabolism with its nocturnal stomatal opening and a greatly enhanced          
              water-use efficiency.  Here, the influences of temperature, soil water         
              status, soil gas phase, and root age on root respiration and water-            
              uptake ability will be determined for individual roots as well as              
              entire root systems for A. deserti, F. acanthodes, and O. ficus-indica.        
              The mechanisms for preventing water loss from the roots to a dry soil          
              will be examined, a feature that is crucial for the survival of                
              perennial plants in deserts.  Performing cost/benefit analyses on the          
              roots of these highly successful and productive species will not only          
              provide basic information on how they respond in the natural                   
              environment but also can be used to propose new land-use scenarios for         
              the beneficial exploitation of succulent plants under future climatic          
              conditions.
