Title       : Conformational Dynamics of Rhodopsin and Bacteriorhodopsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1993  
File        : a9002984

Award Number: 9002984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240050             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Gregory Dewey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fluorescence polarization and energy transfer is used to probe                 
              the conformational dynamics of two light-activated proteins,                   
              rhodopsin and bacteriorhodopsin.  Over the years, these                        
              proteins have provided important model systems for receptor                    
              action and ion transport, respectively.  The goal of the                       
              present study is to investigate changes in protein flexibility                 
              as a result of conformational transitions.  These systems are                  
              especially convenient for this purpose because of the ease of                  
              inducing transitions with light.  These experiments should                     
              provide unique information on how protein dynamics influence                   
              conformational transitions.  Phase lifetime spectroscopy is                    
              used to measure changes in fluorescence energy transfer and                    
              fluorescence polarization in bacteriorhodopsin as it proceeds                  
              through its proton-pumping photocycle.  This novel technique                   
              will allow changes in position of the chromophore, retinal, to                 
              be monitored for intermediates which exist on the millisecond                  
              time scale.  In the rhodopsin work, fluorescence labels are                    
              attached to a site located on the carboxyl tail which is                       
              thought to anchor the tail to the membrane.  The membrane                      
              location of the this site will be established using                            
              fluorescence energy transfer.  Fluorescence anisotropy                         
              measurements will be used to characterize the motion of the                    
              "tethered tail".  Finally, theoretical models will be                          
              investigated to provide link between molecular dynamics and                    
              conformational changes.
