Title       : Microscopic Theory of Quantum Fluids and Nuclear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9002863

Award Number: 9002863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Clark jwc@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willem H. Dickhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will continue a program aimed at accurate                
              theoretical prediction of the properties of strongly-interacting               
              quantum many-body systems, at the microscopic level defined by                 
              the basic forces between the constituents.  The systems of                     
              interest include superfluid liquid helium-four unpolarized and                 
              polarized liquid helium-three, spin-aligned bulk atomic hydrogen               
              and deuterium, nuclear matter, neutron matter, nuclei, and                     
              strongly-coupled electronic systems.  Both static and dynamic                  
              properties of selected examples, notably the helium liquids,                   
              nuclei, and nuclear matter, will be calculated.  Special emphasis              
              is placed on predictions which can be compared with the results                
              of current experiments designed to probe the correlation                       
              structure of many-body systems.  Such experiments include deep-                
              inelastic neutron scattering from liquid helium (e.g. at the                   
              Argonne IPNS facility) and inclusive electron scattering from                  
              nuclei at GeV energies (e.g. at CEBAF).  The basic goal is a                   
              deeper understanding of the breakdown of meanfield pictures due                
              to dynamical correlations.  The primary theoretical tools are the              
              method of correlated basis functions and self-consistent Green's               
              function theory, applied in parallel or joint investigations.
