Title       : Software Development for Neural and Behavioral Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9002089

Award Number: 9002089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Hawken   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Landy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Anthony Movshon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Software will be developed that provides experimental control of               
              stimulus display and data acquisition in neurophysiological and                
              psychophysical investigations of visual processing.  This software             
              is being developed for three main reasons: (1) to take advantage               
              of advances in computer technology that facilitate the development             
              of such systems, (2) to incorporate an extensive library of low-               
              level visual display drivers that have been developed at NYU over              
              the past five years, and (3) to incorporate modern design concepts             
              into the software.  The software is expected to provide the basic              
              experimental control program for the next 5-10 years for the                   
              research group involved in this proposal.  In addition, a key                  
              design feature of the software system is portability, with the goal            
              of freeing its general structure from dependance on a specific                 
              processor architecture or on a particular set of input and output              
              devices.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The common theme of the research that will initially use the newly             
              developed software is that it relies upon computer controlled                  
              generation and display of visual patterns, either on monochrome or             
              color monitors along with the collection of stimulus-evoked                    
              behavioral and neural responses.  Although the initial effort will             
              concentrate on the generation of software for visual                           
              experimentation, the design of the system is by no means limited               
              to this area, and adaptation of the general control structures to              
              a wide range of neural and behavioral experiments should be                    
              straightforward.
