Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis & Calculation of Solutions to the Acoustics
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9002768

Award Number: 9002768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel J. Walkington noelw@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will continue his research into                
              the numerical solution of the acoustic equations that govern the               
              generation and propagation of noise by aircraft.  Specifically he              
              will study two major problem areas:  the development and                       
              implementation of numerical codes that can resolve the acoustic                
              equations in the presence of vorticity, and the posing of                      
              physically correct and numerically consistent boundary conditions              
              for flow problems in unbounded domains.  The vorticity that is                 
              generated near sharp edges like the engines or the landing gear                
              creates difficulties for conventional numerical codes, and so                  
              the principal investigator is developing a finite element code                 
              that obviates many of the problems associated with vorticity.                  
              With regard to the posing of proper boundary conditions it is                  
              necessary to set boundary conditions on an artificial interface,               
              in order to make the computations for a problem in an infinite                 
              domain tractable.                                                              
              The problem of aircraft noise during landings and takeoffs is of               
              growing concern to many communities and local governments.  One                
              obvious solution of this problem is to design airplanes whose                  
              engines and exterior surfaces operate at minimal noise levels.                 
              As one can imagine easily this is a complicated phenomenon, and                
              so mathematicians and aerodynamicists often resort to modelling                
              the complex sets of equations with simpler ones, and then                      
              solving the approximate equations numerically.  However this can               
              be tricky too, since aircraft generate vorticity, which                        
              influences the noise pattern and which often defeats conventional              
              numerical schemes.  The principal investigator is working on                   
              numerical algorithms that can handle the vorticity and the                     
              unboundedness of the flow domain in a computationally efficient                
              manner.
