Title       : Dissertation Research: The Phylogenetic Affinities of the Cheirogaleidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9002112

Award Number: 9002112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9574               (Estimated)
Investigator: Matt Cartmill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The primate Family Cheirogaleidae is classified within the                
              suborder Strepsirhini which includes both lemuriform primates                  
              from Madagascar and lorisiform primates from Africa and Asia.                  
              The exact placement of the Cheirogaleidae, which are found only                
              in Madagascar, has been a problem for some time.  Traditionally                
              they have been placed with the other Madagascar primates, largely              
              on a biogeographic basis.  Most recent classifications, however,               
              place them with the African/Asian lorisiform primates, largely on              
              the basis of features in the base of the skull.                                
                   This proposal addresses the question: are the cheirogaleid                
              primates more closely related to the lemuriform or to the                      
              lorisiform primates?  A number of data sets, including                         
              anatomical, embryological, and genetic information will examined               
              to determine their relationships.  The clarification of                        
              cheirogaleid affinities will be significant for at least three                 
              reasons.  A classification is necessary that is commensurate with              
              phylogenetic relationships.  An understanding of the sister-group              
              relationships between cheirogaleids and other strepsirhines is                 
              necessary to determine the effects of homology versus                          
              convergence.  And, if cheirogaleids and lorisiforms are more                   
              closely related it will confirm that multiple migrations between               
              Madagascar and Africa must have occurred during the history of                 
              the primates.
