Title       : Timing of the Closure of the Central American Isthmus: Evidence From
               Shallow-Water Benthic Foraminifera (Earth Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9002977

Award Number: 9002977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel S. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Approximately three million years ago the emergence of the Isthmus           
              of Panama from the sea divided the American tropical marine fauna              
              in two, profoundly affecting the evolution and geographic distribution         
              of many animals.  The time of severance of deep.water connections              
              has been studied, but Dr. Collins will determine the time of final             
              closure using shallow.water benthic foraminifera.  Fossil species of           
              these abundant protists indicate the water depths in which they                
              formerly lived.  From strata dated with the newest biostratigraphic            
              zonations, a sequence of water depths through time from both sides of          
              the isthmus will be combined with taxonomic data on the biogeographic          
              divergence of East Pacific and Caribbean foraminifera to date and the          
              final closure of the isthmus.  Standard laboratory and analytical              
              methods will be used.  The date of termination of the marine                   
              connection is important to evolutionary studies in paleontology,               
              molecular biological studies of rates of genetic divergence, and               
              calculations of regional tectonic uplift and the terrestrial                   
              interchange of South and North American vertebrates.                           
                Interactions with the host institution include:  teaching an                 
              undergraduate course in biostratigraphy, leading a graduate seminar            
              in paleobiogeography, co-teaching summer geology field camp, and               
              arranging guest lectures by established women paleontologists.                 
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
