Title       : Novel Separation Processes using Solvents with a Critical Point of Miscibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1991       
File        : a9002383

Award Number: 9002383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jeffrey Foltz                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuel Shinnar shinnar@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal deals with a novel separation process recently                   
              developed that could add a valuable and powerful tool to the                   
              process designer.  It is concerned with multistage                             
              countercurrent separation processes.  The basic idea                           
              underlying the approach is based on using pairs of solvents                    
              that have a critical point of miscibility.  By operating close                 
                                                                                             
              to the critical point and changing the temperature of the                      
              system, one can alternatively create regions where the two                     
              solvents form homogeneous solution and others in which they                    
              separate into two distinct phases.                                             
                                                                                             
              Such solvents are already used in separations, but at present                  
              they are used far from the critical point of miscibility.  By                  
              operating across the critical point in each section, the mass                  
              transfer in the mixing zone as well as the coalescence process                 
                                                                                             
              is facilitated.  This allows design with low intensity of                      
              mixing, and this will be useful for separations in which there                 
                                                                                             
              is a tendency to emulsification or foaming due to impurities.                  
                                                                                             
              It is also suitable for separation of high molecular weight                    
              compound which have low diffusivities and therefore high mass                  
              transfer resistance.  This allows some novel design options                    
              and will allow separations which are at present not                            
              economically feasible with existing solvent separation                         
              methods.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The basic concept has been demonstrated and a small column has                 
                                                                                             
              been successfully operated.  However, in order to apply these                  
              processes in an efficient way, a better understanding of the                   
              scientific principles involved is required.  The goal of this                  
              proposal is to provide understanding, as well as to provide a                  
              better scientific base for future design.
