Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Deletions of Interferon Genes in Mammalian
               Cell Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9002064

Award Number: 9002064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7629               (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel O. Diaz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5911      ARGENTINA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research in cell biology to                    
              be conducted by Manuel Diaz of the University of Chicago and                   
              two counterpart scientists in Buenos Aires, Irma Slavutsky                     
              and Irene Larripa of the Academy of Medicine.  They will                       
              carry out collaborative studies on the molecular analysis of                   
              mouse and human cell lines that contain deletions of a                         
              certain genomic region, including a cluster of genes belonging                 
              to the interferon gene family.  The main purpose of the study                  
              will be to analyze the deletions at the molecular level and                    
              to clone and sequence their breakpoint junctions.  They will                   
              determine the size of the deletions, many of which are                         
              submicroscopic and study the mechanism by which these                          
              deletions occur.  The study will elucidate basic mechanisms                    
              of mutagenesis that may be involved in all kinds of genetic                    
              processes:  somatic or germinal mutations related to the                       
              origin of congenital or acquired disease, somatic or germinal                  
              spontaneous neutral mutations without pathologic consequences,                 
              or normal evolutionary processes.                                              
                                                                                             
              The strength of Drs. Slavutsky and Larripa's group, is the                     
              microscopic cytogenetic analysis of chromosome abnormalities                   
              in cancer cells and experimental mammalian cytogenetics.                       
              They will develop the methods of analysis of DNA rearrangements                
              associated with the chromosome abnormalities detected in                       
              their studies.  Their interaction with Dr Diaz`s laboratory                    
              will help them to develop this capability, and at the same                     
              time will allow both groups to coordinate their efforts in                     
              the study of the molecular basis of chromosome rearrangements                  
              in mammalian cells  They have in their laboratory the                          
              necessary equipment to perform DNA extraction from mammalian                   
              cells and to perform Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA.                    
              This is in addition to all the tissue culture, optical and                     
              photographic equipment and facilities necessary for cytogenetic                
              analysis.  The strength of the University of Chicago laboratory                
              is the analysis of DNA rearrangements generated by such                        
              chromosomal abnormalities, the identification and cloning of                   
              the DNA sequences located at the translocation breakpoints,                    
              and the identification and characterization of genes affected                  
              by these rearrangements.  Because these two laboratories                       
              complement each other so well, the mutual benefits of this                     
              collaboration are evident.
