Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on The Long Range Transport of Pollutants in the
               Pacific Rim Region Around South Korea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9002603

Award Number: 9002603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Carmichael gcarmich@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1524,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Gregory R.                          
              Carmichael, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,                 
              University of Iowa, to pursue with Dr. Min Sun Hong,                           
              Department of Environmental Engineering, Ajou University,                      
              Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative                     
              research on the long range transport of air pollutants in                      
              the Pacific Rim region around South Korea.  The research                       
              plan includes observation and modelling components.                            
              Background measurements of aerosol, ozone, and oxides of                       
              nitrogen and of sulfur will be obtained at Cheju Island                        
              located south-southwest of the Korean peninsula.  Comprehen-                   
              sive modelling analysis of the long range transport of                         
              pollutants and their impact on the environment will be made.                   
                                                                                             
              Chemicals released into the atmosphere can have many adverse                   
              impacts on the environment including local air pollution                       
              such as smog, regional problems such as acid rain, and                         
              global problems including the reduction of stratospheric                       
              ozone and global warming.  South Korea's location between                      
              China, to the west, and Japan, to the east, provides an                        
              ideal location to study the transport and chemical charac-                     
              teristics of the east Asia plume.  This research is of                         
              interest and benefit to the United States because it has now                   
              been well established that neither pollutants nor their                        
              effects are confined to the locations where the chemicals                      
              enter the atmosphere.  The two investigators are outstanding                   
              scientists in the field of the project who have a record of                    
              successful collaboration in prior research.  This project is                   
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative                       
              Science Program which seeks to increase the level of                           
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers                   
              through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,                         
              skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems                   
              of mutual benefit.  Dr. Hong's participation in the project                    
              is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation                   
              (KOSEF).
