Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Circle Packings and Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9002397

Award Number: 9002397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Stephenson KENS@MATH.UTK.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                   The source of this mathematical research is a conjecture                  
              made by W. Thurston five years ago to the effect that if one                   
              packed circles inside planar simply connected domains and then                 
              associated the circles by a discrete map, then as the circles                  
              became smaller, the maps would converge to the analytic Riemann                
              map between the two domains.  Several proofs of the conjecture                 
              followed shortly thereafter.                                                   
                   This project continues the study of connections between                   
              circle packings and analytic functions, with the aim of                        
              developing a geometrically faithful discrete analogue of parts of              
              classical function theory.  Initial developments in the                        
              application of circle packing relied on hexagonal packings.  For               
              reasons both aesthetic and practical, this restriction is being                
              removed. Deeper insights into the fundamental behavior of circle               
              packings is expected to result from this work.  A departure from               
              studies of circle packing in the plane to the setting of                       
              hyperbolic geometry is also leading to new connections between                 
              combinatorics and geometry.  What has already emerged, for                     
              example, are hyperbolic analogues for the Schwarz lemma and Pick               
              lemma in the context of circle packing maps.                                   
                   A new element recently introduced into these studies is that              
              of using a random walk as a perspective from which to view the                 
              transition from one packing to the next.  This model shows, for                
              instance, how the effects of differential changes in boundary                  
              radii distribute themselves about the packing.  The precision of               
              the model is exact, reflecting the profound rigidity in circle                 
              packings.                                                                      
                   The first and most important goal of this work will be to                 
              determine the corresponding result of the Mostow rigidity                      
              theorem: Are infinite circle packings which fill the hyperbolic                
              plane unique up to automorphisms?  Work will also be done to                   
              answer the question of which compact surfaces support circle                   
              packings.
