Title       : U.S.-Italy Symposium on Copper in Biological Systems, Manziana Italy, Sept.
               23-29, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9002878

Award Number: 9002878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19482              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Peisach peisach@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1143,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Italy award will support an interdisciplinary                        
              meeting in Manziana, Italy on the topic of copper in biological                
              systems.  The meeting, organized by Professor Jack Peisach of                  
              the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University                  
              and Professor Bruno Mondovi of the University of Rome "La                      
              Sapienza," will include 15 participants from twelve countries                  
              besides the U.S. and Italy.  The emphasis will be on non-blue                  
              copper oxidases, although sessions devoted to blue copper,                     
              hemocyanin, cytochrome oxidase, and the role of copper in                      
              toxicity and detoxification mechanisms will be included.                       
                                                                                             
              Copper plays a vital role in biological systems.  It is an                     
              essential transition metal required for enzymatic reactions,                   
              bioenergetic processes, and for structural integrity of some                   
              proteins.  In excess, it can be toxic, both through its role                   
              as a heavy metal intoxicant, but also in reactions that                        
              generate toxic oxygen species.  Considering the importance                     
              of biological copper systems, it is not surprising that they                   
              remain under vigorous investigation in numerous laboratories                   
              throughout the United States, Italy, and other parts of the                    
              world.  Although the topic has been discussed at various                       
              scientific meetings, the Manzania meetings have been                           
              exceptional for the breadth of their multidisciplinary approach                
              and their specific focus on copper research.  The introduction                 
              of several important techniques in the field can be traced                     
              back to the impact of past Manzania meetings.  In addition to                  
              acting as a clearing house for a multidisciplinary approach,                   
              the Manzania meetings have provided a nurturing scientific                     
              environment for young investigators.  In the five years since                  
              the last Manziana meeting, the direction of the field has                      
              changed considerably and new approaches and understanding of                   
              the role of metals in biology make the case for a meeting on                   
              this topic.
