Title       : A New Method to Investigate Unsteady Heat Transfer in a Turbine Research Rig
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1990   
File        : a9002703

Award Number: 9002703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cengiz Camci c-camci@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the most difficult areas of experimental heat transfer                  
                                                                                             
              is that of determining the thermal response of solid surfaces                  
                                                                                             
              placed inside the flow to highly non-steady fluctuations in                    
              temperature, pressure, velocity, etc.  In recent years, very                   
                                                                                             
              sophisticated computer codes have been developed which are                     
              capable of analyzing such flows, but typically, they involve                   
                                                                                             
              some semi-empiricism.  Experimental validation of these non-                   
                                                                                             
              steady codes is therefore of great importance.  However, the                   
                                                                                             
              progress of experimental techniques has not kept pace with                     
              such computational developments, and much work is needed to                    
              provide such validation.  One area where non-steady effects                    
              are                                                                            
              of great importance is the area of turbo-machinery where high                  
              non-steadiness is produced by rotor-stator flow interactions,                  
              shock wave generation, turbulence, blade-boundary layer                        
              interaction, and the like.   The Axial Flow Turbine Facility                   
              at                                                                             
              Penn State with its instrumentation in the rotor frame of                      
              reference is uniquely equipped to attempt such validation.                     
                                                                                             
              The innovation of the proposed research is to attempt to                       
              simulate non-steady heat transfer in a turbo-machine by                        
              introducing a slug of high temperature air flow at a                           
              relatively small segment of the periphery of the turbo-                        
              machine,                                                                       
              over a very small increment of time.  If the simulation proves                 
                                                                                             
              valid, then the experimental study of non-steady transfer                      
              characteristics in turbo-machines will be greatly simplified,                  
                                                                                             
              and lead to relatively rapid progress in this important field.                 
                                                                                             
              In addition, fundamental information on non-steady heat                        
              transfer                                                                       
              will emerge from this study.
