Title       : Solving and Visualizing Algebraic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1990       
File        : a9002228

Award Number: 9002228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandrajit L. Bajaj   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A general-purpose tool for computing and visualizing solutions to              
              systems of algebraic equations shall be built.  Diverse algorithms             
              exist for this problem and related sub-problems.  The goal of this             
              project is also to develop a new set of solution techniques based on           
              multi-polynomial resultants.  Our designed tool shall be portable and          
              allow rapid prototyping of new and existing algorithms, in an                  
              intelligent blend of algebraic and numeric methods and real                    
              solutions.  Complex solutions can also be computed, but visualizing            
              them is difficult. The software shall also take advantage of any               
              parallel hardware that is present.  In all, a substantial improvement          
              is anticipated in the state of the art of algebraic equation solving.          
              Overall, the approach is to devise novel algorithmic techniques, blend         
              with existing methods as well as compare the relative efficacy of the          
              various methods.                                                               
                                                                                             
              A prototype system implementing some of these goals is built and               
              evolving.  It is written in Common Lisp and C, and runs under the              
              version 11 of the X window system.  The system is portable to any              
              machine that runs vanilla Common Lisp, supports the X window system,           
              and has at least a rudimentary Lisp/C interface.  At the present time          
              it can solve systems of up to two equations in any number of                   
              variables.  Example applications of this are curve and surface                 
              display, curve-curve intersections, or surface surface intersections.          
              A graphical user interface allows the display and manipulation of OD           
              (points), 1D (curves) or 2D (surface) solutions.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 //
