Title       : Structural Interactions and Biological Activity of Allosteric Threonine
               Deaminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9002177

Award Number: 9002177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Eisenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Research on allosteric threonine deaminase from Escherichia coli               
              will reveal protein interactions that regulate enzyme activity.                
              Cloning and high-level expression will aid in purifying wild-type              
              and mutant forms of threonine deaminase for their biochemical                  
              characterization.  Analysis of the protein concentration                       
              dependence of enzyme kinetic parameters will elucidate a model                 
              for the transition between low and high activity conformations.                
              Identifying malfunctioning variants by classical genetics will                 
              reveal structural domains involved in catalysis and regulation,                
              and their effect on the folding of polypeptides will be evaluated              
              by x-ray crystallography.  Sedimentation equilibrium studies of                
              the tetramer-dimer interconversion of threonine deaminase will                 
              permit quantitative determination of changes in subunit                        
              interaction energy.  Direct ligand binding measurements by                     
              equilibrium dialysis, coupled with the energetics of dimer-                    
              tetramer assembly, will reveal the thermodynamic basis for                     
              cooperativity.  The cofactor pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, a                         
              chromophore in the active site, can reveal local changes promoted              
              by effector binding that alter catalysis.  Quantitative analysis               
              of absorption spectra in terms of sums of lognormal curves will                
              establish a free energy profile for the enzyme to assess the                   
              effect of heterotropic ligands on each step of the reaction                    
              pathway.  Presteady-state kinetic studies will correlate the                   
              kinetic and thermodynamic effects of inhibitor binding.
