Title       : Characterizing a Neuropeptide Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9002151

Award Number: 9002151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony O. Stretton Stretton@wiscmacc.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Invertebrate nervous systems are structurally less elaborate              
              than those of vertebrates.  This simplicity along with the                     
              accessibility of their nervous system have permitted detailed                  
              electrophysiological and morphological studies resulting in the                
              construction of functional circuit diagrams.  Dr. Stretton has                 
              used  Ascaris summ, a large nematode parasite of pigs, as a model              
              system to understand the neural circuits controlling locomotion.               
              Their relatively simple movements are coordinated by a motor                   
              nervous system that contains approximately 77 neurons distributed              
              within the ventral nerve cord along the length of the worm.  He                
              has found that along with the classic neurotransmitters that                   
              operate within the nematode nervous system are a large number of               
              immunoreactive neuropeptide-like substances.  These data indicate              
              that previously unknown elaborate communication system exists in               
              these simple organisms similar to that reported in more complex                
              animals.  Dr. Stretton along with Dr. Wright, his postdoctoral                 
              fellow, will isolate, clone, and sequence the gene that encodes                
              two bioactive neuropeptides.  Since each neuropeptide is a                     
              potentially potent chemical messenger with unique target-                      
              responses, they will characterize which motor nervous system                   
              neurons are likely to express individual peptides.  The results                
              obtained using this simple system will enhance our understanding               
              of the neurochemical basis of locomotion and its coordination.                 
              Moreover, studies on the basic neurobiology of nematodes may                   
              provide a rational basis for the design of controls on these                   
              parasites found in man, domesticated animals and cultivated                    
              plants.
