Title       : Construction of calibrated eustatic sea level curve: Mid-Jurassic through
               Mid-Cretaceous
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1990       
File        : a9002728

Award Number: 9002728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dork L. Sahagian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   The research program proposed here is based on the                        
              identification of a stable reference frame for measurement, and                
              its utilization in the construction of a calibrated eustatic sea               
              level curve for mid-Jurassic through mid-Tertiary.  A stable                   
              frame is found in the Russian Platform on which flat-lying                     
              Mesozoic and Cenozoic marine sediments have remained undeformed                
              since deposition.  The elevation of these deposits is a measure                
              of post-depositional sea level change, since factors such as                   
              compaction and loading are very small due to the thin nature of                
              the deposits.  As such, the Russian Platform acts as a meter                   
              stick, recording sea level through time.                                       
                   A sea level curve based on reliable tie points will be                    
              constructed and compared to sea level curves obtained by other                 
              means. Discrepancies will be reconciled in terms of measurement                
              methods and mobile reference frames.  In obtaining independent                 
              information regarding past sea levels, the results of this study               
              will shed light on the passive margin processes of thermal                     
              subsidence and sedimentation, as well as the motions of active                 
              margins.  As it stands now, sequence stratigraphic data must be                
              used to infer thermal subsidence and sedimentation history, as                 
              well as sea level changes.  A significant result of the proposed               
              research project is that it will introduce another data set, so                
              that the sea level signal can be filtered out, and sequence                    
              stratigraphic data can be used to measure thermal subsidence and               
              sedimentation history directly.  Research bears on issues of                   
              global sea level change.
