Title       : The Genetic Control of Developmental Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9002058

Award Number: 9002058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Denell rdenell@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Studies of the genetic mechanisms controlling developmental                    
              commitments during embryogenesis are among the most active and                 
              significant in biomedical research.  The powerful methodological               
              approaches possible with Drosophila have shown that clusters of                
              homeotic genes function to establish developmental fate.  Recent               
              exciting results indicate that mammals have genes with recognizable            
              homology which are expressed in domains paralleling those of the               
              insect homeotic genes.  Although the further developmental and                 
              molecular characterization of these mammalian genes is a                       
              fascinating prospect, progress towards understanding their precise             
              roles will ultimately be limited by the difficulty of isolating and            
              studying mutations.  The proposed project will focus on the                    
              homeotic genes of the red flour beetle (Tribolium castenum), an                
              insect offering the possibility of integrated genetic,                         
              developmental and molecular studies with a resolution similar to               
              that possible with Drosophila, but which is evolutionarily well                
              diverged from flies and shows many interesting differences.                    
              Available balancers and deficiencies will allow the identification             
              by saturation mutagenesis of the developmentally significant genes             
              in the portion of the single homeotic complex of Tribolium                     
              corresponding to the Drosophila ANT-C, and their mutant syndromes              
              will be described.  Portions of several homeotic genes have already            
              been molecularly cloned from a genomic library, and embryonic cDNA             
              and genomic YAC libraries will also be screened.  After these                  
              experiments have isolated the remaining genes and correlated them              
              with the genetic map, further studies will determine their                     
              organization as well as spatial and temporal patterns of                       
              expression.  Such an integrated approach will enable studies of the            
              interactions of these homeotic genes with one another and with                 
              genes up and downstream in this developmental pathway.  Even in a              
              research area as active as the evolution and function of homeotic              
              genes, the methodological advantages of Tribolium will generate                
              unique insights into the regulation of developmental fate.
