Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Supported Iron Carbidocarbonyl Clusters (Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9002957

Award Number: 9002957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna G. Blackmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                IR and SS-NMR studies of supported iron carbidocarbonyl clusters             
              will be conducted.  This research combines expertise developed in the          
              field of supported metal catalyst chemistry with that of                       
              organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis.  Borrowing from            
              surface chemistry techniques, metal clusters will be anchored to               
              supports to provide them with an environment more similar to that of a         
              heterogeneous catalyst is usually found.  In this environment, the             
              metal cluster will be subjected to thermal and chemical treatments             
              while monitoring the transformations that the ligands and the metal            
              framework undergo.  An effort will be made to probe the molecular              
              chemistry of the supported cluster system and compare the observations         
              with the known solution chemistry of the unsupported cluster and the           
              less-well-defined surface chemistry of related adsorbate-metal surface         
              systems.  The studies will provide an understanding of the structure           
              of the cluster systems throughout these interactions, giving the               
              potential to develop a fundamental understanding of a wide range of            
              metal-organic interactions that may provide invaluable clues                   
              concerning similar interactions on metal surfaces.                             
                Interactive activities include a workshop for women undergraduates           
              entitled, "Graduate Education in Chemical Engineering."  This activity         
              will help encourage young women to consider careers in scientific              
              research.  In addition, a graduate course on topics in catalysis will          
              be taught.                                                                     
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
