Title       : Cobalt Mediated Reactions in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1992   
File        : a9002986

Award Number: 9002986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie E. Krafft mek@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Program.                
              Dr. Krafft will be continuing her studies of the synthetic                     
              potential of cobalt carbonyl complexes as reagents for the                     
              controlled construction of five-membered rings. Reagents like                  
              this enrich the armamentarium of synthetic organic chemists and                
              provide more powerful synthetic tools for the synthesis of more                
              complex molecules.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The work on the directed Pauson reaction has progressed to the                 
              point where one can now plan total syntheses with some                         
              confidence.  The ene-yne cycloaddition is highly regioselective                
              due to the direction by nitrogen or sulfur ligands tethered to                 
              the alkene.  Further work is planned to improve the synthetic                  
              efficiency of the directed Pauson reaction.  Some efforts are                  
              now directed toward the total synthesis of asteriscanolide.                    
              Two different approaches are being examined.  An asymmetric                    
              modification of the Pauson cycloaddition is also under                         
              investigation.  Other reactions using alkyne-cobalt carbonyls                  
              are underway, i.e. selective oxidations and sulfoxide                          
              reductions.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project involves the examination of                     
              reactions with acylcobalt carbonyl complexes.  Earlier work                    
              demonstrated that butenolides, with a variety of substitution                  
              patterns, can be synthesized in high yield by the reaction of                  
              alkynes with acylcobalt carbonyl complexes.  One major problem                 
              associated with the reaction will be addressed by the use of a                 
              directing ligand.  The intermediate formed in the reaction is a                
              pi-allyl cobalt complex.  The carbon-carbon bond forming                       
              reactions of the pi-allyl complex will be investigated.                        
              Insertion of acyl cobalt complexes into alkenes and the                        
              asymmetric versions of these reactions will also be studied.
