Title       : U.S.-Denmark Collaborative Research on Science Anxiety and Gender
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1990  
File        : a9002585

Award Number: 9002585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry V. Mallow jmallow@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 7258,
Abstract    :
              This award provides modest partial support to facilitate a sabbatical          
              visit to Denmark by Professor Jeffry V. Mallow of Loyola University            
              of Chicago.  His host will be Professor Karin Beyer of Roskilde                
              University Center, Roskilde, Denmark.  They share a background in              
              physics and a research interest in the sociology and psychology of             
              science education, particularly the phenomenon of science avoidance            
              by women.  Dr. Mallow developed a clinic based program to address              
              science avoidance, while Dr. Beyer's work has emphasized the                   
              modification of classroom interactions.  Semester-long reciprocal              
              visits will permit them to pursue joint research in this important             
              field.  They plan to examine data already acquired on the respective           
              techniques, and to investigate which aspects are transferable to               
              the school system of the other country.  They also intend to                   
              investigate the development of a hybrid technique combining the                
              science anxiety clinic with classroom intervention.                            
                                                                                             
              Gender differences in the decision to study science and mathematics            
              have been recognized for many years.  There is a substantial body              
              of literature now on reactions to mathematics, but less so for the             
              sciences.  Some progress has been made in seeking ways to change               
              girls' avoidance of science.  Recognition and study of the problem             
              has become internationalized, and results of the research have                 
              begun to find application both in the classroom and in the training            
              of teachers.  The collaborators in the curent proposal are among               
              those actively seeking to advance this field, where exchanges of               
              experience have proven to be quite valuable.
