Title       : Multivariate Minimization and Molecular Dynamic Techniques for Predicting
               Nucleic Acid and Protein Structures on Supercomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9002146

Award Number: 9002146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamar Schlick schlick@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suse B. Broyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Peskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Overton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie F. Greengard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Tamar Schlick is supported by a grant from the Theoretical                 
              and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division,                 
              the Databases, Software Development and Computational Biology                  
              Program in the Division of Instrumentation and Resources, and                  
              the New Technologies Program in the Division of Advanced                       
              Scientific Computing to develop new computer algorithms for                    
              performing molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics                          
              calculations.  These new algorithms will be used to predict                    
              nucleic acid and protein structures with the aid of                            
              supercomputers.                                                                
                                                                                             
              In this research Schlick and coworkers will continue to address                
              some of the fundamental computational and theoretical problems                 
              in the field of molecular modeling by: 1) devising more                        
              efficient nonlinear minimization techniques for complex large                  
              scale problems; 2) using larger time steps in molecular                        
              dynamics simulations; 3) including quantum-mechanical effects                  
              in molecular dynamics simulations; and 4) reducing the                         
              computation time for the pairwise nonbonded interactions.  The                 
              algorithms which are developed will be used to study                           
              sequence-dependent folding pathways of closed circular DNA                     
              duplexes.  The ultimate goal of this research is to explore the                
              detailed folding pathways and important transitions in nucleic                 
              acids and proteins.
