Title       : Collaborative Research on the Spatial Analysis of International Conflict and
               Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1990  
File        : a9002699

Award Number: 9002699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69571              (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. O'Loughlin johno@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent studies of international relationships among nations have          
              focused on political aspects of interactions.  This emphasis has               
              produced a rich set of new insights, but it has not been complemented          
              by an equally productive set of inquiries into the geographic                  
              dimensions of international conflict and cooperation.  Essentially             
              unanswered have been a number of crucial questions, such as How does           
              the geographic context within which nations operate affect their               
              relationships?, To what extent do spatial attributes within nations            
              affect their relationships with other nations?, and How do the relative        
              similarities and differences among nations affect bilateral                    
              relationships and the collective interactions of groups of nations             
              within regions?  This collaborative research project will address these        
              and related questions by applying new methods of spatial analysis to a         
              comprehensive database containing information about 120 nations between        
              1948 and 1988.  Matrix-associative methods will be used to develop             
              dynamic measures of state attributes, spatial heterogeneity, and               
              spatial dependence; these measures will form the basis of a general            
              model of post-World War II international behavior.  The model will be          
              validated through analysis of the development of regional alliances,           
              identification of "shatterbelt" areas of high international tension,           
              examination of different forms of economic interdependence, and                
              investigation of regions of intense security-related activity.                 
                   This project will benefit geographers, political scientists, and          
              other scientists interested in the complex processes of international          
              relationships in two ways.  Conceptual understandings will be enhanced         
              because the research will demonstrate the integral and complementary           
              nature of spatial analysis as a means of investigating conflict and            
              cooperation among nations.  The project's empirical contribution will          
              also be significant, because it will exhibit and expand the use of a           
              rich new database.  The implications of both types of contributions for        
              persons directly involved in the development of international policies         
              also will be significant.
