Title       : US-UK Cooperative Research: A Comparative Study of Civic Response to Child
               Sexual Abuse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1990      
File        : a9002521

Award Number: 9002521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pierre Perrolle                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10592              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Frothingham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in sociology                    
              on the topic of comparative U.S. and British civic response                    
              to child sexual abuse.  The investigators are Dr. Thomas                       
              Frothingham, Duke University Medical Center and Dr. C.J.                       
              Hobb, St. James University Hospital, Leeds, England.                           
                                                                                             
              In the county of Cleveland, England in 1987, diagnoses of                      
              child sexual abuse increased suddenly, and within a few                        
              months, more than 100 children were removed from their                         
              homes.  Public outcry and Parliamentary inquiry resulted in                    
              an extensive national examination of all the arrangements for                  
              dealing with child abuse in England.  There are striking                       
              parallels between what has happened suddenly in England and                    
              more gradually in Durham, North Carolina and other areas in                    
              the U.S.  Change in civic response in the U.S. is urgently                     
              needed but is proceeding slowly at best. In this project, Dr.                  
              Frothingham proposes to study in collaboration with Dr. Hobb                   
              the changes now occurring in England in the aftermath of the                   
              Cleveland experience.  Specifically, the following will be                     
              examined:  1) arrangements for the detection and management                    
              of sexually abused children and their families  2) intra-                      
              agency structure and function, i.e. medical organizations,                     
              social services, police, judiciary and private agencies.  3)                   
              inter-agency collaboration and 3) the effect of the Cleveland                  
              experience on current practices and recent changes.  The                       
              proposed research project is a significant opportunity to                      
              gather data on a critical social problem in the U.S.  Since                    
              England provides wide range of social supports not available                   
              to any but the poorest sector in the U.S., the cross-cultural                  
              data will be especially valuable.The results of this research                  
              will provide a greater understanding of the linkages between                   
              the detection and handling of child abuse and the promotion                    
              of family stability.
