Title       : PRF/J: Quantitative Genetics of Adaptation and Apparent "Constraint" in a Desert
               Annual
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9002330

Award Number: 9002330
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon A. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   This research examines the genetic architecture of several                
              demographic traits and underlying physiological mechanisms in the              
              model systems Eriogonum abertiamum, a desert annual.  The work is              
              designed to further understanding of the genetic basis for life                
              history adaptation and of apparent evolutionary "constraints."                 
              More Sonoran than Chihuahuan Desert Eriogonums begin flowering in              
              spring, but populations in both regions retain the ancestral                   
              character of biseasonal reproduction (spring and summer).                      
              Demographic and genetic studies suggest that natural selection                 
              may explain earlier Sonoran flowering.  However, retention of                  
              Biseasonality is not consistent with adaptive explanations in                  
              Sonoran populations:  Expected summer fecundity does not outweigh              
              the risk of between-season mortality.  Fossil, distributional,                 
              and biogeographic evidence suggest the same conclusion.                        
              Correlations among life history traits may block selection for                 
              increased spring fecundity, as suggested by preliminary field and              
              greenhouse studies.  Selection experiments are proposed to                     
              determine a) whether heritabilities and genetic correlations                   
              among demographic traits are significantly different from zero;                
              and b) whether selection on the correlations themselves can                    
              change their signs, i.e., whether the correlations can act as                  
              constraints.  Sib analyses of growth and allocation traits--which              
              underlie demographic traits--will examine genetic variation for                
              these traits both within and between populations.
