Title       : RAS Proto-oncogene Activity in Corpus Luteum Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1990  
File        : a9002110

Award Number: 9002110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura T. Goldsmith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey Medical School
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    /   -

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              In all mammalian species, reproductive success is critically dependant         
              upon normal function of the ovary.  Normal ovarian function serves two         
              purposes, production of the oocyte, and appropriate production and             
              secretion of specific steroid and protein hormones.  In the mammalian          
              ovary, the oocyte is encased in several layers of cells which secrete          
              the female sex steroid hormone estrogen.  At ovualation, the oocyte is         
              extruded from the ovary and the cells which previously surrounded the          
              oocyte are changed into a structure called the corpus luteum.  The             
              cells of the corpus luteum, the luteal cells, secrete the female sex           
              steroid hormone, progesterone.  The secretion of progesterone from the         
              corpus luteum in the proper amounts for the proper time period is              
              required for successful reproduction.  Thus, progesterone secretion            
              from the corpus luteum is a critical determinant of reproductive               
              success.  The cells of the corpus luteum must respond, through                 
              biochemical mechanisms, to blood born hormonal substances which control        
              the normal secretion of progesterone.  The specific biochemical                
              mechanisms which allow the luteal to respond to those hormones which           
              control progesterone secretion are at present unknown.  It is, in fact,        
              these mechanisms that are responsible for normal luteal function.              
                                                                                             
              Dr. Goldsmith has recently discovered that, in the rat, the expression         
              of a particular gene, the K-ras gene, increases greatly at the same            
              time that the seretion of progesterone from the corpus luteum is at its        
              maximum.  Furthermore, when an antibody against the protein coded for          
              by this gene was incorporated into luteal cells in vitro, progesterone         
              secretion from these cells was significantly decreased, thus                   
              demonstrating that the protein encoded by the K-ras gene, the p21              
              protein, plays a role in the production/secretion of progesterone by           
              the luteal cell.  It is the objective of this proposal to determine the        
              specific way in which the p21 protein affects luteal progesterone              
              secretion and whether the p21 protein plays a role in the secretion of         
              other hormones from the corpus luteum.  The K-ras gene product, the p21        
              protein, is present in all mammalian cells.  Thus, the results of the          
              proposed studies will have a significant impact upon the understanding         
              of ovarian hormone secretory mechanisms as well as our understanding of        
              the ways in which all mammalian cells respond to hormones and growth           
              factors.
