Title       : Managing the Reefs: An Exploration of Local and Scientific Knowledge (A
               Postdoctoral Fellowship in Studies in Science, Technology & Society).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1990      
File        : a9002894

Award Number: 9002894
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla Weeks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This one year, full-time award enables a new PhD in anthropologyto             
              develop her understanding of the scientific approaches to                      
              management of natural resources, specifically oyster reefs.  She               
              will undertake a one-year course of study in the Department of                 
              Wildlife and Fisheries Management at Texas A&M University,                     
              sponsored by Dr. David J. Schmidly, Head of the Department.                    
              Attending classes with future regulatory employees, she will learn             
              about the scientific models on which resource management is based,             
              including oyster biology, population dynamics, economics, growth,              
              habitat and histories of local reefs.  At the same time, field work            
              in the Galveston Bay area among oyster fishermen will focus on                 
              elucidating the elements of indigenous models -- the local                     
              knowledge fishermen use in managing their resource.                            
              Anthropological literature has shown that fishermen often have                 
              models for self-regulation which are not apparent to regulatory                
              agencies or to scientists.  Bureaucrats often introduce management             
              regimes with the assumption that fishermen have no management                  
              system (formal or informal) or use one that must be ineffective                
              since it is not based on scientific information.  This project                 
              hypothesizes that 1) adverse socio-economic impacts from the                   
              institution of rationalized management will be lessened if existing            
              informal management systems are, where possible, incorporated, and             
              2) both types of management models must be explicit for this to                
              happen.  The project goal is to enable scientists to incorporate               
              appropriate indigenous strategies and to give fishermen a voice in             
              management of their local resources.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project addresses a central issue in both theory and practice             
              in science studies:  the relationship between formalized,                      
              scientific ways of knowing and the informal experience-based                   
              methods by which communities negotiate priorities and practices.               
              The investigator and her host specialist and host institution are              
              uniquely well-qualified to undertake and support this project;                 
              research and related activities are likely to continue after the               
              period of the award.  Results are likely to be appropriately                   
              disseminated and useful.  An award in the amount of $28,000 is                 
              therefore recommended.
