Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on the Effects of Pore Size on Deactivation of
               Nickel Catalyst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1990  
File        : a9002601

Award Number: 9002601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4180               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong H. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0510303   Kinetics                                
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1401,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Hong H. Lee,                        
              Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Florida,                     
              to pursue with Dr. Sang Heup Moon, Reaction Engineering                        
              Laboratory, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and                            
              Technology (KAIST), for a period of 18 months, a program                       
              of cooperative research on the effects of pore size on                         
              deactivation of nickel catalysts for benzene                                   
              hydrogenation.  These catalysts are affected both by                           
              sintering and coking (poisoning) due to the exothermic                         
              nature of the reaction.  The objective of the research                         
              is to determine the effects of pore size on the                                
              deactivation rate so that a nickel catalyst can be designed                    
              for an extended lifetime for the hydrogenation reaction.                       
                                                                                             
              In the cooperative project, Dr. Moon will prepare and test                     
              catalysts of varying support pore size.  Dr. Lee will                          
              provide a theoretical analysis of the effect of support                        
              pore size on the sintering of these metal catalysts.                           
              Because the catalyst is affected both by sintering and                         
              coking, a determination also must be made as to how much                       
              of the deactivation is due to sintering in order to                            
              properly analyze data on catalyst effectiveness.  In                           
              addition to the importance of the project as a basic                           
              research study, this research may have important                               
              applications in industrial catalysis, where the                                
              effectiveness of the catalyst is inversely related to the                      
              extent of sintering.  The collaborators are highly                             
              respected scientists in the field of this research.  The                       
              present project will allow them to combine their talents                       
              and interests for mutual benefit.  This project is relevant                    
              to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science                        
              Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation                       
              between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through                       
              the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                     
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual                     
              benefit.  Korean participation in the project is supported                     
              by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
