Title       : PRF/J: DNA Sequence Analysis and the Phylogeny of the Liliopsida
               (Monocotyledoneae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9002321

Award Number: 9002321
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin R. Duvall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   The  DNA nucleotide base sequence of a chloroplast gene will              
              be used to interpret phylogenetic relationships among the                      
              subclasses of the Liliopsida (i.e., the monocots).  This gene                  
              encodes the large subunit of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate                         
              carboxylase (rbcL), part of the most abundant, and arguably, the               
              most important protein on earth.  Dr. Michael Clegg, Professor                 
              of Genetics at the University of California, Riverside, has                    
              agreed to sponsor this fellowship proposal.  The rbcL gene is a                
              particularly appropriate choice because it is ubiquitous among                 
              photoautotrophs, because it exhibits sufficient divergence for                 
              use in broad phylogenetic investigations, and because a data base              
              of rbcL nucleotide sequences already exists which will be used in              
              conjunction with sequence data.  Contemporary sequencing                       
              technology permits the analysis of many species in a short period              
              of time by one investigator, especially in a laboratory in which               
              sequence analysis is conducted routinely, such as that of Dr.                  
              Clegg.  Total cellular DNA will be extracted, the rbcL gene will               
              be amplified in the polymerase chain reaction, and the nucleotide              
              sequence will be determined by standard techniques.  Sequence                  
              data will be analyzed to construct statistically supported                     
              dendrograms,  It is anticipated that this research will require                
              two years of work and support:  14-16 months will be spent                     
              procuring plant materials and determining rbcL gene sequences,                 
              and the remaining time will be devoted to analysis of the data                 
              and phylogenetic interpretation.
