Title       : Transient and Turbulent Fields in Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9303821

Award Number: 9303821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reiner L. Stenzel stenzel@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Manuel Urrutia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1242      PLASMA PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9218,AMPP,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Experimental research is being pursued on transient effects  dealing with the
              transport of current and heat pulses in  magnetized plasmas and turbulence
              studies dealing with  coherent structures in fluctuating magnetic fields. 
              These  processes address fundamental plasma properties which are  essential for
              understanding transport in plasmas, and they  are of broad interest in inertial
              and magnetic fusion,  pulsed power, and for active experiments in space
              plasmas.  The proposed work will be performed in a large, controlled 
              laboratory plasma with excellent diagnostic capabilities.  Pulsed currents are
              imposed with electrodes, particle beams  and induced by magnetic antennas.  The
              transport of these  currents by electromagnetic waves such as kinetic Alfven 
              waves, whistlers and beam modes will be studied.  Heat  pulses are generated
              with pulsed, intense rf fields of  magnetic antennas.  The heat transport in
              nearly  collisionless plasmas cannot be described by classical  diffusion
              models but may involve double layers and non-  Maxwellian distributions.  Using
              directional velocity  analyzers, emissive electric field probes and vector 
              magnetic field probes moveable in 3 dimensions will yield a  detailed picture
              of fields and particles.  Magnetic  turbulence will be investigated from the
              thermal level to  that of the ambient field.  It is excited by current 
              fluctuations in particle beams forming coherent rf  structures at cyclotron
              harmonic frequencies or by  instabilities such as beam-generating whistlers and
              lower  hybrid turbulence in high-beta plasmas.  Using conditional  averaging, a
              special statistical technique employing digital  oscilloscopes, coherent
              magnetic structure can be resolved  in a turbulent field.  Fields and particles
              in such  "islands" will be mapped so as to study transport processes  on a
              microscopic scale.  Refined plasma diagnostic tools and  techniques will be
              developed.  Such detailed experiments are  expected to advance the knowledge of
              basic plasma  properties, have i mplications to the various uses of  plasmas,
              and train students in modern experimental plasma  physics.
