Title       : Archaeology of the Formative Period in Oaxaca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9303129

Award Number: 9303129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Spencer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elsa M. Redmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Charles Spencer and              
              Elsa Redmond will conduct three seasons of archaeological survey               
              and excavation at a site near the present day town of San Martin               
              Tilcajete (SMT), located in the Oaxaca Valley of Mexico. A final               
              season with be spent analyzing the materials collected. Preliminary            
              work indicates that the site consists of 17 mounds organized into              
              two mound groups and that it was occupied from ca. 700-200 BC. Drs.            
              Spencer and Redmond will make a detailed map of the site and note              
              all mounds, stone foundations and other cultural features. Surface             
              artifacts will be sampled with controlled intensive surface                    
              collection. In the second season, test excavations will be placed              
              in both mound and non-mound locations with specific placements                 
              guided by an assessment of the surface collections. In season three            
              horizontal excavation will occur on a sample of public buildings as            
              well as in domestic contexts. On this basis it will be possible to             
              trace changes in the site over approximately half a millennium.                
              Variation in population size and degree of political centralization            
              will be monitored. Through analysis of material remains it will                
              also be possible to determine the relationships between this site              
              and others in the Oaxaca Valley.                                               
                                                                                             
              State level organizations have independently arisen only a few                 
              times in human history and archaeologists wish to understand the               
              mechanisms by which this process occurs. The Zaoptec state which               
              was centered at the site of Monte Alban in Oaxaca and appeared                 
              during the first millennium BC provides one example. While the                 
              latter stage of this process is well known through extensive                   
              excavations at Monte Alban, relatively little is known about the               
              early part of the process since the relevant layers remain buried              
              under buildings which have been reconstructed by the Mexican                   
              government. At the SMT site, such data are readily available. SMT              
              appears to be a regional subcenter and for this reason will provide            
              unique insight from what is a provincial perspective.                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. Many archaeologists            
              have worked in the Oaxaca Valley and the data Drs. Spencer and                 
              Redmond collect will fill a major gap. It will also increase our               
              understanding of the forces which led to the development of state              
              level societies.
