Title       : Infrared Interrogation of Atmospheric Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9303058

Award Number: 9303058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Ewing EWINGG@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9303058  Ewing       Aerosols in a variety of sizes, shapes and compositions are
               found throughout the earth's atmosphere.  Some are easily observed  as clouds,
              haze, smog or smoke and they affect weather, climatology  and the radiation
              energy balance.  Some are nucleation sites or  cloud formation.  Others are
              sources of rich chemistry and  photochemistry.  With the obvious importance of
              aerosols, many  techniques have been directed toward their study.       This
              research advances the view that an understanding of  important atmospheric
              aerosols will be enhanced by exploring the  physical and chemical properties of
              their surfaces.  A versatile  analytical technique for this exploration is
              infrared spectroscopy.       While many types of aerosols are amenable to
              infrared  spectroscopic interrogation, salt particles are chosen as examples 
              of the analytical techniques.  These particles are of particular  relevance. 
              Sea salt aerosols generated over the oceans contribute  one of the, if not the,
              most abundant particulate loads on the  global atmosphere.  Their composition
              is transformed by an  intricate chemistry.  Two methods for producing suspended
              salt  particles in a temperature controlled chamber will be investigated. 
              Since the optical path will be in excess of 100 m, infrared  sensitivity allows
              interrogation of the size, shape and composition  of the aerosols as well as
              molecules stuck to their surfaces.  For  solid salt aerosols the incorporation
              of OH- and other ions at the  surface as well as water overlayers will be
              explored. Reactions of  NO2 at the surface will also be monitored.  Water, OH-,
              NO2 and  other oxides have been targeted for laboratory studies of salt 
              because similar surface chemistry is likely to occur in the  atmosphere. 
              Experiments to explore the properties of supported  salt particles will also be
              performed and methods for interrogating  surface defect concentrations will be
              explored.  It is suggested  that atmospheric chemistry is initiated at these
              surface defects .   For ice particles spectroscopic interrogation will likely
              be able  to characterize their interior structure (e.g. amorphous, ice I, or 
              microporous) as well as their surface properties.  It is the  surface
              properties that dictate the type of heterogeneous chemistry  that occurs in
              aerosols, whether in the laboratory or in the  atmosphere.       Preliminary
              experiments with both suspended and supported  aerosols have already been
              successful in the laboratory of the  Principal Investigator.  These successes
              suggest the practically of  the experiments.  The infrared spectroscopic
              interrogation  of these laboratory produced aerosols will reveal the
              feasibility  for future experiments on aerosols in the atmosphere.
