Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9303693

Award Number: 9303693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                A significant unresolved problem in cell biology is understanding            
              how cytoplasmically synthesized proteins are targeted to the                   
              various compartments of eukaryotic cells.  In plant cells,                     
              chloroplasts offer an excellent system for studying this problem.              
              Most chloroplastic proteins are encoded in the nucleus and                     
              synthesized in the cytoplasm as higher molecular weight precursors.            
              These precursors are imported postranslationally into chloroplasts             
              across the two envelope membranes and are subsequently directed to             
              the proper location within the organelle.  The long term goal of               
              this project is to understand how the import process occurs.  At               
              the present time, the major barrier to gaining a more detailed                 
              understanding of protein transport into chloroplasts is a lack of              
              information regarding the identity of transport intermediates.  The            
              basic strategy of the project will be to block protein transport at            
              specific stages, thereby generating translocation intermediates                
              containing precursors at discrete points in the transport process.             
              Cross-linking reagents will be used to identify transport                      
              components that are in close physical proximity to the trapped                 
              intermediates.  As putative components are identified, further work            
              will be required to confirm their involvement in transport and to              
              determine their function during the transport process.  To                     
              accomplish these objectives, specific antibodies directed against              
              each putative component will be prepared and cDNA clones encoding              
              each component will be isolated and sequenced.  These antibodies               
              and CDNA clones will be valuable tools for investigating the                   
              functions of the putative components.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              This work is significant for at least two reasons.  First, it adds             
              to the general understanding of a basic cellular process, i.e.                 
              intracellular protein trafficking.  Second, it has practical                   
              significance for efforts to alter the metabolic pathways of                    
              chloroplasts using genetic engineering techniques, in which foreign            
              proteins will need to be directed into chloroplasts.
