Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inference and Curve-Fitting in Generalizations of
               Isotonic Regression Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9303705

Award Number: 9303705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Hettmansperger tph@psuvm.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Deutsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many scientific hypotheses the researcher can specify a  directional effect: 
              a treatment is believed to improve health, a  new teaching method is believed
              to improve learning, an increase  in dosage is believed to have an increasing
              effect up to a  certain (possibly unknown) toxicity point and then a decreasing
               effect.  Many statistical methods ignore this directional  information, which
              results in a loss of statistical power and  efficiency.  Our major goal in this
              research is to develop very  general approaches to the computation of estimates
              and tests  along with assessments of the standard errors of the estimates  and
              the error rates of the tests.  The research has three main  thrusts:  First,
              the analysis of general algorithms such as  Dykstra's generalization of von
              Neumann's alternating projections  method.  Second, the development and
              implementation of smoothing  and fitting algorithms to use on data that arise
              in experiments  with order restrictions on the parameters.  And third, the 
              construction of statistical estimation and testing methods with  attendant
              error rates for research hypotheses that entail  directional effects.  Often in
              scientific investigations the researcher expects a  directional effect, but
              cannot justify a specific mathematical  function as a relationship.  For
              example, the yield of a crop can  reasonably be expected to increase if the
              amount of fertilizer  applied is increased (at least within a certain range). 
              The fact  that there is a directional relationship is obvious here, but the 
              exact nature of the relationship is far from obvious.  Our goal  is to develop
              methods that make use of directional effects so  that more efficient use may be
              made of experimental data.  We  will develop computer algorithms to fit data in
              ways that obey  directional effects, and use statistical and mathematical
              theory  to study the properties of our fitting methods.
