Title       : PRF/J: Molecular Systematics of the Sipuncula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303301

Award Number: 9303301
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Staton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   During this project the relative gene order of a sipunculan               
              will be analyzed, the entire sequence of cytochrome oxidase (CO)               
              subunits I - III for this species will be derived, and same will be            
              done for partial CO I - III sequences.  These data will permit the             
              creation of a molecular phylogeny of the Sipuncula relative to                 
              other closely related eucoelomate protostome phyla for which                   
              sequence data are presently available.  Separate phylogenies will              
              be derived based on relative gene order and CO I - III sequence                
              data, and those will be checked for congruence as a test of the two            
              methods.  Partial sequence data from at least five other sipunculan            
              species will be analyzed with the original sequence data in order              
              to create a phylogeny of the six described families of the phylum.             
              Using this information it will be possible to produce an                       
              independent test of a phylogenetic analysis based solely on                    
              morphology.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The Sipuncula is a widely distributed group that is little known               
              and poorly understood genetically and phylogenetically.  Though not            
              a large phylum, this limited diversity hasn't facilitated                      
              understanding of either the evolution of the group itself or the               
              relationship of the phylum to metazoan evolution based upon                    
              phenotypic (morphological and ontogenetic) characters.  The gene               
              order and sequence data that will result from this study will be               
              essential for characterizing fine- and coarse-grained evolution of             
              the mitochondrial genome within the entire group.  Such information            
              will reveal answers about phylogeny within the Sipuncula and                   
              affinities with the Metazoa, and will also provide baseline genetic            
              information for further studies concerning the biogeography of                 
              widespread species and population variation of ocean-dispersed                 
              larval organisms.  All of the foregoing is important because marine            
              species are under-represented in studies of systematics and                    
              biodiversity.
