Title       : PRF/J: Intraspecific Chloroplast-DNA Variation and Phytogeography in the Pacific
               Northwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303299

Award Number: 9303299
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline A. Soule   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Many plants exhibit a similar geographic distribution,                    
              occurring from southeastern Alaska to northern California.                     
              Molecular genetic investigations of three species have revealed a              
              pronounced north-south cytoplasmic discontinuity located south of              
              the Wisconsin glacial maximum.  These data implicate glaciation as             
              a possible causal factor in creating the discontinuity and raises              
              the possibility of a link between phytogeography and the genetic               
              architecture of plants in the Pacific Northwest.  If so, then other            
              plants displaying similar geographic distributions should also                 
              exhibit similar patterns of genetic variation.  This study                     
              addresses two questions: (a) do similar geographic patterns of                 
              chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) variation occur throughout a spectrum of               
              Pacific Northwest plant taxa?, (b) are patterns of variation in                
              cytoplasmic and nuclear markers congruent?  Populations of five                
              taxonomically diverse taxa (a gymnosperm, a monocot, and dicots                
              from Dilleniidae, Rosidae, and Asteridae) having different life                
              history features will be examined using cpDNA restriction site                 
              analysis, rDNA analysis, and enzyme electrophoresis.  From these               
              data, phylogenies will be generated and patterns of genetic                    
              variation will be assessed.  Further analysis will address                     
              biogeographical questions and may help clarify the location and                
              extent of suspected glacial refugia.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Our knowledge of the extent of intraspecific cpDNA variation will              
              be enhanced through this investigation.  It will also serve to                 
              facilitate a broad comparison of patterns and extent of cpDNA                  
              variation within species to that observed for nuclear genetic                  
              markers, improve knowledge of plant genetic architecture, and                  
              establish an important link between the areas of systematics and               
              population genetics.
