Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Research in Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9303037

Award Number: 9303037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Guest martin@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9303037  Guest  This award will support a cooperative research  project between
              Professor Martin Guest,  Department of Mathematics, University of  Rochester,
              New York, and Professor Mutsuo Oka,  Department of Mathematics, Tokyo Institute
              of  Technology in Japan.  Dr. Yoshihiro Ohnita of  the Tokyo Metropolitan
              University and Dr. Mikio  Furuta at Tokyo University will also  participate in
              the project.  During his twelve-  month visit Professor Guest and his Japanese 
              colleagues will continue their previous joint  research on the topology of the
              space of  harmonic maps of a Riemann surface into a Lie  group.  These maps are
              of interest from the  point of view of traditional differential  geometry and
              also from the point of view of  gauge theories in mathematical physics.  The 
              researchers will study a systematical  description of the singularities of
              complete  intersection varieties and singularities of the  mappings.  A
              complete intersection variety will  be interpreted as the regular fiber of a 
              holomorphic mapping between affine or toric  spaces.  They  will attempt to
              determine how  the topology of regular fiber or singular  fibers changes under
              a homotopy of a given  mapping.    Results of the research have probable 
              application in advanced mathematics theories as  well as various areas of
              physics such as  theoretical atomic physics.  Professor Guest is  an
              accomplished mathematician who is currently  one of several authorities working
              in the field  of variational principles (harmonic maps) as  applied to problems
              in mathematical physics,  specifically solitons and gauge theory.  Dr.  Oka is
              an authority on toric varieties. Dr.  Ohnita has expertise in the area of 
              differential geometry, especially Lie groups  and harmonic maps and Dr.
              Furuta's specialty is  moduli spaces of Yang-Mills instantons.  Japan  is a
              world leader in the areas of toric  varieties and infinite dimensional Lie
              algebras  and integrable systems.  Since the investiga-  tor's previous
              collaboration proved to be very  produ ctive in terms of new directions of 
              research as well as in terms of publications it  is anticipated that the
              proposed project will  provide similar new scientific opportunities.   This
              project is supported by the NSF-CGP  (Center for Global Partnership) Science 
              Fellowship Program.  ***
