Title       : Signal Transduction Across Plant Plasma Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1996   
File        : a9303929

Award Number: 9303929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Low   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Heinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9303929  Low    One of the most rapid defense responses of a plant to an
              invading  pathogen is the oxidative burst, where, within 5 minutes of the 
              encounter of the plant cell with a pathogen-derived elicitor  molecule there is
              the sudden release of hydrogen peroxide and  other oxidative species.  The
              oxidative burst is possibly the  plant's first line of defense against
              infection, and appears to  result from one of the simplest and most
              topologically localized  signal transduction pathways.  The overall goal of
              this research  is to identify and characterize the second messengers and 
              signaling intermediates that communicate the association of an  elicitor
              molecule with its cell surface receptor to the oxidase  complex that produces
              oxygen radicals and hydrogen peroxide.   Intermediate goals are to:  1)
              identify purified elicitors that  activate the oxidative burst pathway without
              stimulating other  signaling pathways that lead to delocalized defense
              responses  (e.g. production of phytoalexins or PR proteins),  2) identify 
              second messengers that are activated by such elicitors, 3) rank  the second
              messengers chronologically in order of their  appearance, and 4) show linkage
              or connectivity between adjacent  pairs of identified second messengers using
              messenger-specific  inhibitors, activators, etc.  %%%  One of the most rapid
              defense responses of a plant cell to  an invading pathogen is the "oxidative
              burst," the sudden release  of hydrogen peroxide and other oxidative chemical
              species.   The oxidative burst probably represents the first line of a  plant's
              defense against infection.  The goal of this research is  to work out the chain
              of biochemical events between the detection  of a pathogen, as signaled by the
              arrival of a pathogen-specific  chemical on a specific plant cell receptor,
              through the resulting  signal transduction pathways, to the production of
              oxidative  chemicals.  The results of this research will contribute 
              substantially to our understanding of this important cellular  signa ling
              pathway in plants and should provide considerable  information on where and how
              the defense responses of plants can  be genetically manipulated.  ***
