Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Bayesian Analysis,Statistical Decision
               Theory, and Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9303556

Award Number: 9303556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $758922             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The project will focus on research in the six areas of                    
              Robust Bayesian Analysis, Default Prior Bayesian Methodology,                  
              Conditional Inference in Decision Theory, Multivariate                         
              Estimation, Hierarchical Modelling, and Bayesian Computation. In               
              the first two areas, special emphasis will be paid to problems                 
              involving testing and model selection.  Bayesian approaches to                 
              these problems are severely underutilized, primarily because                   
              robust or default prior analyses in these areas have not been                  
              developed.  In Conditional Inference, the primary focus will be                
              the study of situations in which Bayesian answers have a valid                 
              conditional frequentist interpretation.  Identification of such                
              situations is not only valuable foundationally, but also                       
              indicates situations in which adopting a conditional frequentist               
              approach can be highly advantageous.  In Bayesian Computation,                 
              emphasis will be on use of Markov Chain and other simulation                   
              techniques for carrying out Bayesian integrations.                             
                   Bayesian analysis is perhaps the most rapidly growing                     
              approach to statistical analysis, because of its ability to model              
              and analyze even extremely complex situations, and because it                  
              readily allows combination of multiple information sources. The                
              chief limitations of Bayesian analysis have been concern about                 
              sensitivity to modelling assumptions, and the difficulty in                    
              carrying out Bayesian computations in high dimensional problems.               
              In this project we will attack the sensitivity problem by                      
              developing Bayesian models that are inherently "robust," and by                
              creating powerful methods for selecting from among competing                   
              Bayesian models.  On the computational side, we will extend new                
              techniques based on simulation that have the promise of handling               
              situations with hundreds or thousands of unknown model                         
              parameters.
