Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory of Vertex Operator Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9303374

Award Number: 9303374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chongying Dong dong@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The theory of vertex operator algebras and their                          
              representations is a very important subject of study, which has                
              many applications in mathematics and physics.  The first area of               
              this project is the study of the representation theory of vertex               
              operator algebras.  This study will lead to the construction of                
              irreducible twisted modules which are always assumed to exist in               
              the physics literature.  The second area of the project is the                 
              study of the orbifold theory associated with a finite cyclic                   
              group G for a holomorphic vertex algebra V.  The last area of the              
              project is to study the moonshine module vertex operator algebra               
              and to prove the Frenkel-Lepowsky-Meurman conjecture on the                    
              moonshine module vertex operator algebra.                                      
                   Conformal field theory is an important physical theory                    
              describing both two-dimensional critical phenomena in condensed                
              matter physics and classical motions of strings in string theory.              
              Besides its importance in physics, the beautiful and rich                      
              mathematical structure of conformal field theory also has                      
              interested many mathematicians.  New relations between different               
              branches of mathematics, such as representations of                            
              infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and groups, Riemann surfaces                 
              and algebraic curves, the Monster sporadic group, modular                      
              functions and modular forms, elliptic genera, and knot theory, is              
              revealed in the study of conformal field theory.  It is believed               
              that the study of the mathematics involved in conformal field                  
              theory will lead to new mathematical structures which will be                  
              important both in mathematics and theoretical physics.
