Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bayesian Inference and Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9303557

Award Number: 9303557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1040000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Kadane kadane@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luke-jon Tierney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our research is oriented toward implementation of Bayesian  inference. There has
              been increasing interest recently in the  Bayesian approach to statistics, in
              part because advances in  computational ability have made it feasible in many
              settings, and  in part because Bayesian analysis of data can make use of 
              information from additional sources. Our work will build on our  previous
              research in Bayesian statistics, part of which has been  funded by NSF. Our
              main concerns are: (1) review and assessment  of methods for choosing prior
              probability distributions by formal  rules, and further development of methods
              for assessing  sensitivity to the choices; (2) investigation of approximate and
               exact computational methods for Bayesian hypotheses testing; (3)  modification
              and enhancement of numerical integration techniques  and Monte Carlo simulation
              of posterior distributions; also,  improvement of statistical computing
              environments including use  of animation and three dimensional rendering for
              visualization of  uncertainty in higher dimensions; (4) further work on the 
              foundations of subjective probability; and (5) several other  topics related to
              our previous work on elicitation of priors and  asymptotic approximations. 
              When analyzing data, it is important  to combine all sources of information
              effectively.  Bayesian  statistical methods are tailored to this purpose.  Our
              research  focuses on finding practical ways to implement Bayesian methods  and
              on investigating the theoretical basis for these methods.  We are concerned
              with the development of computational and  graphical techniques that make
              Bayesian inference feasible in  complicated problems.  These include:
              simulation, animation and  the construction of statistical computing
              environments.  We will  also investigate theoretical issues that support
              Bayesian  techniques. These issues include the foundations of subjective 
              probability and the development of mathematical approximations.
