Title       : Chloroplast Protein Phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1993      
File        : a9303871

Award Number: 9303871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Markwell markwell@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Sarath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              Markwell  9303871  Protein Phosphorylation plays a major role in eukaryotic
              cellular  regulation.  Much recent attention has been focused on the protein 
              phosphatase enzymes which reverse this covalent modification, but  there
              remains a paucity of information about these enzymes in  plants.  Chloroplastic
              thylakoid membrane protein phosphorylation  in higher plants senses
              environmental light conditions and  correspondingly regulates steady-state
              photosynthetic energy  production.  Whereas much attention has been devoted to
              the protein  kinases which phosphorylate thylakoid proteins, relatively little 
              is known about the protein phosphatase enzymes which reverse this  covalent
              modification.  The native phosphoprotein substrates are  membrane bound and
              lack of a soluble substrate for the protein  phosphatase has been the major
              limitation in studies of this  enzyme.  Recent work by the P.I.s has found that
              synthetic  substrate-analog phosphopeptides are exogenous substrates capable 
              of selectively assaying the thylakoid protein phosphatase.  Using  these
              substrates, this project will purify and characterize the  protein phosphatase
              activity from pea thylakoid membranes.   Characterization will include kinetic
              analysis of the enzyme's  substrate specificity utilizing model
              phosphopeptides, biochemical  analysis of structure and relationship to
              previously characterized  eukaryotic protein phosphatases.  These studies will
              provide an  understanding of the mechanisms underlying reversible chloroplastic
               protein phosphorylation and the role of thylakoid protein  phosphatase in
              plant bioenergetics and physiology.  %%%  During a normal day, a plant is
              exposed to continually changing  light conditions.  In order to maintain
              efficient photosynthetic  energy production, plants have evolved the ability to
              respond to  qualitatively and quantitatively different light environments.  The
               signal transduction for this compensatory mechanism involves the 
              phosphorylation of chloroplast proteins involved in harvesti ng  light energy. 
              While many studies have been conducted on the kinase  enzyme responsible for
              phosphorylation of the light-harvesting  pigment-protein complexes, very little
              is known about the protein  phosphatase enzyme which reverses the
              phosphorylation.  The major  goal of this project is to purify and characterize
              the thylakoid  protein phosphatase enzyme.  These studies will provide an 
              understanding of the role this enzyme plays in the ability of  plants to
              optimize photosynthetic energy production under the  diverse light conditions
              which naturally occur.  ***
