Title       : Induction, Proof Management, and Related Research in Automated Deduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9303394

Award Number: 9303394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepak Kapur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The theorem prover Rewrite Rule Laboratory, RRL, and   the proof  management
              system Tecton are enhanced to make them useful    for applications,  especially
              where analysis of specifications and  well-founded   ordering play a crucial 
              role in these  applications, and large complex proofs often   have to be 
              constructed.  RRL is a theorem prover based on rewriting    techniques and 
              completion which provides support for  equational and   inductive reasoning. 
              Tecton is a management  system, and it provides a menu-driven   interface  to
              the theorem prover and emphasized visualization   of proofs.  Tecton is
              extended to support a proof command language  which   a user control over proof
              construction and  structuring.    Tecton is useful  for instructional purposes,
               for teaching theorem proving,   methods for  constructing proofs  and
              verification.    RRL is extended to   enhance its  theorem proving 
              capabilities for proving properties by   induction.  The cover  set induction
              method which has proved quite effective in    automating proofs by  induction,
              is further refined.   Semantic methods for showing   of rewrite systems of 
              recursively defined functions,   especially those arising  in the 
              specification of algorithms and data structures, are   studied and  further
              developed.  Heuristics for checking the  completeness   of a cover set 
              designed from a function  definition are investigated.    Heuristics for 
              automatic  lemma generation in RRL are expanded.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
