Title       : Programming Language Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9303099

Award Number: 9303099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366629             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This  research  is  concerned with a framework  for  understanding  syntactic, 
              operational  and semantic properties  of  contemporary  programming  languages.
               In addition to  extending  a  descriptive  theory  of  programming  based  on
              type  theory  and  denotational  semantics,  the  research contributes to the 
              development  of  new  programming  languages. The programming  language  goals 
              are  increased  ease and efficiency of programming. This involves  both 
              cleaner   language  design,  so  that  programs  are  easier   for  programmers
              to read, write and maintain, and careful attention  to  features that make it
              possible for programming tools to manipulate  programs meaningfully. The
              theoretical aspects of the research are  aimed  at establishing the semantic
              and algorithmic basis for  the  development   and   implementation  of  
              programming   tools   and  environments. A common thread through the research
              is the  use  of  type systems, both as a mathematical framework for analysis
              and  a  syntactic basis for automatic program analysis.  Some  specific 
              problems are the static type analysis  of  object-oriented  programming  
              languages,  aimed   toward   establishing  properties of programs that may be
              used in compilation and program  transformation, type inference algorithms for
              functional languages  that  include  imperative  and control  features 
              (exceptions  and  continuations), and the use of linear logic to obtain more
              precise  static analysis of programs. A pragmatic language design effort is  a 
              type  and  module  system that is useful  for  the  design  and  development 
              of  object-oriented programs in existing  languages.  Some  longer-term
              foundational problems are the  model  theory  of  linear  logic, operational
              and denotational methods for  reasoning  about   imperative  programs  with 
              higher-order  and  polymorphic  constructs,  and  treatments of concurrency in
              a  higher-order  or  object-oriented language framework.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
