Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods for Parameter Estimation in Distributed
               Parameter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9303222

Award Number: 9303222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis R. Vogel vogel@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
              9303222  Vogel       The investigator combines Total Variation based techniques 
              and parallel computing to develop improved parameter estimation  methods.      
              This proposal deals with computational methods for parameter  estimation in
              distributed parameter systems.  Parameter  estimation is the process of
              determining coefficient functions,  typically for partial differential
              equations, from observations  of solutions.  The work of this project was made
              possible by  recent advances in scientific computing and image processing.  In 
              the field of image processing, the development of so-called  ``Total
              Variation'' based techniques enables the reconstruction  of much sharper images
              than was previously possible.  The  development of parallel computers allows
              the solution of complex  2- and 3-dimensional problems, which were previously
              intractable.   Direct applications of research in parameter estimation include 
              the improved reconstruction of images from electromagnetic,  thermal, and
              acoustic data.  Radar and sonar are perhaps the most  well-known examples. 
              Others include noninvasive medical imaging  techniques such as CAT scans,
              sonograms, and Magnetic Resonance  Imaging (MRI).  Seismic data processing,
              where recordings of  disturbances which have passed through the earth are used
              to  infer the internal structure of the earth, is yet another  important
              example.  Parameter estimation also plays a key role in  the development of
              mathematical models, i.e., mathematical  descriptions of physical phenomena. 
              These models are used to  describe processes ranging from the transport of
              toxic chemicals  through the soil to the spread of the AIDS epidemic.  ***
