Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integral Operators, Decompostions of Function
               Spaces Related to Wavelets, and Boundary Elements in Nonsmooth Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9303363

Award Number: 9303363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolfo H. Torres   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9303363  Torres        Work done on this project will develop wavelet type 
              decompositions for the study of spectral and continuity  properties of
              operators.  In particular, pseudodifferential  operators with rough symbols
              will be considered.  The analysis of  the operators will be carried out through
              the construction of  molecules whose smoothness matches that of the symbols of
              the  operators.  Similar decompositions for parabolic spaces will be 
              constructed and used to study operators whose kernels have non-  isotropic
              singularities.  Previous work on discrete spaces and  multiplier operators will
              be developed further.  Work will also  be done on boundary element methods in
              nonsmooth domains.  Singular integral and layer potential techniques will be 
              employed.  The problems to be considered include the construction  of Galerkin
              procedures for the traction boundary value problem  from elastostatics and for
              moving boundary problems in unstable  solidification.  To aid in applications
              of this research, efforts  will be made to confine the function spaces to those
              that permit  efficient numerical implementation.  For this purpose, the latest 
              developments on the method of layer potentials in Holder spaces  and
              decomposition techniques for spaces of homogeneous type will  be incorporated
              into the project.       The application of wavelet analysis to singular
              integral  operators has led to new insights into the continuity properties  of
              these transformations.  In addition, the very discrete nature  of the wavelet
              decompositions allows for unexpected accuracy in  their numerical
              approximation.  The second part of the research  on boundary element methods
              continues efforts to understand the  degree by which mathematical treatment of
              differential equations  may be carried out in the absence of standard
              smoothness  assumptions.  These assumptions often do not reflect conditions 
              present in problems describing phenomena taken from the physical  world.  ***
