Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Immersed Interface Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9303404

Award Number: 9303404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. LeVeque rjl@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loyce M. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Bube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1325,9139,9216,9218,9263,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9303404  LeVeque       Many important practical problems lead to partial 
              differential equations whose solutions have discontinuities or  nonsmoothness
              across some interface.  In solving these problems  numerically, it is very
              convenient to use a uniform Cartesian  grid in spite of the fact that the
              interface may cut between grid  points.  The investigator and his colleagues
              develop finite  difference methods that aim to give highly accurate solutions
              at  all grid points while maintaining the efficiency and ease of 
              implementation of uniform grid methods.  Several specific  problems are studied
              in depth.  One goal is to develop improved  versions of Peskin's "immersed
              boundary method" for  incompressible fluid dynamics in regions with complicated
              moving  boundaries, such as blood flow in a beating heart.  Hyperbolic  wave
              equations with discontinuous coefficients arise in modeling  the structure of
              the earth in seismic oil exploration.  Other  applications include porous media
              equations arising in oil  reservoir simulation and groundwater transport, and
              multi-phase  solidification problems.  In modeling fluid motion near rigid 
              boundaries, an additional problem arises in solving an  ill-conditioned system
              of equations for the strength of  discontinuities at the boundary.  Iterative
              methods for solving  such problems are studied.       Simulating the behavior
              of complicated structures in the  real world typically involves solving large
              systems of equations  that cannot be solved exactly.  Instead the solution must
               be approximated by numerical methods on high performance  computers. The
              investigators study problems in which there is a  boundary or interface that
              has a complicated shape and may be  moving in time. Examples include the
              surface of a body of water  or a bubble surrounded by fluid, the surface of a
              beating heart,  or the boundary between oil and some fluid that is injected
              into  the earth to force oil out of an oil field.  In these examples  the
              equations being solved model the flow o f some fluid.   Another problem is to
              study the motion of the boundary between  melting ice and the surrounding
              water, or between different  phases of a substance more generally.  In this
              case the equations  model the conduction of heat.  In oil exploration it is
              necessary  to model the motion of seismic waves in the earth and the manner  in
              which they reflect off interfaces between different kinds of  rock deep within
              the earth.  The goal of the project is to  develop relatively simple methods
              that can be used to solve a  wide variety of such problems with complicated
              boundaries or  interfaces.  ***
