Title       : Computer Upgrade for the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the
               University of New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9303968

Award Number: 9303968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Acton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney C. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Geissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura J. Crossey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katerina E. Petronotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award provides 62% of the funds required for the                     
              acquisition of equipment to upgrade the computing facilities in the            
              Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of New            
              Mexico. The University of New Mexico is committed to providing the             
              remaining funds necessary.                                                     
                   The upgraded computing system will be distributed among                   
              faculty and student stations and is designed to provide access to              
              a large number of research students and faculty. In addition to                
              educational use the system will be used in active research projects            
              in structural geology, sedimentology, hydrogeology, geochemistry,              
              mineralogy, and meteoritics, as well as dedicated applications in              
              the operation of the Department's analytical facilities (electron              
              microprobe, analytical-high-resolution electron microscope, and X-             
              ray diffractometer).
