Title       : Structure and Reactivity of Gas Phase Transition Metal Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1995   
File        : a9303918

Award Number: 9303918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Weisshaar weisshaar@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Prof. James Weisshaar of the University of                 
              Wisconsin at Madison will conduct a broad program of                           
              fundamental measurements on the reactivities and electronic                    
              structures of metal-hydrocarbon molecules as function of                       
              temperature, pressure, and the electronic state of the neutral                 
              reactant molecule.  Specifically, research will be pursued in                  
              three areas: 1) a survey of the chemical kinetics involving                    
              neutral transition metal atoms, 2) a study of the absorption                   
              and desorption of small molecules on, or from, size specific                   
              clusters of transition metal atoms by means of time-resolved                   
              bimolecular collisions, and 3) application of the new technique                
              of mass-analyzed threshold ionization to obtain mass-specific                  
              spectra for small aggregates of metal atoms and clusters formed                
              by metal atoms and organic molecules.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Saturated hydrocarbon molecules, such as, for example, methane                 
              and ethane, are abundant sources of carbon, but they are rather                
              inert.  Their chemical reactivities can, however, be                           
              significantly enhanced under low energy conditions by catalysts                
              of transition-metal atoms such as nickel, platinum, rhodium,                   
              and others.  The physical chemistry of this activation process                 
              is not well understood and this research is devoted to improve                 
              our knowledge of the interactions between metal atoms and                      
              hydrocarbon molecules.  This will be done by conducting the                    
              experiments under controlled conditions in the gas phase, in                   
              which the perturbing effects of possible solvents are absent.                  
              This research is of an interdisciplinary nature and its results                
              will affect our understanding of solution-phase organo-metallic                
              chemistry, heterogeneous catalysis, and surface chemistry.                     
              Furthermore, the data obtained in these investigations will be                 
              of use in the development of theoretical models and techniques                 
              for the calculation of interaction potentials between metal                    
              atoms and hydrocarbon molecules.
