Title       : PRF/J: The Dynamics of a Two-Species Prey/Predator/Parasite System: Interactions
               Between the Ciliate Lambornella clarki and the Mosquito Larva Aedes sierrensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303260

Award Number: 9303260
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph N. Eisenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   This is to be a quantitative study of the tri-trophic level,              
              two-species interaction between the western tree hole mosquito                 
              Aedes sierrensis and the ciliate Lambornell clarki.  Three models              
              will be employed: two will compare a general 3-species prey /                  
              predator / parasite system to explore the unique properties of the             
              interaction, while a third model will incorporate size structure               
              and age structure features in addition to extrinsic factors.  Model            
              analysis is to focus on understanding three kinds of larval                    
              mortality: over-compensatory, compensatory, and decompensatory,                
              each of which has been observed under varying food resource                    
              conditions.  Sensitivity analysis will be used to determine which              
              parameters are responsible for causing the various mortality types.            
              Finally the model is to be validated through experiments designed              
              to test simulation results.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Pollution problems and insect resistance to traditional pesticides             
              necessitate examination of alternative control methods.  The                   
              potential for biological control agents is great due to their                  
              target specificity.  It is expected that this investigation will               
              significantly improve our understanding of mechanisms for insect               
              mortality in nature (for example, are they density-dependent?).                
              Results should be very useful in guiding pest control strategies               
              generally.
