Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Monitoring Micro DrillingProcess States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9303401

Award Number: 9303401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kornel F. Ehmann k-ehmann@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5942,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9303401  Ehmann    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Kornel F. Ehmann, 
              Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University, to  pursue with
              Dr. Dong Woo Cho, Department of Mechanical  Engineering, Pohang Institute of
              Science and Technology, Korea,  for 24 months, a program of cooperative
              research on factors  relevant to process quality and efficiency monitoring of
              the  micro-hole drilling process in microelectronics manufacture.   Their
              objective is to develop and implement a technology for on-  line monitoring of
              gradual drill wear, breakage, and the  locational tolerances of through holes
              on both top and bottom  surfaces of multi-layer printed circuit boards (PCB's).
               A  combined theoretical and experimental approach will be  implemented in this
              research.  A new theoretical approach will be  utilized based on (1) the
              mechanics of initial penetration, for  determining the state of the process,
              and on (2) the use of  neuro-fuzzy algorithms, for recognition purposes. 
              Practical  studies will take place on a unique instrumented high speed 
              micro-drilling testbed.    Micro-hole drilling is becoming increasingly
              important in a wide  spectrum of precision manufacturing industries including
              the  production of automotive fuel injection nozzles, watch and camera  parts,
              medical needles, air bearings, and thick multi-layer  printed PCB's in
              electronic circuitry.  Mechanical  micro-  drilling has proved to be superior
              to alternative methods such as  laser drilling.  The collaborators are
              recognized as experts in  the field of the proposal.  They will be assisted by
              graduate  students who are not supported under this grant.  This project is 
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science  Program which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between  U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of  scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. 
              Korean  participation in the project is sup ported by the Korea Science  and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  This project adds an  international
              cooperative dimension to the PI's research under  NSF Grant No. DDM-9201144. 
              ***
