Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Integrable Models in Mathematics and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9303413

Award Number: 9303413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Tracy tracy@itd.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This research project develops new methods involving                      
              completely integrable differential equations (of the Painleve                  
              type), operator theory and asymptotic analysis to study the level              
              spacing distributions for various random matrix ensembles.  The                
              level spacing distribution for various orthogonal polynomial                   
              ensembles can be expressed in terms of a Fredholm determinant.                 
              The methods of the PI and his collaborator Harold Widom show that              
              this determinant is also a tau-function.  In the general problem               
              that will be analyzed the tau function has two distinct types of               
              variables. There are the ``KP type variables'' which describe a                
              KP flow on the Sato Grassmannian and there are the ``deformation               
              type variables.''  It is the combination and interplay between                 
              these two types of variables that give the general tau-function.               
              Particular examples of this general tau function are important in              
              disordered conductors, numerical analysis associated with the                  
              condition number of a matrix, in addition to the standard                      
              applications of random matrix ensembles to the analysis of                     
              eigenvalue statistics.  The methods developed in this program                  
              will give detailed and explicit formulas for these important                   
              cases.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
                   Complex systems that arise in nuclear physics, atomic and                 
              molecular physics, condensed matter physics dealing with media                 
              with impurities require a type of mathematics that gives results               
              for averaged quantities, since on the macroscopic everyday world               
              the variables that are controlled in various experiments (like                 
              concentration of an impurity, the energy of the system) do not                 
              completely specify the microscopic system.  Therefore one                      
              develops statistical methods that predict average behavior or                  
              give the probabilities of deviation from this average behavior.                
              The subject of random matrices is one such statistical theory                  
              that has been successfully applied to the above problems in                    
              physics along with a host of more theoretical problems in                      
              mathematics and practical problems in numerical analysis.  This                
              research project develops new methods using the tools of                       
              differential equations to study these statistical theories.
