Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Trace Formula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9303550

Award Number: 9303550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106200             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Goresky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9303550  Goresky       The Lefschetz trace formula of Arthur is an expression
              for  the alternating sum of traces of the map induced on the L2  cohomology of
              a locally symmetric space Y by a Hecke  Correspondence.  This expression is
              given in terms of orbital  integrals, volumes of stabilizer groups, and
              characters of  discrete series representations.  Arthur's formula will be 
              rederived (in this joint project with R. MacPherson of M.I.T.) by  interpreting
              it as the Lefschetz fixed point formula for the  action of the Hecke
              correspondence on the weighted cohomology of  the reductive Borel-Serre
              compactification of Y.  This  interpretation will be used (a) to extend
              Arthur's formula to  include the case of the ordinary cohomology, (b) to derive
              a  similar expression for the alternating sum of traces on the Hodge 
              components of the cohomology, and (c) to conjecture a related  expression which
              should be valid for Shimura varieties defined  over fields of characteristic p
              > 0.       During the 1970's, R. Langlands (of the Institute for  Advanced
              Study in Princeton) outlined a series of conjectures and  ideas of enormous
              scope and depth which, when fully explored and  verified, will result in a
              "grand unification" of several  branches of mathematics, including number
              theory, representation  theory of Lie groups, and harmonic analysis.  During
              the last  twenty years enormous progress has been made on this program and 
              very difficult obstacles have been overcome.  Nevertheless, it is  commonly
              believed that it may take another fifty years (or more)  before Langlands'
              ideas are fully explored.  The present project  concerns a newly discovered
              geometric and topological  interpretation and proof of the "trace formula," one
              of the basic  tools in the subject.  Using this interpretation, the trace 
              formula has been generalized and refined to the point where it  may be applied
              to the central objects of interest (namely, Hecke  correspondences on Shimura
              varieties).  Although these geometric  techniques have b een developed
              primarily to carry out this step  in Langlands' program, they have already been
              applied to problems  in other areas of mathematics.  ***
