Title       : PRF/J: Chloroplast and Nuclear Sequence Phylogenetics of the Palmae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303266

Award Number: 9303266
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Hahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Despite intensive study of morphological, anatomical and                  
              molecular data sets, phylogenetic relationships within the Palmae              
              and the family position within the monocots remain unresolved, a               
              situation common in taxa with deep phylogenetic branches.                      
              Solutions to such problems include generation of additional data               
              sets, greater taxon sampling density, comprehensive review of the              
              fossil record,and critical analysis of the various data sets                   
              individually and in combination.  For this purpose, regions of DNA             
              exhibiting levels of divergence appropriate for phylogenetic                   
              resolution at the familial, subfamilial and sectional levels will              
              be sought.   Sequences from both nuclear and chloroplast genomes               
              will be produced for representative members of the family and                  
              proposed outgroup taxa.  Analysis of data is to be conducted                   
              independently but also coupled with different data sets.                       
              Phylogenetic reconstruction will use parsimony analysis, and employ            
              consensus and combinational approaches.  Specific evolutionary                 
              issues to be addressed include resolution of phylogenetic position             
              both within the family and with respect to the monocots, study of              
              character evolution within a phylogenetic framework, comparative               
              molecular evolution within and across genomes, and examination of              
              broad biogeographic patterns exhibited by the family.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Because an extensive fossil record exists, and the family is                   
              generally well characterized, restricted to the tropics/subtropics,            
              and has low dispersal abilities, the palms provide an excellent                
              group for conducting the work described above.  This study will                
              address controversial problems involving data analysis in                      
              systematics.  The issue is "What is the most appropriate method of             
              analysis."  Difficulties relate to: (a) relative importance of one             
              data set compared to another and (b) questions of gene versus                  
              genome versus organismal phylogenies.  Debate over analytical                  
              strategies revolves around methods of consensus or combination. The            
              dynamic nature of this field indicating that additional comparisons            
              and applications of potential solutions are needed.
