Title       : PRF/J: Competition in a Spatial Framework: Single Species and Two Species Models
               of Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303283

Award Number: 9303283
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Molofsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Simple ecological models have been used by ecologists to                  
              understand how interactions such as density-dependence affect                  
              population dynamics.  These relatively elementary models ignore the            
              spatial aspect of populations.  This research will contribute to               
              the understanding of how spatial processes influence population                
              dynamics.  Cellular automata models of populations that assume that            
              each individual exists in a unique location and that competition is            
              occurring over some predefined local scale will be developed.  How             
              local competitive interactions translate into spatial and temporal             
              dynamics and what general class of patterns (stable, cyclical, or              
              chaotic) are expected for competing populations distributed in                 
              space will be determined.  Conditions under which dispersal and                
              competition can lead to coexistence in a spatially distributed                 
              system will be examined, as will the problem of how differences in             
              competitive scale and dispersal scale influence the patterns.                  
              Simple models have already yielded important insights into how                 
              intra- and interspecific competition can produce chaotic spatial               
              dynamics.  These models for single species and two species will be             
              generalized to models for multiple species.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Overall, results from this work ought to enhance our knowledge of              
              how local competitive interactions translate into spatial and                  
              temporal dynamics.  It will ascertain what general class of                    
              patterns can be expected for competing populations that are                    
              distributed in space.  In addition, it will determine the                      
              conditions under which dispersal and competition can lead to                   
              coexistence in a spatially distributed system and will examine how             
              differences in scale impacts patterns within populations and                   
              ecological communities.  Such information will be useful in                    
              learning how often we should expect chaotic spatial dynamics in                
              natural systems.  By intensively studying two important variables              
              (competition and dispersal), it will be possible to discover what              
              patterns are most likely in spatially distributed populations.
