Title       : PRF/J: Molecular Genetics of Wing Coloration Polymorphism in Heliconius
               Butterflies: Isolation, Characterization and Phylogenetic Analysis of Linked
               Nuclear DNA Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1993       
File        : a9303251

Award Number: 9303251
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew V. Brower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The evolution of wing pattern variation in Neotropical mimetic            
              Heliconius butterflies (altogether 38 species in the genus) is an              
              ideal system for investigating the roles of genetic drift and                  
              natural selection in the formation of geographical races.  Years of            
              studying this system have failed to reveal underlying mechanisms to            
              which a stunning diversity of distinct allopatric forms may be                 
              attributed.  By identifying RAPD molecular genetic markers that co-            
              segregate with wing-pattern alleles in backcrossed broods, it will             
              be possible to identify and sequence nuclear DNA fragments linked              
              to pattern-altering alleles from multiple geographical races of a              
              widespread species (Heliconius erato).  A phylogenetic analysis of             
              each pattern-related marker among different H. erato races will be             
              compared to an independent phylogenetic hypothesis of intraspecific            
              relationships from a mitochondrial gene, to determine if similar               
              wing patterns in allopatric races have been maintained over time by            
              selection, or have arisen multiply and independently from separate             
              ancestors.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Results will enhance our understanding of the roles of alternate               
              evolutionary forces in the production of a mimicry complex and                 
              provide a preliminary template for genomic map studies in                      
              Heliconius.  This study will also illuminate the effects of                    
              selection on phenotype at the molecular level.  The possibility of             
              identifying genes that are functionally involved in pattern                    
              formation is an exciting one, for it has been hypothesized that the            
              developmental pathway responsible for wing patterns is homologous              
              in all butterflies (and possibly all Lepidoptera).  If this is                 
              true, it would have far reaching implications for molecular                    
              developmental biology in general.
