Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Noncommutative Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1994    
File        : a9303379

Award Number: 9303379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162600             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Bergman gbergman@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project is concerned with a wide spectrum of problems                
              in noncommutative ring theory.  The principal investigator will                
              work on (i) a construction of all division algebras generated by               
              homomorphic images; (ii) a proof that for every two varieties U                
              and V in the sense of universal algebra, the category of                       
              representable functors of U into V has an initial object; (iii) a              
              characterization of all co-sheaves of sets on a topological                    
              space; (iv) a common generalization of such results as "every                  
              group structure on a Stone space is an inverse limit of finite                 
              groups" and "every associative algebra structure on a linearly                 
              compact topological vector space is an inverse limit of                        
              finite-dimension algebras"; (v) results on a curious construction              
              for division algebras, which consists of choosing a nonprincipal               
              maximal filter F of subspaces of an infinite-dimensional vector                
              space V, and forming the factor-ring of the ring of endomorphisms              
              of V that repect F by the ideal of those endomorphisms whose                   
              kernel belongs to F.                                                           
                   This research is in the general area of ring theory.  A ring              
              is an algebraic object having both an addition and a                           
              multiplication defined on it.  Although the additive operation                 
              satisfies the commutative law, the multiplicative operation is                 
              not required to do so.  An example of a ring for which                         
              multiplication is not commutative is the collection of nxn                     
              matrices over the integers.  The study of noncommutative rings                 
              has become an important part of algebra because of its increasing              
              significance to other branches of mathematics and physics.
