Title       : SGER: Predation by Fishes on Species of Mnemiopsis in the Coastal Waters of the
               Americas, and its Potential Utility asA Means of Population Control in the
               Black Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9303417

Award Number: 9303417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48910              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Richard Harbison gharbison@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              About ten years ago, the ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi, first                  
              appeared in the Black Sea.  This ctenophore was previously found               
              only on the eastern seaboard of the Americas, so it was probably               
              transported to the Black Sea in the ballast water of ships.  Since             
              then, it has multiplied enormously, causing a drastic decline of               
              several important fisheries.  One possible reason for its profound             
              impact in the Black Sea is that the ctenophore has no predators                
              there, since the fish fauna is extremely limited.  Therefore, in               
              collaboration with Russian and Ukrainian scientists, this Small                
              Grant for Exploratory Research project will develop a plan to study            
              the feasibility of introducing fishes from the Americas that                   
              specifically feed on Mnemiopsis.  These scientists are ware of the             
              dangers of introducing exotic species, and recognize the need for              
              a general agreement as to the advisability of such a course from               
              all of the nations in the region.  However, before any such                    
              proposals can be put forward, basic information on the feeding                 
              behavior and environmental tolerances of such fishes is necessary.             
              This project represent the first step in the American part of this             
              research program.  Basic information on feeding preferences of                 
              fishes will be obtained by interviews with local fishermen along               
              the eastern seaboard of the Americas, and with laboratory studies              
              on feeding preference.  Methods will be developed for the mass                 
              culture of Mnemiopsis in the laboratory.  Dr. Harbison will also               
              determine the ability of these American ctenophore-eating fishes to            
              survive in the specialized environmental conditions of the Black               
              Sea.  This research will provide the first step in trying to solve             
              a major case of biological pollution, and will serve as a model                
              program for international cooperation in dealing with other forms              
              of introduced marine species.
