Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Exposure Age Dating of Late
               Weichselian Ice Sheet Boundaries in Western Norway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9303440

Award Number: 9303440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Brook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Edward J.                                   
              Brook of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution                                  
              to work with Dr. Atle Nesje of the University                                  
              of Bergen at the Centre de Spectrometrie                                       
              Nucleare et de Spectrometrie de Masse (CSNSM)                                  
              in Orsay, France.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This project proposes to answer fundamental                                    
              questions about weathering boundaries in                                       
              Scandinavia and eastern Canada which provide                                   
              important constraints on the history and size                                  
              of past Northern Hemisphere Ice Sheets.  The                                   
              primary uncertainties in interpreting the                                      
              significance of the boundaries are that the age                                
              of associated bedrock surfaces are not known                                   
              and their mode of origin (ice limit vs. thermal                                
              boundary) is unclear.  Dr. Brook and Dr. Nesje                                 
              will date bedrock surfaces associated with                                     
              weathering boundaries in western Norway using                                  
              cosmogenic 10Be and 26Al.  The results can be                                  
              used to evaluate existing models of the                                        
              Scandinavian ice sheet, theories about                                         
              biological refugia during the last glaciation,                                 
              and the processes that form weathering                                         
              boundaries in arctic and sub-arctic                                            
              environments.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months and $300 for excess baggage.
