Title       : PRF/J: Nutrient Cycling as a Measure of Agroecosystem Sustainability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9303261

Award Number: 9303261
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Erle C. Ellis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DC Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,9200,
Abstract    :
              This project will relate nutrient cycling to long term productivity            
              of agroecosystems by comparing nutrient cycles that prevail under              
              agricultural methods in ancient and complex Chinese agroecosystems             
              with those of conventional farms.  With nitrogen often being the               
              limiting nutrient in such systems, nitrogen (N) - cycling is the               
              main focus of the study, with other nutrient cycles to be also                 
              characterized where useful.  N-cycling patterns are to be modeled              
              from annual N-transfer budgets of village-scale agroecosystems.                
              Food web and trophic chain models of N-cycling will be compared for            
              their ability to differentiate agroecosystem behaviors, and various            
              calculations will be assessed for their suitability in quantifying             
              nutrient cycling.  A nitrogen-recycling-efficiency index will be               
              derived from N-cycling measures combined with input/output                     
              efficiency criteria and soil N pool size.  This index will be                  
              related to ecological sustainability using as a benchmark Chinese              
              agroecosystems that have sustained high yields for centuries.  The             
              contemporary importance of legume cultivation to sustained                     
              agroecosystem productivity will then be evaluated using the N-                 
              recycling index.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Traditional Chinese agroecosystems and the eco-farms derived from              
              them are striking examples of environmental management based upon              
              ecological principles.  Nutrient cycling patterns of such systems              
              provide an excellent contrast to Chinese farms that use only                   
              conventional chemical nutrient management.  All three agroecosystem            
              types (traditional, eco-farm, conventional) may be found in the                
              same bioclimatic area of China; the combination of all three types             
              in a comparative study constitutes a unique opportunity to develop             
              measurements of sustainability.
