Title       : Experimental Studies of Thin Film Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1994   
File        : a9303091

Award Number: 9303091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Erskine erskine@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates electronic and magnetic properties of                
              matter that are intrinsic to thin film structures, surfaces, and               
              interfaces.  The propsed work is driven by new capabilities to                 
              deliberately modify and characterize physical properties of matter             
              that affect magnetic behavior, and by recent improvements in                   
              magnetically sensitive spectroscopic techniques.  The experimental             
              approach combines novel materials synthesis, advanced structure                
              determination methods, and spin sensitive spectroscopic techniques.            
              The principle scientific objectives of the program are to explore              
              the relationship between atomic level structure and magnetism, and             
              to probe fundamental concepts in phase transitions.  Proposed                  
              experiments address atomic level factors that affect magnetic                  
              anisotropy, magnetic coercive forces, and magnetic remanence in                
              ultra-thin epitaxial films and magnetic coupling through ultra-thin            
              non-magnetic layers.  The experiments also address issues in                   
              statistical mechanics including the notion of two-dimensional                  
              universality classes and related specific theoretical predictions              
              of scaling parameters and critical exponents.  These important                 
              concepts are studied under experimental conditions that represent              
              a transition from the two-dimensional to three-dimensional state of            
              matter.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Thin film and multilayer magnetic materials offer attractive                   
              opportunities for future development of recording media and of                 
              novel high-density discrete digital data storage concepts.  These              
              materials also offer important new scientific opportunities for                
              seeking a more thorough understanding of the broad range of                    
              phenomena that account for the commercial importance of magnetic               
              materials.  The opportunities are especially attractive in the area            
              of thin film magnetic structures because new processing technology             
              and measurement techniques permit synthesis and characterization of            
              engineered materials having selected characteristics.  This                    
              research program investigates several related aspects of thin film             
              magnetic behavior that are relevant to advanced materials                      
              processing and potential application of thin film materials.  The              
              principle emphasis of the program is to understand the relationship            
              between the materials processing (film growth), the structure of               
              the films including compositional and atomic level effects, and the            
              resulting magnetic characteristics that can be exploited for                   
              various applications.
