Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Analytic Function Theory Via Circle Packing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9303135

Award Number: 9303135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Stephenson KENS@MATH.UTK.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        This project continues investigations into the                       
              connections between circle packing and the theory of analytic                  
              functions of a complex variable.  Circle packings have long been               
              an intriguing concept in mathematical research.  In 1985 William               
              Thurston proposed that circle packings - packings of plane                     
              domains by circles of various sizes - could lead to a completely               
              new point of view in conformal mapping.  This turned out to be                 
              the case and this project is one of several by-products of that                
              now famous lecture.  The idea has grown and prospered.  Circle                 
              packings are exhibiting faithful discrete analogues to the                     
              classical results of geometric function theory such as the                     
              Schwarz-Pick lemma, Dirichlet problem, uniformization theorem,                 
              Brownian motion, etc.  The current project concentrates on the                 
              discrete version of the length-area method, a powerful, but                    
              unwieldy method exercised by a few experts and not easily                      
              understood by consumers of function theory.  The second part                   
              concerns infinite packings, possibly the most speculative part of              
              the project.  Most research to date considers only finite                      
              packings.  The final component of the research involves packings               
              using circle with overlap.  There are fundamental results which                
              allow for overlap, but little work has been done on this                       
              generalization.  Past research led to the development of software              
              for manipulating, displaying and animating circle packings.  This              
              is both a research tool for performing experiments and a                       
              practical method for creating the pictures needed for                          
              presentation.  The software is freely available.                               
                   Complex function theory is the mathematical basis for                     
              computing with and visualizing the behavior of complex functions               
              of a complex variable.  The subject has an extensive history                   
              and is normally studied concurrently as analysis and geometry.                 
              This project adds a new dimension: computation.  Circle packing                
              leads naturally to computer simulation.  This in turn has led to               
              new insights and proofs in the classical theory. To prove its                  
              worth, the new point of view will have to lead to new ,                        
              unexpected discoveries.
