Title       : Dissertation Reserach: Mission Pueblo Ceramic Analyses: Implications for
               Protohistoric Interaction Networks and Cultural Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9303840

Award Number: 9303840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7435               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia H. Capone  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, MS Patricia Capone will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will examine the               
              response of Native Americans in the U.S. Southwest to Spanish                  
              missionization which took place during the 17th century. Beginning             
              in about 1630 the Spanish established a number of missions in this             
              region with a goal both of converting Native Americans to                      
              Christianity and of integrating them into a Spanish economic                   
              system. Native Americans were forced to provide labor to the                   
              missions. While it is clear that missions did have a major effect              
              on Native American lifeways, the nature and degree of change is                
              less well understood. It is also not known how uniformly different             
              Native American groups adapted.                                                
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to use locally produced ceramics to               
              examine this issue. In the prehistoric Southwest and continuing                
              into historic times ceramics were widely produced and traded over              
              broad areas. Some decorated types were moved great distances and               
              likely were produced by specialists in localized areas. Ceramics               
              therefore provide insight into economic and trade organization as              
              well as - more indirectly - into political and social structures.              
              MS Capone will examine two Pueblos at Abo, New Mexico, and Awatovi,            
              Arizona which are located at the Eastern and Western ends of the               
              Pueblo region respectively. She will study the geology of each area            
              to locate and characterize clay sources. She will then study                   
              ceramic materials from both sites by means of petrographic thin                
              section analysis. On this basis she will be able to tie vessels to             
              raw material source areas. She will also look as such factors as               
              uniformity of production to determine the degree of craft                      
              specialization. Each site spans the pre-mission and mission periods            
              and therefore MS Capone will be able to examine the issue of                   
              continuity and change. Preliminary work suggests that native                   
              Americans were more resistant to change by missionization than                 
              historic data suggests.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will increase our                        
              understanding of how very different cultures interact with each                
              other. It will shed new light on culture change and assist in the              
              training of a promising young scientist.
