Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Self-Similarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9303718

Award Number: 9303718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Strichartz str@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9218,9251,HPCC,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project seeks to exploit some of the developing ideas                
              in harmonic analysis which relate to important ideas in                        
              self-similarity.  Self-similarity is a subject of intense                      
              interest today because of its relationship with fractal geometry               
              and wavelet analysis.  However, these relationships can be traced              
              to work in the early 30's by Wiener and Wintner on Fourier                     
              transforms of Cantor measures.  Work to be done includes the                   
              computation of dimensions of classes of self-similar measures.                 
              There are two directions in which the concept will be expanded.                
              The first involves replacing strictly contractive transformations              
              in their definition and replacing this with average                            
              contractivity.  One can no longer guarantee compact support in                 
              this case.  The growth rate of such measures and the smoothness                
              of their Fourier transform are subjects for investigation.  The                
              second direction replaces the convex combinations with variable                
              weights.  Here one is interested in existence and uniqueness of                
              the measures as well as their Lp and pointwise dimensions.  Work               
              will also be done in analyzing the Radon transform of                          
              self-similar measures.  The two natural questions to be                        
              considered are whether or not the Radon transform is invertible                
              and whether one can characterize the range of the transform.  The              
              transform is known to preserve the class of distributions if and               
              only if the transform of the measure is not slowly decreasing.                 
              For self-similar measures this is not the case, leaving open the               
              question of what the proper spaces ought to be.                                
                   Harmonic analysis combines those elements of mathematics                  
              best exemplifying the ideas of synthesis.  One seeks to decompose              
              complex problems into fundamental components.  These                           
              components are then analyzed for their basic characteristics.                  
              Finally, the solution is reconstructed through a recombination of              
              the components.  The Fourier series and Fourier transform are                  
              examples of tools used in this context; one discrete , the                     
              other representing a continuous decomposition. More recently                   
              the wavelet theory added new dimensions to some of the more                    
              classical approaches to harmonic analysis.
