Title       : Organization of Bacteriophage T4 DNA Replication Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9303880

Award Number: 9303880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Gogol   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Initial experiments to visualize components of the bacteriophage               
              T4 replication apparatus by cryo-EM, under enzymatically active                
              conditions, have successfully identified distinctive assemblies                
              of a complex of the replication accessory proteins bound to DNA.               
              These assemblies require continual ATP hydrolysis, have short                  
              lifetimes, and appear to comprise only a minority of the protein               
              in the sample; hence they are difficult to isolate for structural              
              analysis by means other than cryo-EM.  The next step in this                   
              project is determining the composition and arrangement of the                  
              proteins in these complexes, by a combination of cryo-EM, site-                
              specific labelling (subunit-specific antibodies and covalent                   
              labels), and biochemical analysis.  The mechanism of formation                 
              and translocation of these structures will be examined, and their              
              interaction with the T4 DNA polymerase will be determined, to try              
              to understand the role of the accessory proteins in the process                
              of replication.  The other elements of the T4 replication                      
              machinery, the DNA helicase and RNA primase, will also be                      
              examined by these methods, to determine their arrangement in                   
              enzymatically active complexes and their structural relationship               
              to the polymerase.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Accurate and efficient replication of the genome is a critical                 
              process in all life.  Much progress has been made, primarily by                
              biochemical analysis, in elucidating the molecular mechanism of                
              DNA replication.  The complexity of the enzymes involved is                    
              greater than had been initially anticipated.  The interactions                 
              among the many proteins required for DNA replication have proven               
              particularly difficult to analyze directly, in part due to the                 
              transient nature of active replication complexes.  New                         
              technologies in electron microscopy, in particular the use of                  
              minimally-perturbing specimen preservation by cryogenic methods                
              (cryo-EM), has opened new avenues to approach the study of                     
              active, chemically-sensitive macromolecular assemblies such as                 
              those which catalyze DNA replication.  Biochemical examination of              
              replication mechanisms in many different organisms has identified              
              common elements of the process, which allow structural                         
              information gained about simple systems (phage and bacteria) to                
              be related to genome replication in higher organisms.  The work                
              proposed here is an attempt to further the understanding of the                
              mechanism of DNA replication by structural study of functionally               
              relevant complexes of the proteins of the bacteriophage T4                     
              replication apparatus (with DNA templates and products), and to                
              correlate the structural analysis to steps in the enzymatic                    
              activity.
