Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research In Algebraic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9303489

Award Number: 9303489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar H. Brown brown@binah.cc.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Four investigators will study a variety of problems in                    
              algebraic topology.  (1) Edgar H. Brown, Jr. will continue his                 
              applications of the machinery developed in "Continuous Cohomology              
              and Real Homotopy Theory" to mod p homotopy theory, classifying                
              spaces of foliations, and real homotopy type of Kaehler                        
              manifolds.  (2) Kiyoshi Igusa will study the relationship between              
              the higher Reidemeister torsion invariants (algebraic K-theory                 
              invariants associated to the diffeomorphism space of a smooth                  
              manifold) and the simpler cyclic homology groups associated to                 
              circle bundles.  In particular, he has a plan to prove a                       
              complexified version of a theorem of Bokstedt, which if proved                 
              would give an explicit realization of these difficult invariants.              
              The methods he will use are Morse theory, algebraic K-theory, and              
              cyclic homology.  (3) Jerome P. Levine will work on a direct                   
              topological description of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer rho-invariant              
              of an odd-dimensional manifold, and determining when it is a                   
              homotopy invariant.  In particular, he has a conjectured formula               
              for the jump along a path of representations.  He is also                      
              investigating the possible use of the algebraic version of the                 
              rho-invariant (a multisignature) to determine the torsion-free                 
              part of the homology concordance surgery group (Gamma-group) of                
              Cappell-Shaneson.  He will continue to study the "algebraic                    
              closure" construction in group theory, particularly in its                     
              application to link concordance questions.  Several geometric                  
              questions reduce to purely algebraic questions about the                       
              algebraic closure of the free group.  (4) Daniel Ruberman will                 
              treat a number of problems in gauge theory related to the                      
              topology of low dimensional manifolds.  One main aspect of the                 
              work is the further development of gauge theory on 4-manifolds                 
              with boundary, via the moduli space of finite energy                           
              anti-self-dual connections.  Applications include obstructions to              
              the representation of homology classes by surfaces of low genus                
              as well as a new knot cobordism invariant.  The project also                   
              includes a study of gauge-theoretic invariants of connections on               
              3-manifolds, and the relation of such invariants to the topology               
              of the space of flat SU(2) connections.  These invariants lead to              
              potentially new obstructions to a group's being the fundamental                
              group of a 3-manifold.                                                         
                   These various projects concern the topology and geometry of               
              manifolds, which are spaces locally resembling the familiar                    
              Euclidean spaces.  Three and four-dimensional manifolds provide                
              models for the physical world of space and time, while manifolds               
              of higher dimension arise naturally as the parameter spaces for                
              complicated systems involving many variables.  The fundamental                 
              problems about such spaces include their classification in terms               
              of numerical and algebraic invariants, the classification of                   
              their symmetries (or diffeomorphisms) and the determination of                 
              how one space may sit inside another (as a knotted curve sits                  
              inside of 3-dimensional space).  Brown is perfecting some of the               
              algebraic machinery required.  Igusa's part of the project                     
              studies ways in which complicated families of symmetries may be                
              understood in terms of algebraic invariants derived from                       
              corresponding families of matrices.  Levine is investigating the               
              interpretation in topology of an analytically defined invariant,               
              as well its uses in the theory of knots.  Ruberman will use the                
              Yang-Mills equations of mathematical physics to understand the                 
              nature of four-dimensional manifolds and the two-dimensional                   
              surfaces which they contain.
