Title       : Development of a Mixed-Integer Optimization Package for Process Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1991      
File        : a9017521

Award Number: 9017521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 1,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Glavic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ignacio E. Grossmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maribor
	      
	      Maribor, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in chemical process design between Peter Glavic, Z.                    
              Kravanja, of the University of Maribor and I. Grossmann of Carnegie            
              Mellon University is to develop a computer system to solve                     
              production problems in chemical processing.  The researchers propose           
              to develop a software model for optimal planning and scheduling of             
              multiproduct processes.  Dr. Kravanja and Dr. Grossman have                    
              conducted some preliminary work together.  They propose to develop             
              software which can be applied to environmental, energy consumption             
              and factory retooling and retrofit problems, and which can be used             
              as a teaching tool in engineering education.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.
