Title       : Systematics of Clibadium (Compositae, Heliantheae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9017695

Award Number: 9017695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tod F. Stuessy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge E. Arriagada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries award will help to                        
              support thesis dissertation work of Mr. Jorge Arriagada of                     
              Concepcion, Chile working under the supervision of Professor                   
              Tod Stuessy of Ohio State University.  The main objectives                     
              of the proposed research are:  (1) to produce a taxonomic                      
              revision of the species of Clibadium, a Neotropical genus of                   
              approximately 40 species distributed from Mexico to Peru;                      
              (2) to determine the evolutionary relationships among these                    
              species; (3) to establish generic limits relative to                           
              Desmanthodium, Ichthyothere and Stachycephalum; and (4) to                     
              determine biogeography and suggest modes of speciation of the                  
              species.  An ancillary objective of this research is to study                  
              variations and evolution of capitulescence structure and                       
              development of unusual drupe-like fruits in Clibadium for                      
              help in reconstructing phylogeny.  As time permits, the                        
              ethnobotanical activities of the Indians in Latin America                      
              will be documented as they relate to use of Clibadium species                  
              as fish-poisons.  The ethnobotanical role of the genus should                  
              provide an extra dimension to understanding the systematics                    
              and biogeography of the genus.  To achieve these goals, a                      
              complete collection of plant material and field observations                   
              along the distributional range is needed.  Morphological                       
              (including anatomical) and cytological data will be gathered,                  
              and reconstruction of phylogeny will be done by cladistic                      
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The proposed research is significant for several reasons.  It                  
              will produce the first modern revision of the genus, including                 
              keys, descriptions and a predictive classification, valuable                   
              to botanists working on Neotropical floras.  It will also                      
              provide the first phylogenetic reconstruction of the genus.                    
              In addition, understanding of evolutionary relationships                       
              within Clibadium should lead to an improved understanding of                   
              affinities with the related genera Desmanthodium, Ichthyothere,                
              and Stachycephalum.
