Title       : RUI: The Effect of Ash Flows on Shallow Marine Sedimentation: An Example from
               the Ordovician Capel Curig Volcanic Formation, North Wales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1991  
File        : a9017590

Award Number: 9017590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39999              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Fritz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of the research is to investigate two hypotheses              
              involving sedimentation associated with the emplacement of shallow             
              marine ash-flow tuffs.  Specifically, these hypotheses are:  1)                
              that Ordovician ash-flow tuffs of the Capel Curig Volcanic                     
              Formation were emplaced and welded underwater, and 2) that                     
              explosive volcanism has a significant impact on influencing                    
              patterns of shallow marine sedimentation.  Ordovician volcanic and             
              volcaniclastic rocks of the Capel Curig Volcanic Formation provide             
              an ideal laboratory for testing these hypotheses.                              
                   Sedimentary rocks associated with ash-flow tuffs in the                   
              Ordovician of North Wales are well exposed and contain numerous                
              sedimentary structures.  Detailed mapping by the British Geological            
              Survey has provided a well-defined stratigraphic context for this              
              work.  Furthermore, many of these ash-flow tuffs have been                     
              interpreted to have been emplaced and welded underwater, although              
              this hypothesis has been controversial.  Yet the tuffs of the Capel            
              Curig Volcanic Formation have remained one of the textbook examples            
              of welding in shallow marine water.  The study will determine                  
              environments of deposition in the associated sedimentary rocks                 
              beneath the tuffs and paleowater depths from numerous bedding plane            
              exposures of wave ripples.  Determination of the environments of               
              deposition will test the likelihood of subaqueous welding.                     
              Comparing pre-tuff environments with ones that existed following               
              tuff emplacement will determine the effect that these tuffs had on             
              patterns of sedimentation.                                                     
                   Successful completion of this work will provide data far                  
              beyond that of solving a local geological problem in Wales.  This              
              project will bear directly on the question of subaqueous welding               
              and on the specific examples that have been most often to support              
              welding in intermediate depth water.  Also, models of                          
              volcaniclastic sedimentation from the Capel Curig Volcanic                     
              Formation will be developed that can be applied in many future                 
              studies and used to determine the influence that explosive                     
              volcanism plays on patterns of marine shelf sedimentation.
