Title       : Role for Protein Phosphorylation in Yeast Vacuolar Protein Sorting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9017678

Award Number: 9017678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : October 1,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Emr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed studies focus on one of the yeast vacuolar protein                
              sorting (VPS) genes, VPS15.  The predicted product of the VPS15                
              gene shares significant sequence similarity with the catalytic                 
              domains of the family of serine/threonine protein kinases.  Using              
              both genetic and biochemical approaches, the following will be                 
              analyzed:  (1) the functional role of myristoylation on Vps15p                 
              function and localization, (2) the subcellular location and                    
              possible site of action of the Vps15 protein, and (3) the presumed             
              kinase activity of the VPS15 gene product.  It is anticipated that             
              these studies will result in a detailed view of the organization               
              and control of vesicular traffic between the Golgi and the vacuole,            
              and possibly other inter-organelle transport events in eukaryotic              
              cells.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The process of selective recognition, sorting and transport of                 
              proteins from one intracellular organelle to another via vesicular             
              carriers represents an essential feature of all eukaryotic cells.              
              The precise mechanisms and machinery that direct these processes               
              are not yet known.  This laboratory has isolated a large collection            
              of yeast mutants that exhibit severe defects in protein delivery               
              to the lysosome-like vacuole.  The defective genes in these mutants            
              are likely to encode components of the cell's protein sorting                  
              apparatus.  Toward an understanding of the molecular and                       
              biochemical basis of the vacuolar protein sorting ("vps") defects              
              in these mutants, this research will characterize the roles certain            
              of the VPS genes and their products play in the sorting and                    
              delivery of vacuolar enzymes from the Golgi complex to the vacuole             
              in yeast.  The fundamental similarities between yeast and other                
              eukaryotic cells in their pathways for protein delivery, together              
              with the powerful genetics and molecular approaches available in               
              yeast, make yeast an ideal organism for addressing these problems.
