Title       : Ion Transport in Freshwater Mussels: Ion Specific Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9017461

Award Number: 9017461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Dietz   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Lynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold Silverman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Freshwater mussels are successful ionic- and osmotic-regulators but            
              they maintain blood ion concentrations well below other freshwater             
              animals.  Using various procedures including ion fluxes, ion                   
              substitution studies, isolated tissue techniques, morphology and               
              histochemistry, cAMP and prostaglandin biochemistry, we have                   
              demonstrated that the gill is the a major site of ionic regulation.            
              We have found that freshwater mussels transport Na, K, Rb, and Cl              
              at rates that equal or exceed the transport rates found inmost                 
              freshwater forces involved in ion transport, the electrical                    
              gradient across gill epithelial cells must be measured.  In                    
              addition, the types and their respective conductances of ion                   
              channels present in epithelial cell membranes will be determined               
              using the inside-out patch clamp technique.  Preliminary data                  
              indicate that mussel membranes have ion channels with remarkably               
              high (>300 pS) conductances.  These studies will provide                       
              information about how mussels function with low blood ionic                    
              strengths, and yet tolerate substantial modification of blood ion              
              composition when subjected to changes in their environment.                    
              Understanding the cellular mechanisms that allow freshwater mussels            
              such remarkable adaptations is relevant to our understanding of the            
              limits at which cells and organisms can function.                              
                //
