Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Forward and Inverse Modeling of TwoCretaceous Foreland
               Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9017168

Award Number: 9017168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa E. Jordan tej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A recently developed quantitative model predicts the                      
              stratigraphy and geometry of foreland basins and passive margin                
              basins in response to deformation history and sea-level change.                
              The model combines a largely-accepted mechanical description of the            
              lithosphere with a new approach, that of simulation of the surface             
              transport of sediments by diffusion.  The robustness of the new                
              approach will be tested by comparing the predicted stratigraphies              
              of two foreland basins, the colville basin and the Western Interior            
              Seaway, to the geological data.  Sediment fluxes and depositional              
              profiles will be measured over known time intervals and the                    
              lithospheric loads calculated by two-dimensional back-stripping                
              procedures.  The load histories and sediment fluxes will then be               
              input to the forward model of basin evolution.                                 
                   The project is a collaboration of scientists from Cornell                 
              University, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and the                     
              University of Colorado.  The results will resolve whether or not               
              the lithosphere relaxes significantly during foreland basin                    
              formation, the tectonic effects of thrusting on subsidence in the              
              distal parts of basins, and the contribution of eustatic sea-level             
              change to stratigraphic sequences.  These findings will have                   
              important consequences for tectonics and sedimentology.
