Title       : Annotated Maps for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9017990

Award Number: 9017990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169117             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley E. Dunn dunn@oe.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishnamurthy Ganesan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1472,
Abstract    :
              Florida Atlantic University (FAU) and Carnegie Mellon University               
              (CMU) are pleased to cooperate in a three-year program of                      
              research on autonomous underwater robots.  The use of remotely                 
              controlled, tethered underwater vehicles to routinely perform                  
              critical underwater tasks in offshore and ocean situations has                 
              clearly demonstrated both the utility and importance of these                  
              systems.  Recent developments in autonomous vehicle and robot                  
              technology now form the basis for projecting that significant                  
              expansions are possible in the capabilities of underwater                      
              vehicles and robotics.  The technologies involved are wide                     
              ranging and include sensors, controls, power, computing,                       
              architectures and data representation.                                         
                                                                                             
              The coordinated research program will focus on map-based                       
              knowledge representation to directly address several of these                  
              central issues of autonomous underwater vehicles.  We will                     
              develop methods to build, store, and use the knowledge that                    
              autonomous vehicles need to execute useful missions.                           
              Specifically, we will develop "annotated maps", which index                    
              information to particular objects and locations in the map.  The               
              annotations can be used for a wide variety of purposes:                        
              describing objects, providing hints for perception or control, or              
              specifying particular actions to be taken.  We will provide a                  
              query mechanism to retrieve annotations based on their map                     
              locations.  We will also build "triggers", which will cause a                  
              specified message to be delivered to a particular process when                 
              the vehicle reaches a given location in the map.  These annotated              
              maps will serve a crucial role in enabling missions that are                   
              currently beyond the reach of autonomous systems.
