Title       : Influence Of Industrialization On Social And Economic Security (U.S.-Egypt
               Cooperative Science; Science In Developing Countries)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9017161

Award Number: 9017161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saad Z. Nagi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal supports the collaboration of                      
              Drs. Saad Z. Nagi and Sharon K. Houseknecht, Ohio State                        
              University (OSU), and Dr. Mohamed Abdel Aal, Cairo                             
              University, Egypt.  The purpose of this collaboration is to                    
              study the influence of industrial development on social and                    
              economic security arrangements in Egypt.  Project funding                      
              will allow Dr. Houseknecht to visit study communities in                       
              Egypt and to participate in discussions with their leaders                     
              and for Dr. Aal to analyze data for a period of time at OSU                    
              with Drs. Houseknect and Nagi.  Dr. Nagi, as Principal                         
              Investigator, will provide overall project supervision.                        
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This proposal brings together research scientists                      
              from two countries working in the area of Egyptian                             
              socio-economics and culture.  It is anticipated that this                      
              collaborative research will result in a report on the                          
              influence of industrial development on social and economic                     
              security arrangements in Egypt.  The Egyptian scientist, Dr.                   
              Aal, will gain experience in the application of advanced                       
              statistical techniques and be exposed to sophisticated                         
              methods of research during his stay at OSU.  Conversely, Dr.                   
              Houseknecht will get an opportunity for cross-cultural                         
              research experience and her exchanges with Egyptian                            
              researchers will be highly beneficial to her future research                   
              and instructional endeavors.  Therefore, this proposal                         
              fulfills the objectives of the Science in Developing                           
              Countries program in its exchange and transfer of scientific                   
              knowledge through an international collaboration.
