Title       : Solute Transport with Convective Instability in Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1990  
File        : a9017504

Award Number: 9017504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin W. Schwartz frank@geology.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Scott Bair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a three-year experimental, theoretical and field study of              
              convective instability and its role in solute mixing during mass               
              transport.  Instabilities can develop at different scales under a              
              variety of geologic and hydrogeologic situations when more dense               
              groundwater overlies less dense groundwater.  The process mixes                
              the two waters to reduce the density stratification.  The                      
              specific objectives of the study are to describe the dynamics of               
              instability development both conceptually and mathematically and               
              to evaluate the potential for instability development to                       
              influence the chemical evolution of groundwater in large flow                  
              systems.  The study includes both experiments and the evaluation               
              of an actual groundwater system, the Milk River artesian aquifer,              
              in which unstable mixing has a significant potential for                       
              influencing the chemical evolution of the water.  The laboratory               
              work will involve a series of precisely controlled and monitored               
              flow tank studies designed to describe the dynamics of the mixing              
              process.  The field study will involve a detailed                              
              characterization of the geology and hydrogeology of the Milk                   
              River aquifer, followed by an evaluation with a variable density               
              model.  This study will contribute basic knowledge about a                     
              relatively unknown and poorly understood process.  Previous                    
              studies show that mixing due to instability development can be                 
              more important than commonly realized.  The work is of practical               
              and academic importance to problems of solvent-enhanced oil                    
              recovery, chemical mixing in sedimentary basins and contaminant                
              migration.
