Title       : Mechanisms of Fiber Formation During Muscle Hypertrophy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9017085

Award Number: 9017085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Schultz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hyperplasia is a distinctive component of the hypertrophy that                 
              occurs in the overloaded and stretched avian wing; a large number              
              of embryonic myosin positive fibers appear in intra- and                       
              interfascicular locations. The number of fibers formed decreases               
              as a function of increasing age. This proposal examines two                    
              potential mechanisms of nascent fiber formation: 1) from                       
              activation, proliferation and fusion of satellite cells, and 2)                
              from existing fibers through a process referred to as "fiber                   
              splitting", where a fiber splits along its longitudinal axis,                  
              producing first a branched fiber, and ultimately two independent               
              fibers. Mature and immature chickens will be infused continuously              
              with bromodeoxyuridine, a thymidine analogue and marker of cell                
              division, during the overload period in order to distinguish                   
              whether one or both processes are involved in nascent fiber                    
              formation. Virtually all myonuclei of nascent fibers formed                    
              through proliferation and fusion of satellite cells will be                    
              labelled, while nascent fibers formed from pre-existing fibers                 
              will contain few labelled nuclei. Satellite cells involved in                  
              formation of new fibers in interfascicular spaces would be                     
              required to migrate from their fibers into these areas. The                    
              location of activated and proliferating satellite cells will be                
              examined during overload in order to determine if satellite cells              
              located on fibers at the periphery of fascicles are                            
              preferentially activated. Finally, Dr. Schultz will test directly              
              if environments in overloaded muscles promote interstitial fiber               
              formation by implanting myoblasts into control and overloaded                  
              muscles and comparing their fusion behavior with the electron                  
              microscope. These studies should provide fundamental additional                
              information to our understanding of the plasticity of skeletal                 
              muscle during a response to increased functional demand.
