Title       : Mass Spectrometry: Instrument Development and Applications to Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1993  
File        : a9017262

Award Number: 9017262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Gross   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger N. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Cerny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1103      TECHNIQUE DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the University of Nebraska for                    
              funding of a facility that provides advanced mass spectrometric                
              techniques through collaborations with researchers at Nebraska                 
              and at other institutions.  One of several approaches to mass                  
              spectrometry (MS), tandem MS provides high resolution                          
              measurements of compounds with the high molecular weights typical              
              of proteins, nucleic acids and other biopolymers.  Efforts                     
              sponsored by this award will focus on improving techniques for                 
              analysis of variety of proteins, carbohydrates and other natural               
              products using the tandem instrument; a variety of collaborative               
              research projects will be initiated or continued, and training                 
              activities at the pre- and post doctoral level will continue.                  
                                                                                             
              Mass spectrometry plays an increasingly important role in the                  
              structural analysis of biomolecules.  Information about protein                
              sequence and structure, including naturally occurring                          
              modifications of proteins, and similar kinds of information about              
              polysaccharides and other branched chain polymers are obtained                 
              with great difficulty by other techniques.  Because of the                     
              considerable expense of acquisition and operation of tandem MS                 
              instruments, this type of mass spectrometric analysis is not                   
              routinely available at most research institutions.  The Nebraska               
              facility is one of only several in the country that provide                    
              researchers at numerous institutions with access to the kind of                
              skilled mass spectrometry needed in many areas of modern                       
              biological research.
