Title       : Genetic Covariances Among Life History Traits: The Effect of Novel Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9017401

Award Number: 9017401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Service philip.service@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Ecological and genetic theory predict that there should be                
              trade-offs between life history traits such as reproductive                    
              output and lifespan.  Genes that result in greater reproduction                
              should also produce shortened life span.  This theory, if                      
              correct, supports the idea that senescence has a genetic basis                 
              and that senescence is a consequence of normal processes that                  
              favor increased reproduction at the expense of shortened                       
              lifespan.  Furthermore, this theory points a way, in principle,                
              to genetic modification of fertility and lifespan.                             
                   While some experimental observations support this                         
              expectation of trade-offs, many do not.  The absence of trade-                 
              offs in a number of experimental studies may be a consequence of               
              the testing of organisms in environments to which they are not                 
              adapted, as would be the case when wild-caught organisms are                   
              brought into the laboratory.  Under this hypothesis, some                      
              individuals will carry genes that fortuitously are favorable in a              
              new environment.  Those individuals will be generally more                     
              vigorous than other individuals that by chance carry genes that                
              are not favorable in the new environment.  This situation will                 
              produce a pattern of positive associations between life history                
              traits, rather than a pattern of trade-offs.  However, the                     
              positive associations should be a transient phenomenon, and as                 
              populations adapt to their new environment, the expected pattern               
              of trade-offs should be reestablished.  These experiments will                 
              test the robustness of basic theories underlying the evolution of              
              characters such as lifespan, and the predictive value of the                   
              theory in novel environments, such as would occur during global                
              climate change.
