Title       : Quality Through Engineering Design, a U.S.-India-Japan Conference, Bangalore,
               India, February 1992, Group Travel Award- Supplement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9017040

Award Number: 9017040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Way Kuo   (Principal Investigator current)
              K. O. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5919      INDIA (COOPERATIVE SCIENCE)
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports U.S. participants to a                     
              U.S.-India-Japan Conference on Quality Through Engineering                     
              Design, planned for February 1992 in Bangalore, India.  The                    
              trilateral conference is intended to accelerate the                            
              exchange of information on computer based and statistical                      
              approaches to the engineering design of quality products                       
              and processes.  The conference is expected to last 5 days,                     
              and will consist of mainly invited papers and few                              
              contributed papers, and will allow for extensive formal and                    
              informal discussions.  Seven major sessions are planned:                       
              materials formulation and processsing design; metrology in                     
              materials development; electro-mechanical design; metrology                    
              in electro-mechanical design; statistical quality                              
              engineering techniques for design; total quality control;                      
              and computer-aided design system requirements.  The Indian                     
              organizer is Dr. B. K. Pal of the Indian Statistical                           
              Institute in Bangalore, India.  The conference proceedings                     
              are expected to be published.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Scope: Several organizations in the three countries are                        
              expected to support the conference including the Indian                        
              Institute of Technology, Madras, Indian Institute of                           
              Science, Bangalore, Baharat Heavy Electric Co., Bangalore,                     
              The National Aeronautical Laboratory and the Bureau of                         
              Indian Standards in India, the National Institute for                          
              Standard and Technology (NIST) in the U.S., and the Union                      
              of Japanese Scientists and Engineers in Japan.  The topic                      
              of the conference is quite important to the U.S. and to                        
              India.  The publication of the proceedings will be helpful                     
              to workers in this field in the U.S. academic and                              
              industrial organizations, and could lead to collaboration                      
              with Indian scientists.  The project fits well with the                        
              objectives of the U.S.-India Cooperative Science Program.
