Title       : Parameterization of Vegetation for Meterological Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9017220

Award Number: 9017220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragutin Mihailovic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Pielke Sr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Novi Sad
	      
	      Novi Sad, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in climate change and mesoscale meteorology between Dragutin           
              Mihailovic of the University of Novi Sad's Institute of Field and              
              Vegetable Crops and Roger A. Pielke of Colorado State University is            
              to investigate land surface - atmosphere interactions.  These                  
              studies will contribute to improved weather and climate prediction             
              models and enhance understanding of climate impact on ecosystems and           
              the environment.  Yugoslav collaboration adds an international                 
              dimension to Dr. Pielke's NSF research grant on the Influence of               
              Surface Heat and Moisture Fluxes on Mesoscale Climate and Weather.             
              In his NSF grant, Dr. Pielke developed the RAM model (Regional                 
              Atmospheric Modeling).  The objective of this cooperation is                   
              improvement of the RAM through the development of finer                        
              specifications of land surface parameters.  Yugoslav involvement               
              consists of integrating soil and vegetation parameterizations into             
              the Colorado State RAMS model and testing its accuracy by using                
              field data derived from the agricultural belt of Yugoslavia.                   
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.  NSF's objective of advancing scientific knowledge will           
              be promoted through this joint scientific effort and complementary             
              expertise of the Yugoslav and U.S. scientists.
