Title       : Characterization of Quartz Coarse Silt Using Laser Micro- probe and Objective
               Cathodoluminesence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1991  
File        : a9017764

Award Number: 9017764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59403              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen K. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The quartz sediment provided by various source rocks can be                    
              characterized on the basis of physical and chemical properties.                
              Both have been used to evaluate the sources of quartz sand                     
              although the physical properties have been emphasized.  Chemical               
              properties have been used to characterize whole sediment samples               
              (a mixture of sediment size and mineral composition) or multiple               
              grains of a single mineral component but generally not for                     
              individual grains and specifically not for fine-grained quartz.                
              Indirect chemical properties observed using subjective                         
              cathodoluminescence (CL) petrography is applied to individual                  
              sand grains, but generally not for the finer quartz grains.                    
              Quartz coarse silt is an important component of mudrocks.  The                 
              purpose of this pilot study is to characterize attributes of                   
              quartz not previously determined on these fine particles.  LAMMA               
              laser microprobe and objective CL petrography will be used to                  
              document characteristics of quartz coarse silt liberated from                  
              various source rocks in a single drainage system.  Quartz coarse               
              silt will be collected from several first order streams each                   
              draining a single known source rock in the James River drainage                
              basin.  This quartz sediment from each source as well as the                   
              quartz in the source rock will be characterized using the two                  
              techniques.  This quartz, thus fingerprinted, can then be                      
              attributed to specific source rocks.  There are two immediate and              
              major applications of this pilot study.  First, demonstration of               
              the ability of these techniques to identify source rock of quartz              
              sediment will allow further studies to determine the dominant                  
              lithologies contributing silt to modern muddy environments, a                  
              topic presently debated but possibly not solvable with the                     
              commonly used tools at present.  Second, because the                           
              characteristics analyzed by these techniques are not expected to               
              be affected by diagenetic processes, they have the potential to                
              evaluate the sources of silt in mudrocks if it can be shown that               
              source rock types have unique and predictable characteristics.
