Title       : Nature and Theory of Severe Bora Storms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9017035

Award Number: 9017035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Vesna Jurcec   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hydrometeorological Inst
	      Gric 3  41000 Zagreb
	      Zagreb Yugoslavia, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in mesoscale meteorology between Vesna Jurcec of Zagreb's              
              Hydrometeorological Institute, F. Mesinger of Belgrade's Institute             
              of Meteorology and Ronald B. Smith of Yale University is to continue           
              their study of Bora wind storms using observational, numerical and             
              theoretical approaches.  The Bora phenomenon is a severe, downslope            
              wind storm occuring along Yugoslavia's mountainous Adriatic Coast.             
              Bora-like winds also occur in Utah, the Cascade Mountains of                   
              Washington, and along the Alaskan coast.  Thus, research on the                
              Yugoslav Bora can be applied to similar regions in the U.S.   The              
              investigators plan to continue to apply Smith's hydraulic model to             
              severe bora cases in the southern Adriatic.  Bora simulations are              
              planned using Dr. Mesinger's computer model on mountain airflow.               
              The Bora simulations, in turn, will be used to validate Dr.                    
              Mesinger's model.  The joint work with Smith will contribute to                
              better understanding of the particular Bora wind storm and extend              
              our abilities to predict other severe storms and weather phenomena             
              connected to mountainous regions.                                              
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.  NSF's goal to advance scientific knowledge is promoted           
              through the joint efforts and complementary expertise of the                   
              Yugoslav and U.S. investigators.
