Title       : Collaborative Research: Oxygen Evolution in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1990 
File        : a9017526

Award Number: 9017526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Aaron Diner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : E I Dupont De Nemours Co
	      PO Box 80173
	      Wilmington, DE  198800173    302/695-2791

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              This research is designed to determine how the structure of                    
              photosystem II (PSII) and associated cofactors mediate electron                
              transfer from water to the primary electron donor, P680.  The                  
              focus of this project is on the role of the D1 reaction center                 
              polypetide of PSII in oxygen evolution.  Mutant strains of                     
              Chlamydomonas which still accumulate PSII reaction center                      
              complexes but which show impaired electron transfer, particularly              
              on the oxidizing side of the complex are being identified and                  
              isolated by Dr. Jeanne Erickson at UCLA.  These mutants are being              
              characterized biophysically and compared to wild-type cells by                 
              examining:  1) the concentration of PSII reaction centers, 2) the              
              relative rates of electron transfer and the equilibrium constants              
              which govern electron transfer between the OEC, Z and the                      
              oxidized primary electron, P680+, 3) the quantum yield of primary              
              charge separation, 4) the amount of oxygen released in each of a               
              series of saturating light flashes and 5) the number of oxidizing              
              equivalents that can be extracted from the donor side before                   
              electron transfer is halted.  Altered optical and EPR                          
              spectroscopic signals arising from the oxidizing side of the                   
              reaction center as well as the concentration of the manganese                  
              cluster associated with PSII responsible for the oxidation of                  
              water to molecular oxygen are being studied in collaboration with              
              Dr. Gary Brudvig of Yale University.                                           
                                                                                             
              Terrestrial, aquatic and marine plants are the primary source of               
              renewable biomass on earth.  Through the process of                            
              photosynthesis plants convert radiant energy received from the                 
              sun into chemical energy.  This energy drives the conversion of                
              atmospheric carbon dioxide into sugars and other compounds, such               
              as fats and proteins, which are essential components of all                    
              living organisms.  Photosynthesis also results in the production               
              of oxygen, and this oxygen is crucial for sustaining all forms of              
              life that rely on respiration in order to provide the energy to                
              keep them alive.  The purpose of this research project is to gain              
              an increased understanding of the biochemical and physical                     
              reactions that take place during photosynthesis by plants,                     
              resulting in the production of oxygen and consumption of carbon                
              dioxide.  Most of this research will be done on a simple                       
              unicellular plant which is well suited to analysis by modern                   
              molecular biology and therefore provides an excellent model                    
              system for study.
