Title       : Collaborative Research: Regional Chronostratigraphic and Sequence Stratigraphic
               Analysis of Central Cordilleran Foreland Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1991  
File        : a9017871

Award Number: 9017871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. DeCelles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project consists of a detailed, regional                              
              chronostratigraphic, sedimentologic, and sequence stratigraphic                
              analysis of nonmarine rocks in the Upper Jurassic - Lower                      
              Cretaceous Morrison, Cloverly, and Kootenai Formations and the                 
              equivalent strata of the Gannett Group.  In order to integrate                 
              sequence stratigraphic analysis with the marine record of the                  
              foreland basin, the study will include bounding marine rocks in the            
              Sundance (Jurassic) and Thermopolis (Cretaceous) Formations.  Areas            
              of data collection include the Powder River basin and Black HIlls,             
              the Idaho-Wyoming thrust belt, and the area surrounding Great Falls            
              in west-central Montana.                                                       
                   Detailed facies analysis, point counts of petrographic thin               
              sections and conglomerate clast counts, outcrop mapping of fluvial             
              channel complexes, subsurface-to-surface correlations of                       
              geophysical well logs, detailed magnetostratigraphy, and fission-              
              track dating of euhedral zircons from selected ash-rich horizons               
              will be performed.                                                             
                   The principal results of this data base will be a complete                
              chrono - and lithostratigraphic framework for the Morrison-Cloverly            
              sequence and its equivalents to the west and north of Wyoming.  The            
              data base will span an area covering - 250,000 km , from the                   
              proximal part of the basin to near its eastern terminus.  Among                
              other important results will be (1) a sequence - stratigraphic                 
              framework for nonmarine rocks in both underfilled and overfilled               
              parts of foreland basins; (2) a new chronostratigraphically                    
              controlled model for early filling of the Cordilleran foreland                 
              basin; and (3) new and more complete understanding of the extrinsic            
              (tectonic, eustatic, climatic) controls on the early Cordilleran               
              foreland basin.  The results also will provide one of the largest              
              data bases for comparison with available and developing geophysical            
              models for foreland basins.
