Title       : Functional Domains in Rubisco SSU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1992   
File        : a9017419

Award Number: 9017419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans J. Bohnert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Subunits of multimeric enzymes have evolved interactive protein                
              domains by which assembly and activity are determined.  Ribulose-              
              1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco), with its two                 
              subunits, LSU and SSU, is an excellent model for studying such                 
              subunit assembly and interactions.  Extensive biochemical and                  
              physiological studies are available, including protein/gene                    
              sequences and crystallographic structures.  Rubisco SSU, which                 
              does not contribute any active site residues, is essential in the              
              L8S8 rubisco holoenzyme for activity.  This project will focus                 
              on the functions of domains in SSU in determining i) folding of                
              SSU, ii) assembly of active L8S8, and iii) SSU influence of                    
              kinetic parameters.  Two of these aspects have been extensively                
              studied by us (Wasmann et al., 1989; Ramage, 1990; Smrcka et all,              
              1990a,b) providing the basis for specific mutations which we will              
              introduce into SSU by site directed mutagenesis.  After site-                  
              directed mutagenesis, SSU genes will be expressed in bacteria and              
              assembled with soluble cyanobacterial L8 in vitro.  Assembly of                
              modified SSU will also be investigated following transport into                
              chloroplast.  Kinetics of activation, stability of substrate and               
              effector binding, and binding parameters of substrate analogs                  
              will be measured with holoenzymes composed of homologous and                   
              heterologous subunits.  Similar studies on higher plant rubisco                
              are prevented as LSU is extremely insoluble in the absence of                  
              SSU.  Therefore, altered SSU will be expressed and assembled in                
              vitro, in isolated chloroplasts, and in vivo, following                        
              inactivation of resident SSU expression by a ribozyme gene                     
              construct.  (As an intermediary step to establishing the                       
              functionality of ribozymes, ribozyme constructs and mutated SSU                
              will be tested in vitro, after electroporation of genes into                   
              mesophyll protoplasts).  The effect of modified SSU on several                 
              parameters of activity of higher plant rubisco will be                         
              determined.  The hypothesis is that SSU (cyanobacteria and in                  
              higher plants) compensates conformational changes induced by the               
              binding of substrate to the active site.
