Title       : Mechanics of Fish Interactions with Habitat Protuberances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1992  
File        : a9017817

Award Number: 9017817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Webb pwebb@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Swimming is a key factor in energy acquisition, energy                         
              expenditure, and survival of fishes.  The ability to efficiently               
              obtain food while avoiding becoming food for predators is                      
              strongly affected by the presence of structures such as rocks,                 
              weeds, windfall trees, corals, artifical reefs etc.  These                     
              structures are especially important in streams, oceanic currents,              
              and tidal flows.  The ability  of fish to use structures depends               
              on morphology and behavior which vary among species.                           
              Consequently interactions with habitat structure affect                        
              population dynamics, community compostition and the evolutionary               
              biology.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              In spite of the importance of structure to so many apsects of the              
              lives of fishes, there has been little research on mechanisms                  
              employed.  Our research will be the first attempt to provide a                 
              common mechanistic understanding and predictive model for fish                 
              interactions with the complex structures they prefer.   We                     
              examine behavior and swimming performance as fish use complex                  
              structure, determining imposed current velocity and fish                       
              morphology.  We expect our results will help explain habitat                   
              preferences in relatively stable or predictable situations such                
              as lower river reaches, many inland lakes, and offshore marine                 
              habitats.   We also believe our results will help explain how                  
              fish survive in or are excluded from more naturally stressful                  
              habitats, such a temperate streams and intertidal zones.                       
                                                                                             
              We believe our research will have impact on fisheries management.              
              Addition of structure is a common habitat improvement practice                 
              and field experience show that various stuctures can be used to                
              attract different fish species.  Our results should provide a                  
              predictive basis for such habitat improvement practices.
