Title       : IV International Conference on Retinal Proteins - July 22-28, 1990, Santa Cruz,
               CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9017089

Award Number: 9017089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto A. Bogomolni bogo@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This International Conference on retinal proteins, which is                    
              anticipated to have 130-150 attendees, will permit scientists                  
              from the United States and abroad to discuss recent developments               
              and ideas regarding the structure, function, genetics, evolution,              
              and molecular mechanisms of light sensing and energy conversion                
              by retinal proteins in prokaryotes, lower eukaryotes, and the                  
              visual rhodopsins of highly evolved eukaryotes.  Research on                   
              sensory and energy transduction mediated by retinal-containing                 
              chromoprotein pigments is currently underway in a large number of              
              laboratories in the United States, Europe, Japan, China and                    
              Israel.  A range of organisms among the archaebacteria, and                    
              eukaryotes are studied, especially with regard to energy                       
              conversion and chemo and photosensory transduction mechanisms.                 
              Approaches being taken are also very diverse.  They include                    
              behavioral studies, electrophysiology, genetics, biochemistry,                 
              spectroscopic, and molecular biophysical, ultrastructural, and                 
              immunocytochemical studies.  One of the purposes of this meeting               
              is to bring together investigators from many laboratories who use              
              a wide range of techniques to study molecular mechanisms of                    
              photo-sensory transduction and light energy conversion in a                    
              variety of systems, to compare results, and seek fundamental                   
              common principles.  Emerging homologies between the components of              
              sensory systems of microorganisms and higher eukaryotes make this              
              an opportune time to make detailed comparisons between higher and              
              lower organisms.  Accordingly, this meeting includes scientists                
              who study photosensory transduction in systems ranging from the                
              most primitive archaebacteria to higher vertebrates.  It                       
              includes also physiologists, biochemists and molecular                         
              geneticists, and biophysicists to present an integrated view of                
              the problems. Thus it provides a rare opportunity for the                      
              participants, particularly the young scientists, to acquire a                  
              broad background in the field.
