Title       : Jurassic Paleoceanography: Oxygen Isotope Study of Lower to Middle Jurassic
               Carbonate Strata in the Central High Atlas Mountains of Morocco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9017357

Award Number: 9017357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42215              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Bruce Railsback rlsbk@gly.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will determine the feasibility of a                            
              paleoceanographic project on Jurassic carbonates in the Central                
              High Atlas Mountains of Morocco.  The principal questions to be                
              addressed are: 1) Can the complexities of downslope transport be               
              overcome, so that fossils that lived in both shallow and abyssal               
              environments can be recovered for geochemical analysis? 2) Do the              
              isotopic compositions of those fossils result from depositional                
              conditions (i.e., are they unaltered), or have the isotopic                    
              compositions been changed during subsequent diagenetic events?                 
                   The relationship between depositional environment and                     
              morphology in Mesozoic brachiopods should help distinguish between             
              fossils from shallow and abyssal environments.  The second question            
              is to be addressed by a variety of geochemical and petrographic                
              analyses of the samples themselves, as well as by a broadly-focused            
              study of carbonate diagenesis in the area to determine regional                
              diagenetic trends.                                                             
                   Unaltered brachiopod material should display the fibrous,                 
              "keel and saddle" microstructure typical of pristine brachiopods,              
              should not cathodoluminesce, and should have trace element                     
              compositions in the range of compositions previously measured in               
              Jurassic brachiopods.  Isotopic compositions themselves are of use             
              in that covariant trends in     and     can often be used to                   
              distinguish between original signatures and altered compositions.              
                   Comparison of isotopic compositions of fossils and other rock             
              components should also help determine the reliability of brachiopod            
              compositions for paleoceanographic research.  For example, shallow             
              and abyssal brachiopods from the same locality will most likely                
              have differing isotopic compositions if they are well-preserved,               
              whereas identical compositions would suggest diagenetic alteration.            
              Similarly, if brachiopod compositions differ from those of other               
              fossils and cements or micrite, it would appear that burial                    
              reequilibration has not been extensive.                                        
                   These isotopic compositions will also be better understood in             
              light of a regional to sub-regional study of diagenesis in Jurassic            
              carbonates of the southern Central High Atlas Mountains.  Such a               
              study should allow estimation of the types of diagenetic fluids                
              that have passed through these rocks, as well as the flow paths of             
              those fluids.                                                                  
                   The combination of these approaches (direct observations,                 
              comparison with other rock components, and comparison with regional            
              diagenetic trends) should allow determination of whether isotopic              
              compositions of brachiopods from the Central High Atlas Mountains              
              of Morocco are suitable for paleoceanographic research.  If so, the            
              stage will be set for a study that should allow significant                    
              conclusions about Jurassic deep ocean circulation.
