Title       : Cambrian Ichnostratigraphy of the Eastern Basin and Range and Western Rocky
               Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1990  
File        : a9017385

Award Number: 9017385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan A. Ekdale ekdale@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research focuses on the utility of ichnofossils              
              (biogenic sedimentary structures) for biostratigraphy and                      
              paleoenvironmental studies in the eastern Great Basin and western              
              Rocky Mountains.  Four aspects of Lower Cambrian trace fossils will            
              be studied: ichnotaxonomy (systematic classification); mode of                 
              production (tunnels, open furrow, etc.); ichnostratigraphy;                    
              paleoecologic and paleogeographic implications.  Preliminary work              
              has revealed a great diversity and abundance of ichnofossils in                
              this area.  In addition, diverse fossil assemblages of potential               
              trace-makers also are present.                                                 
                   A revision of the taxonomic classification of arthropod trace             
              fossils will be undertaken, and a set of taxonomic criteria that               
              can be applied consistently across the group will be formulated.               
              Consideration will include patterns of morphology, mechanics of                
              construction, the type of structure (endogenic or epigenic), and               
              inferred trace-makers.  The stratigraphic distribution of trace                
              fossils within the Lower Cambrian of Utah and adjoining areas will             
              be documented, and the global significance of Cambro-Ordovician                
              stratigraphic models using ichnospecies of Cruziana and Rusophycus             
              will be assessed.                                                              
                   The mode of production of Cruziana and Rusophycus will be                 
              investigated by the examination of samples and the reproduction of             
              traces in sediment flume and aquarium experiments, using modern                
              trace-makers (e.g., insects and crustaceans).  Characterization of             
              relationships between ichnofacies and lithofacies (or lithotopes)              
              will be made to document benthic community relationships in the                
              early Paleozoic.  Trace fossils also can furnish detailed                      
              information about important environmental factors, such as                     
              substrate consistency, salinity, and sediment anoxia.  Patterns in             
              the distribution of these factors allow local paleogeography to be             
              inferred, which will allow existing regional paleogeographic models            
              to be defined more clearly than they are at present.//
