Title       : A Collaborative, Biogeochemical Study of the Jurassic Lower Oxford Clay, England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1991   
File        : a9017832

Award Number: 9017832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25419              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project is detailed isotopic biogeochemical study of the              
              Jurassic marine Lower Oxford Clay.  Its goal is to understand                  
              sedimentary microbial processes and how they affect preservation               
              of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur in organic and inorganic phases and             
              the relationship between those microbial processes and depositional            
              environments.  Effects of specific microbial processes and the                 
              environments in which they are prevalent will be identified.                   
              Results of analyses of organic-sulfur compounds in these rocks                 
              should provide new information on the role of these compounds in               
              the carbon-sulfur-iron system.                                                 
                   Samples for this study were collected from active quarries in             
              central England.  The quarry exposures allowed acquisition of                  
              large, fresh samples of this immature, organic-carbon-rich mudrock.            
              The samples, representing all stratigraphic horizons and biofacies,            
              were obtained in collaboration with experts on the vertebrate and              
              invertebrate paleoecology of the Lower Oxford Clay.  Measurements              
              (i) will include carbon, oxygen and sulfur isotopic compositions               
              of the extensive and well preserved biominerals in this unit; (ii)             
              carbon and nitrogen isotopic compositions of the organic materials             
              preserved in the bones and shells; (iii) abundances and carbon-                
              isotopic compositions of individual molecular fossils (i.e.,                   
              biomarkers); and (iv) abundances and sulfurisotopic compositions               
              of organic sulfur compounds and pyrite.  The results should provide            
              unique taphonomic information.
