Title       : Ternary Porosity Effects on Organic Attenuation by Clays in
               Clay/Organic/Electrolyte Ternary Systems Studied by Clay- Modified Electrodes
               and Low Angle X-ray Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1992   
File        : a9017273

Award Number: 9017273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alanah Fitch afitch@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313030   Solid Waste Disposal                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The main focus of this project in the Analytical and Surface                   
              Chemistry Program is the utilization of the electrochemical                    
              properties of clay modified electrodes to study the transport                  
              of species that should mimic the movement of organic pollutants                
              through a clay bed. Models for the kinetic process of ion                      
              exchange (adsorption) followed by partitioning reactions in a                  
              porous medium will be developed for multisweep cyclic                          
              voltammetry. These will be fast quasi-explicit finite                          
              difference models, and will be tested experimentally at a                      
              clay-modified electrode with a variety of compounds which                      
              should fall into different kinetic regions. The model will be                  
              used to predict the effect of electrolyte speciation in                        
              maximizing retention of an organic compound diffusing through a                
              clay bed. The role of porosity in controlling the reaction will                
              be monitored in situ by an electroactive probe whose current                   
              will be controlled purely by diffusion, which is, in turn,                     
              controlled by the porosity of the medium. A model has been                     
              developed which relates the porosity of a well-oriented film to                
              the interlayer spacing.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The results are expected to provide an improved understanding                  
              of several important processes which occur in the clays which                  
              are used to line chemical waste disposal sites.  Among these                   
              are the adsorption and absorption of chemicals by clays and the                
              shrinking and swelling of clays as solvents and electrolytes                   
              are absorbed.  It is also possible that the project will lead                  
              to the development of a rapid electrochemical method for                       
              measuring the porosity of clays.
