Title       : The Neoproterozoic Record of the Origin of Eukaryotes and Biogeochemical Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1991  
File        : a9017747

Award Number: 9017747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Knoll aknoll@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   The history of life is recorded in the fossil record.  Because            
              significant episodes of global-level environmental change have                 
              recurred in the earth's history, it is feasible to predict the                 
              effect of current levels of change on the earth's biota, by                    
              studying the fossil record before and after those important                    
              episodes.  Three types of information are necessary to interpret               
              this record effectively:  (1) a sound systematic framework (that               
              is, a consistent and biologically meaningful set of names and                  
              categories that are based on phylogenetic relationships) for                   
              discussing the fossils; (2) reliable stratigraphic placement (that             
              is, a framework for ordering fossil occurrences in space and time);            
              and (3) an independent record of environmental change that allows              
              placement of the biological record in the context of a dynamic                 
              planet (lithosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere).                  
              Although such data are routinely available for fossils deposited               
              during the past 540 million years, there is at present no                      
              comparable framework for interpreting older fossils, which                     
              constitute about 90% of life's history.  In this project, the PI               
              proposes to provide detailed systematic, stratigraphic, and                    
              environmental data for the fossils of organisms that lived 900-540             
              million years before the present.  This will almost double the                 
              period for which the life history of the planet can be studied in              
              detail.  More importantly, it is clear that the interval under                 
              consideration was a time of profound environmental change that had             
              a major influence on the subsequent course of evolution and, hence,            
              the diversity of life.  The derived data will help refine our                  
              understanding of a critical period in the Earth's environmental                
              and biological development.  The research is also of practical                 
              value in that the establishment of a reliable stratigraphic and                
              environmental framework will facilitate resource exploration in                
              rocks containing under exploited petroleum and ore deposits.
