Title       : RUI:Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Viscous Flow and Convective
               Heat Transfer in Helicoidal Heat Exchangers (REU Supplement)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9017732

Award Number: 9017732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259880             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. A. Ebadian EBADIAN@HCET.FIU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              This investigation is both experimental and theoretical.  The                  
              objectives of the proposed research are as follows:  (1) to                    
              develop a complete general solution for viscous laminar and                    
              turbulent flows in helicoidal pipes;  (11) to obtain the                       
              complete general solution of convective heat transfer for                      
              laminar and turbulent flows in helicoidal pipes and;  (iii) to                 
              repeat (i) and (ii) experimentally.  The specific objectives                   
              ar to obtain the flow fields and thermal properties in the                     
              listed cases for which rigorous analytical/numerical or                        
              experimental results are not available, and to present                         
              correlations, tables, and graphs for use in industrial                         
              application.  It is believed that the availability of accurate                 
              analytical, numerical and experimental results for these                       
              fundamental problems are important from academic and practical                 
              points of view and they will further enhance the research in                   
              this area.  The governing equations are non-linear.  These                     
              equation, by using the method of perturbation for laminar flow                 
              will be reduced to a set of ordinary differential equations.                   
              By the use of numerical methods, an algorithm will be                          
              developed for the evaluation of these equations.  The modified                 
              K-. Turbulent Model will be used to solve the governing                        
              equations.  For part (iii), an experimental set-up will be                     
              designed and used to obtain experimentally the fluid flow                      
              using laser doppler anemometry (LDA) and temperature field                     
              using data acquisition.  Experimental findings will be                         
              compared with the results of theoretical/numerical analysis to                 
              check the validity of basic assumptions and of various models                  
              available in literature.
