Title       : U.S.- U.S.S.R. Cooperation in Arctic Biological and Environmental Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1991      
File        : a9017017

Award Number: 9017017
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Kohl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U S Fish & Wildlife Serv
	      
	      Washington, DC  20240    /   -

NSF Program : 5202      ARCTIC RES & POLICY SUPPORT PR
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The US-USSR Agreement on Cooperation in the Field Environmental                
              Protection has had several sustained Arctic activities since its               
              beginning in 1972.  Area V deals with Biosphere Reserves and                   
              specific projects on northern wildlife, marine resources, and                  
              plants.  Five projects under Area X, Arctic and Subarctic                      
              Ecosystems, were formally agreed to at the January 1990 US-USSR                
              Joint Committee meeting in Washington D.C.  These include                      
              protection of the environment under oil and gas development,                   
              regional planning, ecological and cultural monitoring, cryospheric             
              processes, and joint activities adjacent to the Bering Sea.  This              
              Interagency Agreement will facilitate exchange of personnel during             
              1990 under Areas V and X of the Agreement.  These activities deal              
              with Alaska, the Soviet Far East and Siberia.  A Soviet group will             
              visit Alaska in June to exchange information on environmental and              
              operational practices associated with gas and oil developments.                
              And several small teams of scientists will participate in field                
              investigations including visits in the Noatak Biosphere Reserve,               
              Alaska, and Taimyr Peninsula, Siberia.  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife             
              Service will be responsible for the technical administration of the            
              joint activities.  The Arctic Staff of the Division of Polar                   
              Programs co-chairs Area X with the U.S. Geological Survey.  Soviet             
              groups include several Institutes of the Academy of Science, Gas               
              Ministry, and the State Committee for Nature Protection.  The U.S.             
              interagency cooperation fulfills U.S. Arctic Research Policy                   
              developed under the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984, to                 
              pursue mutually beneficial international activities.  It also                  
              fulfills a growing concern to protect the Arctic environment.
