Title       : Cell Biology of Echinoid Host Defense Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1991  
File        : a9017104

Award Number: 9017104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth T. Edds 7168313527  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term goals of this research are to understand the cellular            
              and molecular basis for host defense reactions in selected                     
              invertebrate systems.  These systems offer relative simplicity and             
              may represent a paradigm for vertebrate blood cells.  This proposal            
              deals with defining which of two cell types is involved in the                 
              formation of a large multicellular syncytium that functions in a               
              host encapsulation response in echinoderms.  Two distinct subsets              
              of coelomocytes will be separated from other coelomic fluid                    
              components, the subsets will be marked and their fate during fusion            
              will be followed.  The ultrastructure of apparent syncitia will be             
              studied to establish whether cell-cell interaction results in the              
              formation of true synsytia, and cytoskeletal linear elements that              
              may orient cortical flow and/or influence the formation of the                 
              cellular aggregate will be identified.  The relationship between               
              cytoskeletal motility and cell fusion events will be determined                
              using high resolution, digitally enhanced video microscopy.                    
              Cortical motility of cells that do and do not fuse will be                     
              compared, and patterns of cortical motility in cells after fusion              
              will be studied.                                                               
                                                                                             
              In sea urchins migratory phagocytic cells known as coelomocytes                
              play important roles in the organisms' defense mechanisms such as              
              engulfing foreign micro-organisms, wound repair, and blood                     
              clotting.  Some aspects of the defense reactions in these animals              
              involve the ability of the phagocytic cells to fuse with each                  
              other, which may be related to their ability to encapsulate                    
              invading parasitic organisms or to their clot forming ability.                 
              Very little research on the cell biology of these important defense            
              reactions in invertebrates has been done taking advantage of modern            
              techniques.  The results of this project will provide a detailed               
              analysis of the cellular events underlying the process of                      
              coelomocyte fusion and will lay the groundwork for further analysis            
              of the function of defense responses in these organisms.
