Title       : RAMHSS: Conservation, Processing and Computerization of the Diatom Collection of
               the California Academy of Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9017609

Award Number: 9017609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246386             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Kociolek pkociolek@cas.calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Diatom Collection of the California Academy of Sciences               
              is the largest systematic reference collection of its type in                  
              western North America.  It includes more than 37,000 prepared                  
              slides and hundreds of type specimens.  Marine, freshwater, and                
              fossil diatom samples from the western U.S. and the Pacific                    
              margin make this collection an internationally important                       
              resource.  Dr. John P. Kociolek, Curator of Diatoms, has                       
              initiated a multifaceted program aimed at improving the                        
              accessibility of the collection, and increasing its impact on                  
              systematic, evolutionary, and ecological research.  The donated                
              collections within the larger holdings will be integrated and                  
              entered into a computer database, and unprepared samples will be               
              processed into usable specimen slides.                                         
                   Natural history collections such as this are the foundations              
              on which diverse biological research is based.  Ecology,                       
              evolutionary biology, and biogeography are but three of the many               
              scientific disciplines that rely on systematic collections.                    
              Supporting the growth and improvement of these collections will                
              provide future generations of investigators with the essential                 
              tools of biological research.
