Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Purification and Physio- logical Activity of
               Lobster Cholecystokinin-Like Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9017003

Award Number: 9017003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen I. Selverston aselverston@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1193,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in behavioral                   
              neuroendocrinology between Dr. Allen I. Selverston, University                 
              of California at San Diego, and Dr. Dr. Allain Van Wormhoudt,                  
              Laboratory for Marine Biology, College of France, Concarnu,                    
              France.  The objective of the project is to purify, sequence                   
              and synthesize a crustacean CCK-like peptide from the spiny                    
              lobster Panulirus interruptus, and to determine its physio-                    
              logical activity on the gastric mill network in the stomato-                   
              gastric ganglion.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This peptide has profound modulatory effects on a simple                       
              neural circuit, the gastric mill circuit of crustaceans, and                   
              is involved in the feeding- induced activation of the gastric                  
              mill.  Obtaining a sequence from this peptide will allow the                   
              investigators to study in detail the mechanisms by which a                     
              neuropeptide activates and modulates a well understood neural                  
              circuit.  This project is of particular importance, since the                  
              lobster CCK-like peptide is the first peptide modulating the                   
              stomatogastric rhythms, whose patterns of release in the                       
              lobster have been shown.  The stomatogastric system has been                   
              for many years one of the most important and instructive                       
              model systems available for studying both the control of                       
              rhythmic patterns and its modulation by various neurotrans-                    
              mitters. This project will take advantage of the known                         
              information to enhance our understanding of these modulatory                   
              processes.  The project will benefit from the mutual expertise                 
              of the two investigators:  Dr. Selverston is a leader in the                   
              field of small systems neurobiology and Dr. Von Wormhoudt is                   
              an experienced biochemist who has studied CCK in other                         
              crustacea.
