Title       : Perceptual Properties of Electrical Stimulation in the Gustatory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1990    
File        : a9017320

Award Number: 9017320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Di Lorenzo diloren@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The brain has pathways of nerve fibers that run between cell                   
              groups, to carry information in a code, since the signal itself                
              is simply the firing pattern of individual nerve fibers.  Two                  
              major kinds of coding have been proposed.  One proposes that                   
              each fiber from a sensory organ carries a certain kind of                      
              information alone, so that for example a class of fibers from                  
              the tongue are active only when there is a sweet substance but                 
              not when there is a sour one; this coding is called a "labelled                
              line."  The other proposes that the brain takes in the varied                  
              pattern of activity from a whole group of fibers, where each                   
              one has a somewhat different response to a whole range of                      
              stimuli, and determines from the overall pattern that one                      
              taste, for example, is "more sweet" while another is "more                     
              sour"; this coding is called the "across-unit pattern."  This                  
              proposal uses a novel exploratory approach of artificial                       
              stimulation in the taste pathway to try to mimic the sensory                   
              activity.  Stimulation to mimic the neural responses to sugar                  
              taste will be paired to licking of plain water by the animal,                  
              and the animal will be conditioned to avoid that experience.                   
              If the behavioral taste aversion is transferred to cause                       
              avoidance of naturally licking other sweet substances, then                    
              this technique will be validated as an important way to study                  
              what features of spatially and temporally distributed patterns                 
              of input are important for the brain to act on in producing                    
              relevant behavior.  Results will be important to virtually all                 
              sensory systems, and to bioengineering/computational models as                 
              well, because of the active interest in how labelled lines or                  
              parallel processing work in distributed systems.
