Title       : Presidential Young Investigator: Application of Group Transfer from Metals to
               Olefins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9057740

Award Number: 9057740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Jacobsen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Eric N. Jacobsen is being funded by the Organic Synthesis                  
              Program as a Presidential Young Investigator.  He will be                      
              studying the development of enantioselective catalysts for                     
              organic synthesis.  The oxidation of unfunctionalized olefins                  
              will be the first reaction that he will explore.                               
                                                                                             
              Facial selectivity in group transfer to a prochiral olefin can                 
              be controlled by purely non-bonded interactions or by                          
              constraining the degrees of freedom in diastereometric                         
              transition states through substrate pre-coordination.                          
              Catalytic systems are being developed based on both principles.                
              A series of chiral manganese complexes have been designed which                
              catalyze epoxidation of isolated and unfunctionalized olefins                  
              by iodosoarenes with up to 33% enantiomeric excess.  The                       
              ligands for these complexes are readily prepared by                            
              condensation of chiral diamines with salicylaldehyde                           
              drivatives, permitting systematic variation of their steric and                
              electronic properties.  Current efforts are directed toward                    
              tuning the steric environment surrounding the reactive site in                 
              order to increase enantioselectivity to synthetically useful                   
              levels and to use observed stereochemical preferences to map                   
              out the trajectory of olefin approach to the intermediate metal                
              oxo species.  The results with six catalysts prepared to date                  
              and examination of a crystal structure of the most effective                   
              system have allowed a detailed transition structure for                        
              oxygen-atom-transfer from manganese to olefin to be developed.                 
              This model is now being refined by systematic variation of                     
              metal, ligand, and substrate; the elucidation of a transition                  
              structure which holds predictive value with regard to                          
              stereochemistry will also provide mechanistic insight into the                 
              general question of oxygen-atom transfer from metals to                        
              olefins, an important step in a wide range of laboratory,                      
              industrial, and biological processes.
