Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Precision Finishing of Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1995     
File        : a9057916

Award Number: 9057916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Chandrasekar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Ceramics are widely used in precision electronics and                     
              biological applications such as sensors, bio-implants, and                     
              magnetic heads, and have potential for use in mechanical                       
              components such as engines and bearings.  In view of the high                  
              accuracy required, ceramic surfaces for these applications are                 
              generated primarily by slicing, grinding and fine finishing                    
              processes such as lapping and polishing.  The processes alter the              
              near-surface mechanical and electromagnetic properties of the                  
              ceramic causing their performance in systems to deteriorate.                   
              Therefore, a critical need exists to understand these effects and              
              to be able to control them through suitable finishing/post-                    
              finishing processes.  The goal of this research is to understand               
              the science and technology of ceramic finishing to generate                    
              atomically smooth surfaces of high quality.                                    
                   The research will use well developed surface                              
              characterization techniques such as x-ray diffraction, electron                
              and tunnelling microscopy to characterize the near-surface                     
              deformation in finished ceramic surfaces.  It will quantify                    
              deformation induced changes in the near-surface electromagnetic                
              and mechanical properties.  A series of studies will be carried                
              out to understand the material removal mechanism during fine-                  
              finishing and its influence on the near-surface properties.  By                
              integrating the process-property understanding developed above,                
              fine-finishing processes will be developed for generating ceramic              
              surfaces with controlled surface quality.
