Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Fundamental Mechanisms of Heat and Mass
               Transport With Phase Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9057258

Award Number: 9057258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Condensation in multispecies systems can be dramatically                       
              different from single-component condensation in enclosures.                    
              Variation of species concentration along phase boundaries can                  
              result in large, nonlinear decreases in condensation rates,                    
              with strong impacts on the fluid mechanics.  Experiments show                  
              that semi-stagnant multispecies systems can exhibit complex                    
              bifurcation behavior and large pressure fluctuations, but only                 
              approximate modeling techniques are available, even for                        
              steady-state recirculating conditions.  Here new numerical                     
              techniques for boundary conditions are being combined with                     
              laser holography experiments to determine species                              
              distributions.  In a second area of research, conjugate heat                   
              transfer effects on nuclear boiling will be investigated under                 
              conditions of strong convection, as occur in critical flashing                 
              flows in nozzles, pipes, and cracks.  Conjugate heat transfer                  
              in the wall material will result in some wall subcooling at                    
              the temperature inflection point where bubble nucleation                       
              occurs.  Under conditions where this wall subcooling is large,                 
              bubble nucleation will be depressed and large liquid                           
              superheats observed, strongly altering the flow dynamics.                      
              This new hypothesis provides good correlation of existing                      
              experimental data over wide superheat ranges, but study of                     
              heat transfer under high velocity flashing conditions is                       
              required to permit nonempirical modeling.  A third topic of                    
              interest is multiphase transport in porous materials.                          
              Under certain conditions, experiments have shown solute                        
              leaching and transport are enhanced under unsaturated                          
              conditions.  Most studies however, particularly for geologic                   
              repositories for high-level nuclear waste storage, assume                      
              saturated conditions as "worst case" scenarios.  Here research                 
              is focusing on two and three-dimensional transport in                          
              unsaturated systems, paying particular attention to the waste                  
              forms of species affecting leaching rates, ion exchange and                    
              mass transfer, and coupling between the fluid mechanics and                    
              temperature, concentration, and pressure fields.                               
                                                                                             
              When gas, vapor, liquid, and solid phases coexist, the                         
              fundamental mechanisms of heat and mass transport can be                       
              greatly complicated by behavior at phase interfaces.  Often                    
              the location, thermodynamic state, and heat and mass transport                 
              across the phase interfaces cannot be modeled or even measured                 
              experimentally.  These difficulties are being addressed by                     
              research on three specific topics, with primary application to                 
              nuclear and conventional energy conversion systems, and                        
              processing and storage systems for nuclear and chemical                        
              wastes.
