Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1997      
File        : a9057420

Award Number: 9057420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Packard pack@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is to provide research support to Dr. Packard under                  
                                                                                            
              the National Science Foundation's Presidential Young                           
              Investigator Awards (PYIA) Program.  The objectives of the                     
              PYIA Program are to provide support to the Nation's most                       
              outstanding and promising young science and engineering                        
              faculty.  The awards are intended to improve the capability of                 
                                                                                             
              U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand for highly                 
                                                                                             
              qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and                   
              industrial research and teaching.  Dr. Packard's field of                      
              research is applied mathematics, with emphasis on linear                       
              algebra and control.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The research to be done can be split into three topics:                        
              analysis, design and modeling. Specifically:                                   
              (1) Analysis of linear fractional transformations- The                         
              motivation for this comes from control system design where it                  
                                                                                             
              is often natural to model individual components as a nominal                   
              model, along with a linear fractional perturbation set, which                  
                                                                                             
              together are called the "model pair".  The structured singular                 
                                                                                             
              value (ssv) of a matrix is the conceptual mathematical tool                    
              which answers many questions about the behavior of the matrix                  
                                                                                             
              when it is perturbed in a linear fractional manner.  The PI                    
              will use these tools to study the optimal synthesis of linear                  
                                                                                             
              systems.  His main theoretical goal is to develop a more                       
              unified approach which includes both one-dimensional, and                      
              multidimensional (for example, image processing) systems.  The                 
                                                                                             
              ssv will be the starting point for this research, since both                   
              types of systems, system properties (such as stability and                     
              input/output norms), and the robustness of these properties,                   
              are equivalent to ssv tests.                                                   
              (2) Robust Control Design- He plans to study computational                     
              problems with H-infinity design and the optimal                                
              diagonally scaled problem (the diagonal scaling "tricks" H-                    
              infinity into designing robust closed loop systems).                           
              (3) Modeling- Improved models alleviate the problems of                        
              plant/model mismatch.  He plans to use ssv and H-                              
              infinity to produce sets of models from existing  modeling                     
              tools, rule out model pairs via measurements (invalidation),                   
              and produce models from measurements (identification).  He                     
              plans to experimentally verify these theoretical models.
