Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Robust Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9057292

Award Number: 9057292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evanghelos Zafiriou zafiriou@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is to provide research support to Dr. Zafiriou                      
              under the National Science Foundation's Presidential Young                     
              Investigator Awards (PYIA) Program.  The objectives of the                     
              PYIA Program are to provide support to the Nation's most                       
              outstanding and promising young science and engineering                        
              faculty.  The awards are intended to improve the capability of                 
              U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand for highly                 
              qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and                   
              industrial research and teaching.  Dr. Zafiriou's field of                     
              esearch is process control theory and applications.                            
              In particular, he will to work in three areas:                                 
              (1) Model Predictive Control (MPC): MPC algorithms use a model                 
              to predict future values of the process outputs.  Modeling                     
              error creates the need for designing controllers                               
              which are robust with respect to model/plant                                   
              mismatch.  The problem is more complex when hard                               
              constraints are present either as physical                                     
              limitations or as performance and safety                                       
              specifications, because in that case the overall                               
              closed-loop system is nonlinear, even if the plant                             
              dynamics are assumed linear.  His goal is                                      
              development of computer-aided design and tuning                                
              methodologies that directly account for modeling                               
              error.                                                                         
              (2) Batch Control: Optimal control theory is often used to                     
              determine the input profiles for fed-batch (semi-batch)                        
              processes.  These profiles, however, may not                                   
              perform well when applied to the actual process,                               
              since they are only optimal for the model that was                             
              used.  The PI is looking at the development of                                 
              methods that appropriately modify the input                                    
              profile during  the course of successive batches,                              
              by utilizing both the model and plant information                              
              from the previous batches.  This work is                                       
              applicable to both polymerization and biochemical                              
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              (3) Neural Computing in Process Control: The PI's focus will                   
              be on the use of neural networks for sensor/actuator                           
              failure detection.  Significant interactions exist between the                 
              operation of a control system and that of the diagnostic                       
              module.  The main source of these interactions is the presence                 
              of model-plant mismatch.  He will be examining the use of                      
              neural networks for distinguishing between patterns                            
              characteristic of control system failure and those                             
              corresponding to performance deterioration caused by modeling                  
              error.
