Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Empirical Studies in Industrial Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9057511

Award Number: 9057511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Wolak wolak@zia.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This award provides support to Dr. Frank Wolak under the National         
              Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards Program.           
              The objective of this program is to provide research support to the            
              Nation's most outstanding and promising young science and engineering          
              faculty.  The awards are intended to improve the capability of U.S.            
              academic institutions to respond to the demand for highly qualified            
              science and engineering personnel for academic and industrial research         
              and teaching.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                   This award will allow the investigator to pursue his research in          
              the areas of theoretical econometrics and industrial organization.  All        
              of his research is motivated by the desire to link economic theory to          
              empirical data.  While the role of his methodological work is to               
              provide better econometric techniques for accomplishing the goal of his        
              empirical work, the goal of his empirical work is to derive and                
              estimate econometric models based on economic theory and then to test          
              the validity of the economic theory embodied in these models.  It is in        
              this synergistic fashion that Dr. Wolak intends to focus on integrating        
              the innovative theoretical work modeling firm and industry behavior            
              with the empirical realities of the global semiconductor market, public        
              utility regulation, and the nature of spatial competition among firms          
              as revealed in the context of U. S. electric utility coal purchases.           
              In his analysis of the global semiconductor market, special emphasis           
              will be given to assessing the impact of the increased Japanese                
              penetration into this market on the stability of the world and U. S.           
              markets.  Dr. Wolak's subjection of problems involving inequality              
              restrictions to rigorous hypothesis testing and his empirical                  
              implementation of game-theoretic models of firm interaction exemplify          
              the way in which he brings his unusual set of important skills to bear         
              on bridging the gap between theory and practice.  Dr. Wolak's work has         
              been and will continue to be very effective in achieving a more                
              rigorous fit between economic theory and empirical data as he                  
              dynamically draws upon theory to inform data collection and data to            
              inform the development of theory.
