Title       : Quorum Sensing in Vibrio fischeri: Cell Density Regulation in Global Control of
               Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9808308

Award Number: 9808308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett P. Greenberg epgreen@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1112      GENES AND GENOME SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It has recently been appreciated that quorum sensing, the ability of a bacterial
              species to monitor its own population density and activate specific sets of
              genes at appropriate cell concentrations, is a common trait. This trait is
              critical to the success of bacteria in adapting to changes in environmental
              conditions. The classic example of quorum sensing is the luminescent, symbiotic
              bacterium, Vibrio fischeri. Recent evidence indicates there are two quorum
              sensing systems in V. fischerii, one that is known to control expression of a
              set of genes including the luminescence genes and one that presumably controls
              another set of genes. With the exception of the luminescence genes, the target
              genes for the two quorum sensing systems remain undefined. The specific aims of
              this research project are to identify the genes controlled by each of the two
              quorum sensing systems and to determine whether control of individual genes is
              direct or indirect. Two main approaches will be taken to identify target genes.
              I. Wildtype and V. fischeri quorum sensing mutants will be employed to identify
              proteins expressed at higher levels with or without each of the signal
              molecules. This approach will involve pulse-chase radiolabeling of cellular
              proteins. II. Transposon mutagenesis of a V. fischeri quorum sensing null
              mutant with promoter probe vehicles will be employed to screen for and identify
              genes that require for their expression the presence or absence of either of
              the quorum sensing signals. The two main approaches to determine whether quorum
              sensing control of target genes is direct or indirect will be: I. To measure
              transcription of target genes in vitro. II. To examine expression of lacZ
              fusions to target gene promoters in recombinant Escherichia coli. Luminescence
              gene regulation is the best studied model of quorum sensing in gram negative
              bacteria. In this model and in other systems it has become clear that the role
              of quorum sensing in the general regulatory circuits of the cell is complex,
              yet this has not been investigated systematically. This research will open a
              new area of study in bacterial cell-to-cell communication.
