Title       : Database for the Analysis of Neuronal Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9808738

Award Number: 9808738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $993032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwen A. Jacobs gwen@nervana.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Ellisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denbigh Starkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DBI 9808738; Jacobs, Gwen; Montana State University

NeuroSys is a
              prototype database developed under prior NSF funding which contains
              
information about the anatomy and functional attributes of neurons. NeuroSys
              also 
contains information about measured and hypothetical relations between
              neurons. In 
addition an advanced visualization program for dynamic synthesis
              and animation of 
ensemble activity patterns has been integrated into this
              database environment. Finally, an 
advanced neural simulation program has also
              been integrated with this environment. 
Through the use of these advanced
              query and analysis tools, it is now possible to 
formulate queries which
              predict dynamic activity patterns of large neuronal ensembles 
across multiple
              processing stages within an animal's nervous system. These features 
elevate
              the utility of the database far beyond that of a sophisticated data repository,
              and 
provide an enabling tool for the formulation of hypotheses related to
              neural computation, 
plasticity and development. The general goals of this
              work are to extend the capabilities, 
transportability and general utility of
              this prototype system, and to distribute this system to 
all interested
              researchers in the neuroscience community. Specific aims are as
              follows:

Ñ	The functionality of the graphical user interface and its links
              to data analysis programs 
will be enhanced by modification of the
              architecture to accommodate distributed data 
and new software tools more
              effectively, and to allow users to conduct complex queries 
without affecting
              the data of other users. 

Ñ	The data acquisition, analysis and query tools
              will be enhanced to accommodate several 
new data types, including a)
              Voxel-based representations of individual neurons and/or 
objects as density
              clouds derived from confocal microscope images, b) time-series data 
generated
              from single and multi-electrode recordings, and c) surface-rendered and
              vol-
ume-rendered structures derived from microscope images of objects traced
              from sec-
tioned tissue samples. 

Ñ	A link will be created between the
              database/workspace environment and three popular 
neural modeling
              programs.

Ñ	New software tools will be implemented to facilitate the
              configuration of the system for 
other users. Those tools will include a
              program to generate and customize the query 
interface/GUI, and a program to
              generate database tables from a set of user-defined 
inputs

Ñ	The user base
              will be extended to the general neuroscience research community. As 
part of
              this process, the system will be validated through a beta test program, the
              stabil-
ity and transportability of the tools across several hardware and
              software platforms will 
be increased, and an interface will be developed for
              web-based access and data entry. 

Ñ	The current multi-disciplinary training
              environment for bioinformatics at Montana 
State University will be supported
              and extended, through directed and independent 
research projects based on
              aspects of the project. A set of coursework modules will then
              
be

Ñ	developed for classroom use via a Java-based web interface to the
              database and tools. 
These modules will be used in a number of courses
              locally, and will be made available 
to the general public via the
              web.

This project will be carried out as a coordinated effort between two
              sets of neuroscience 
and computer science researchers: one group at MSU and
              the other group at UCSD. This 
project is a core component in the NPACI
              Neuroscience Thrust Area, and will leverage on 
a wealth of technical
              expertise and computer resources at the San Diego center.


