Title       : Upgrade of a Synchrotron Radiation Beamline for Surface 
Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9808022

Award Number: 9808022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dowben pdowben@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Moewes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eizi Morikawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie A. Langell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip T. Sprunger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              will assist faculty in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the
              University of Nebraska to upgrade a Synchrotron Radiation Beamline for use in
              surface chemistry research.   The upgraded beamline will be used to study the
              electronic band structure as a function of wave vector in molecular crystals
              and ordered overlayers.  Photoemission studies of the molecular orbitals will
              be used to ascertain bond mechanisms and molecular orientation.  Research will
              be conducted in three primary areas: 1) the study of band structures of
              adsorbate overlayers and molecular crystals; 2) molecular orientation
              determined by angle resolved photoemission; and 3) the chemistry of oxide
              surfaces.

Crystalline arrays of large molecules are used to form one
              dimensional conductors, organic semiconductors, nonlinear optical materials,
              ferroelectric and photorefractive materials.  Molecular crystals and polymers
              are widely used in high density optical storage devices and high speed optical
              fiber communications systems.  Photorefractive holographic data storage is
              based on the electro-optical properties of nonlinear optical molecules
              incorporated into photoconductive polymers.  An understanding of the electronic
              structure of these materials is crucial to their performance.  Studies
              initiated with this upgraded photoemission resource will enhance the ability of
              these investigators to study such materials.
