Title       : Growth Management and Modernization of the Ephemeroptera Collection at Florida
               A&M University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9808827

Award Number: 9808827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Hubbard michael.hubbard@famu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Peters  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT      DBI 9808827  William L. Peters 
              Florida State University      Recent large donations of Ephemeroptera
              (mayflies) to Florida   A&M University have  made this university collection
              one of the largest and most  significant collections of mayflies in North
              America. As these  donations exceed normal growth, this project is concerned
              with  the management and preservation of incoming collections and 
              modernization of the entire  Ephemeroptera collection. Specific objectives are
              a) to continue  to assure the integrity of all  type and voucher material
              arriving at Florida A&M University;  (b) to upgrade storage of the  Berner
              collection;  (c) to integrate the Traver and Edmunds  collections into the
              existing  Ephemeroptera collection; and  (d) to house the Ephemeroptera 
              collection in steel storage  cabinets in such a way as to make them easily
              accessible for  revisionary work and future  growth management.    The
              donations include the transfer of the entire Berner  collection (including the
              Lyman  collection) from the University of Florida and a portion of the  Edmunds
              and Traver collections  from the University of Utah to Florida A&M University.
              The  greatest significance in the Berner  collection is the historical record
              for the mayflies of the  Southeastern United States.  Additional material comes
              from many other areas, including  Africa. The Berner collection is a 
              specimen-based collection, so that any published record can be  accessed by
              specimen in a  few minutes using a system of card catalogs and indices. In the 
              time the Berner collection  has been at Florida A&M University, it has been the
              source of  frequent loans as revisions of  North American mayfly genera or
              species must return to the  published Berner distributions.  The Edmunds and
              Traver collections are worldwide in scope, with  greatest strength in the 
              Neotropical representatives of Leptophlebiidae and  Leptohyphidae. The Edmunds
              and Traver collections contain type  material for over 100 sp ecies, including
              55 primary types.    Specific curatorial needs for these collections include 
              replacing all bakelite lids on 16  oz jars with polypropylene closures,
              replacing all rubber-lined  closures on a 50-year  assortment of different
              sized jars with standard-sized museum  jars (16-oz, 32-oz) and  polypropylene
              closures, and disintegrating stoppers. All  collections, those in racks and
              those  in jars, will be placed into steel storage cabinets. For future  access,
              they will be stored  phylogenetically by family or superfamily group. All type 
              material in alcohol will be curated  into a double storage vial system (inner
              and outer vials) in  museum jars.
