Title       : RNA Processing Regulation of Immunoglobulin Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9808637

Award Number: 9808637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha L. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   Peterson  MCB-9808637   The mouse immunoglobulin mu gene is an
              established model system for studying regulated RNA processing during B
              lymphocyte development. This gene contains a site subject to either
              cleavage-polyadenylation or splicing; the efficiencies of these two competing
              reactions must be balanced. The relative use of these two processing options is
              modulated as B cells mature to plasma cells; plasma cells produce relatively
              more RNA cleaved and polyadenylated at the mu-s polyA site. Evidence to date
              has suggested that the gene structure, rather than Ig gene-specific sequences,
              is required for regulation. The regulatory mechanism must, therefore, involve
              changes in components of the general RNA processing machinery.
              Cleavage-polyadenylation activity increases as B cells mature to plasma cells.
              In addition, preliminary evidence suggests that splicing activity differs
              between B cells and plasma cells. Thus, the mechanism regulating mu processing
              likely involves changes in both the cleavage-polyadenylation and splicing
              activities. This project will extend current studies to further the
              understanding of  the mechanism regulating mu alternative RNA processing, of
              splice site choice, and of cleavage-polyadenylation site usage in general.
              Toward these ends, the changes in splicing activity will be explored by two
              different approaches. Sequences that contribute to differential splicing
              activity will be identified using a splice enhancer-requiring gene. These
              sequences will be identified in the mu gene and in a chimeric gene whose
              splicing is regulated in B cells and plasma cells.  Any sequences that activate
              splicing will be used to identify RNA binding proteins by a combination of RNA
              gel shift, UV cross-linking, and antibody identification procedures. A second
              approach will use the suppression subtraction hybridization technique to find
              genes encoding products relevant to RNA processing whose expression differs
              between B cells and plasma cells. The cleavage-polyadenylation reaction  will
              be further studied by examining sequences from the mu-s polyA site that
              potentially affect cleavage-polyadenylation activity in novel ways. Sequences
              far downstream and upstream from the polyA site both contribute to its
              activity. To understand better the function of these sequences, additional
              site-directed mutational analyses and in vitro cleavage-polyadenylation and
              binding assays will be performed. To determine if the upstream sequences are
              involved in interactions between splice and cleavage-polyadenylation reactions,
              in vitro assays using conditions that couple these reactions will be performed.
              As regulation is predicted to involve changes in general splicing and
              cleavage-polyadenylation factors, these proposed approaches will provide
              information on splice and cleavage-polyadenylation enhancing sequences and
              factors in general, as well as contribute to the understanding of the
              regulatory mechanisms operating during lymphocyte maturation.  Alternative RNA
              processing is a mechanism by which eukaryotic cells expand the coding capacity
              of their genomes: more than one product can be made from a single gene.
              Alternative RNA processing is often regulated such that different mRNA's are
              made in different cell types or during different stages of cellular
              development. How this alternative RNA processing is regulated is only beginning
              to be understood. This project examines the alternative processing of the
              immunoglobulin gene - the alternate products are either a secreted protein or a
              membrane-associated protein whose relative abundance changes during B
              lymphocyte development. Information gained from this research will contribute
              to our knowledge of RNA processing reactions in general and of the regulation
              of these reactions.
