Title       : NMR Studies of RNA Enzymes and Aptamers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9808072

Award Number: 9808072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juli Feigon feigon@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Feigon  MCB 9808072    1. Technical  Multidimensional, multinuclear NMR
              spectroscopy will be used to determine the structures and investigate the
              folding and cation binding of RNA molecules.  Two systems will be studied:  (1)
              the hairpin ribozyme from the tobacco ringspot virus satellite and (2) a
              cyanocobalamin-binding RNA aptamer. The hairpin ribozyme is a 50 nucleotide
              catalytic RNA that is essential for rolling circle replication of the tobacco
              ringspot virus satellite (sTRSV) RNA.  Hairpin ribozyme catalysis results in
              the cleavage of an RNA substrate with formation of 2'3' cyclic phosphate and 5'
              hydroxyl termini, as observed for the hammerhead and hepatitis delta ribozymes.
               However, the hairpin ribozyme secondary structure, folding topology, and role
              of cations in catalysis are distinct from other known ribozymes.  The secondary
              structure of the sTRSV hairpin ribozyme with substrate consists of two domains,
              A and B, each of which contains an internal loop flanked by Watson-Crick paired
              helices.  The structure of domain A has been previously determined by NMR
              studies.  The first part of this study will determine the structure of the
              isolated domain B, using multidimensional, multinuclear NMR spectroscopic
              methods on 13C,15N-labeled RNA. For the larger RNAs, specific and random,
              fractional deuteration is employed. Domain B contains a UV-crosslinkable
              subdomain which is also found in several other RNAs, and its structure will
              also be determined.  Once the domain B structure has been characterized, the
              ribozyme without substrate will be studied, and finally the intact ribozyme.
              Results from this study should complement the existing information on the
              molecular biology and biochemistry of the hairpin ribozyme, and provide new
              insights into RNA catalysis, how RNA folds, and the possible role of cations in
              nucleating folding. The cyanocobalamin (Vitamin B12) aptamer is an in vitro
              selected RNA that binds to cyanocobalamin with high specificity and affinity
              (Kd ~ 90 nM).  The mode of binding of the aptamer to  cyanocobalamin is of
              interest because a variety of biologically important reactions, including the
              conversion of ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides, are carried out by
              cobalamin-dependent enzymes, and it has been proposed that many of these
              reactions were originally catalyzed by RNA enzymes.  The consensus sequence of
              the aptamer indicates an unusual pseudoknot fold.  The structure of a minimal
              aptamer of 31 nucleotides which contains consensus sequence and retains high
              specificity and affinity to the substrate cyanocobalamin will be studied. 
              Since this aptamer has been shown to have a specific Li+  requirement for
              binding, the cation dependence will also be investigated.  The results should
              provide new insights into RNA tertiary structure motifs and how RNA can
              recognize and bind specific ligands. Knowledge of the structure should help in
              optimizing the hairpin ribozyme constructs currently being investigated as
              therapeutic agents against viral infections.        2. Nontechnical 
              Multidimensional, multinuclear NMR spectroscopy will be  applied to determine
              the structures and investigate the folding and cation binding of RNA molecules.
               Two systems will be  studied: (1) the hairpin ribozyme from the tobacco
              ringspot virus satellite and (2) a cyanocobalamin-binding RNA aptamer.  The
              hairpin ribozyme is a 50 nucleotide catalytic RNA that is essential for rolling
              circle replication of the tobacco ringspot virus satellite (sTRSV) RNA.  The
              cyanocobalamin (Vitamin B12) aptamer is an in vitro selected RNA that binds to
              cyanocobalamin with high specificity and affinity (Kd = 90 nM).  The mode of
              binding of the aptamer to cyanocobalamin is of interest because a variety of
              biologically important reactions catalyzed by RNA enzymes, including the
              conversion of ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides, are carried out by
              cobalamin-dependent enzymes.  The structural studies of the cyanocobalmin
              binder should provide new insights into RNA tertiary structure motifs and how
              RNA can recognize and bind specific ligands .  The structural studies of the
              hairpin ribozyme should complement the existing information on the molecular
              biology and biochemistry of the hairpin riboyzme, and provide new insights into
              RNA catalysis, how RNA folds, and the possible role of cations in nucleating
              folding. In addition, basic knowledge of the structure should help in
              optimizing the hairpin ribozyme constructs currently being investigated as
              therapeutic agents against viral infections.      PROJECT SUMMARY          A-2
