Title       : Structure of RNA and its Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9808127

Award Number: 9808127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Rich cbeckman@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Rich  MCB 98-08127      1. Technical    Our understanding of the
              biological function of RNA is enhanced considerably by knowledge of its
              three-dimensional structure.  The general objective of this study is to
              determine various RNA three-dimensional structural motifs by single crystal
              X-ray crystallography.  Since the biological activity of RNA is often expressed
              through the proteins that it interacts with, this study aims at solving the
              structure of RNA binding proteins in conjunction with the RNA.  The flow of
              genetic information involves the production of mRNA and its subsequent
              translation into protein.  That process is often modified by a translational
              regulator.  In bacteriophage T4 production, the protein regA is a translational
              regulator that modifies protein synthesis in 35 mRNAs.  The three-dimensional
              structure of that protein has been solved, and this study is to co-crystallize
              the protein with one or more of its RNA substrates in order to understand the
              mechanism of messenger selection.  An important RNA conformational motif is the
              pseudoknot in which the RNA strand folds back on itself in a specific manner.
              The RNA pseudoknot changes the mRNA reading frame and is an important component
              of many viral infections. The structure of the RNA pseudoknot from the Beet
              Western Yellow Virus has been solved in the P.I.'s lab previously. Experiments
              in this study examine if its three-dimensional structure provides insight into
              how this RNA conformation acts to change the reading frame in translation. The
              editing enzyme double-stranded RNA adenosine deaminase has several RNA binding
              domains, as well as a binding domain for left-handed Z-DNA.  This study is to
              express the RNA binding domains and co-crystallize them with double-stranded
              RNA substrates.  The results may provide insight into the editing mechanism of
              this enzyme.  The E3L protein encoded by Vaccinia virus also contains a
              double-stranded RNA binding motif as well as a Z-DNA binding motif.  Solution
              of its crystal structure w ith nucleic acid binding components may provide
              insight into its mode of action.         Abstract    Rich  MCB 98-08127    2.
              Non-technical    Information in biological systems is encoded primarily in the
              DNA of the genome.  Segments of the DNA are used to direct the synthesis of RNA
              which is active in directing the synthesis of proteins.  However, RNA itself
              has a consider-able impact in monitoring and changing the way in which genetic
              information is expressed.  In order to understand how this occurs,  a general
              objective of this study is the determination of the three-dimensional structure
              of RNA using single-crystal X-ray analysis.  Once the three-dimensional
              structure of RNA is known, a better understanding of how it acts in biological
              systems can be achieved.  The flow of genetic information involves the
              production of RNA and its subsequent translation into proteins.  However, that
              process is often modified by a regulator, that is a protein that binds to the
              RNA that directs protein synthesis.  This study concerns the system that is
              found in the bacteriophage T4 in which a protein called regA binds to selective
              regions of messenger RNA and regulates its translation. The three-dimensional
              structure of the regA protein was earlier solved, which allows pursuing the
              structure of its complex with segments of messenger RNA to which it binds.  It
              is the nature of this binding interaction that determines how much protein is
              synthesized.  Another example in which RNA determines the amount of protein
              formed is found in the folding of RNA into a structure which is called a
              pseudoknot.  That is, the structure is folded in double-stranded regions, but
              it is not a genuine knot, hence pseudoknot.  The pseudoknot acts on the
              translational system and regulates the amount of protein that is formed. The
              three-dimensional structure of the RNA pseudoknot obtained from a Beet Western
              Yellow Virus using X-ray diffraction analysis was also solved. This structure
              information is used to study how a pseudoknot acts i n modifying protein
              synthesis.  Another RNA modification may be seen in an enzyme which binds to
              double-stranded RNA and changes the chemical nature of the nucleotides in the
              RNA.  This is called an editing enzyme because it changes a component of the
              messenger RNA which, in turn, changes the identity of a particular amino acid
              in a protein.   Another aim of this study is thus to understand how this
              editing enzyme works and how it binds to double-stranded RNA to carry out this
              editing activity.  Toward this end segments of this enzyme are to be
              crystallized and solved for their structures when bound to double-stranded RNA,
              so that the mechanics of the editing process can be determined.  The general
              theme of this research is to understand how the three-dimensional structure of
              RNA and its interaction with proteins changes the flow of genetic information
              in biological systems, resulting in modifications in the way proteins are made.
                           2
