Title       : Activity-Dependent Growth Cone Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9808919

Award Number: 9808919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Lnenicka gregL@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808919  LNENICKA    The electrical activity, or "use" of the  nervous system
              plays an important role in its development,  maintenance, and modification.  In
              particular, electrical activity  can influence the development of mechanisms
              involved in regulating  the internal calcium concentration ( Ca++ i) of nerve
              cells.  The  regulation of  Ca++ i is very important since internal calcium 
              regulates a broad spectrum of events ranging from neuronal growth  during
              development, to communication between neurons in the adult,  to cell death in
              the aging nervous system.  Recent findings show  that activity-dependent
              changes in calcium regulation influence  the growth and degeneration of axons
              (the elongated portion of the  nerve cell that forms connections with other
              cells).  The growing  tip of the axon, the growth cone, controls the extent and
               direction of axon elongation and, thus, allow the formation of  appropriate
              connections during development and nerve regeneration.  The actions of growth
              cones are regulated by changes in  Ca++ i  resulting from calcium entry through
              channels and calcium removal  through its binding to calcium-buffering
              proteins, uptake into  organelles, and extrusion across the outer cell
              membrane.  Moderate changes in  Ca++ i can influence the rate of growth, and 
              large increases in  Ca++ i can produce axon retraction and  degeneration. 
              Increased electrical activity strengthens calcium  removal, influencing the
              response of the growing axon to  environmental cues as well making it more
              resistant to  degeneration.  Dr. Lnenicka has planned experiments to identify 
              the calcium-removal processes that are strengthened by increased  electrical
              activity, and to determine whether altered activity  produces changes in the
              sensitivity of the growth cone to  Ca++ i.  He will also examine the effect of
              increased electrical activity  upon the structure of growing axons.  Finally,
              the mechanisms  through which electrical activity produces these neuronal
              changes  will be explored.  These st udies are possible by utilizing the 
              relatively simple nervous system of the crayfish, where large  identified cells
              with differences in activity and growth cone  properties can be directly
              examined.  Dr. Lnenicka has previously  developed a cell-culture system of
              identified crayfish neurons,  and in these studies, he will use time-lapse
              video-microscopy to  follow the developing growth cones in the cultures under
              various  treatment conditions.  Calcium removal processes will be examined  by
              measuring the changes in  Ca++ i in growth cones with the  fluorescent calcium
              indicator, fura-2.  Axon and growth cone  structure will be examined with light
              and electron microscopy.  These studies will advance our knowledge of the basic
              mechanisms  of nerve regeneration and the influence of experience on the 
              formation and plasticity of the nervous system.
