Title       : A Public Molecular Recognition Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9808318

Award Number: 9808318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Gilson gilson@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DBI 9808318; Gilson, Michael; University of Maryland

Molecular
              recognition, the noncovalent binding of specific molecules to each other, is
              
fundamental to biology. Examples include antibody-antigen recognition and the
              binding 
of hormones to their receptors. Data on what molecules bind each
              other and how tightly 
they bind is currently published almost exclusively in
              journals. This sharply limits the 
amount of information that may be published
              and makes even simple queries impossible.

It is proposed to develop the
              first public, web-accessible database with information on 
molecular
              recognition. The initial release will be modest in scope, but will be carefully
              
planned and designed to support rapid future expansion. The database
              will:

Contain measured binding affinities for proteins, nucleic acids,
              carbohydrates and other 
natural and synthetic molecules; 

allow deposition
              of experimental details of the binding measurements;

include structural
              information from the Protein Data Bank and links to structures in the
              
Cambridge Structural Database; 

allow for a range of queries including
              SQL, sequence, and chemical-substructure 
searches;

provide analysis tools
              for correlating structure with thermodynamics.

be subject to continuing
              evaluation by users, depositors, and a scientific advisory board.

Workshops
              involving prospective users and depositors will guide the development of the
              
data dictionary and the user interface The implementation will be facilitated
              by extensive 
previous work in biomolecular informatics by the proposers.
              Thus, the data dictionary will 
be developed as an extension of the mmCIF
              dictionary an internationally accepted format 
for biomolecular structure. A
              relational data management system will be used for most 
queries. The Property
              Object Model developed by one of the proposers will also be used to 
support
              property-oriented queries such as those involving 3-D substructure searches.
              The 
database will be accessed primarily via the WWW; mirror sites on both
              coasts will be used 
to shorten response times and to provide backup service.
              The project will undergo 
continuing evaluation via several mechanisms,
              including a Scientific Advisory Board that 
will meet publicly to review
              progress and provide guidance.

This cross-disciplinary project will impact
              molecular biology, structural biology, 
bioinformatics, and chemistry. The
              database will advance knowledge of the functions of 
biomolecules, of the
              relationships between molecular structure and binding, and of the 
physical
              chemistry of molecular recognition. It will also lead to new and improved
              
methods of designing molecules that bind targeted receptors. Such molecules
              will be 
useful as novel biological effecters and will also be used in a range
              of applications 
including assays, sensors, and chemical separations.

