Title       : Homosynaptic Long-Term Depression: Mechanisms and Role in Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9808930

Award Number: 9808930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Glanzman dglanzman@physci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9808930         Changes  in  the  strength of connections 
              (synapses)  between  neurons  in  the  brain  are believed by  most 
              neuroscientists  to  underlie learning and memory. Synapses in the brain may
              increase in  strength, or decrease in strength, as a consequence of learning 
              by  an animal. One prominent form of a change in synaptic strength that  occurs
               in  the mammalian brain is known as homosynaptic  long-term  depression or
              LTD. LTD is a decrease in the strength of a  synapse,  lasting  60 minutes to
              hours, produced by low-frequency stimulation  of  a  presynaptic neural
              pathway. Many synapses in a part  of  the  brain known as the hippocampus
              exhibit LTD. Because the hippocampus  plays  an important role in learning and
              memory in mammals,  it  is  thought  that  LTD  might represent a neural
              mechanism  of  memory.  Despite  a half-decade of work on LTD in the
              hippocampus,  however,  relatively little is understood about the cellular
              mechanisms  that  underlie  LTD. Furthermore, even less is understood regarding
               what  role LTD of hippocampal synapses might play in learning and memory. 
              Part  of  the  difficulty  is that the  hippocampus  is  a  complex  structure.
               Moreover,  the  types  of  learning  that  involve  the  hippocampus are
              difficult to understand on a neurobiological level.  The  goal  of the present
              project is to study the role  of  LTD  in  learning and memory in an animal
              with a simple nervous system.  The  hope   is  that  the  insights  gained  by 
              studying  the  cellular  mechanisms of LTD, and its role in learning, in a
              relatively simple  organism  will  help us to understand the mechanisms and 
              learning-  related  role  of  LTD  in  the brains of more  complex  organisms, 
              including  man.  Toward  this end the  PI  will  study  LTD  in  an 
              invertebrate  organism, the marine snail Aplysia californica.  This  animal 
              possesses a relatively simple nervous system  and  exhibits  several  simple 
              forms of learning. Furthermore, a  great  deal  is   already  known  about the
              neural mechanisms of Aplysia's  behavior.  The PI has previously shown that
              synapses between sensory and motor  neurons  in the nervous system of Aplysia
              can exhibit LTD.  The  PI  will analyze the cellular mechanisms of LTD of the
              synapses between  sensory  and  motor neurons in Aplysia. The PI will also 
              determine  whether LTD plays a role in a simple form of learning exhibited  by 
              Aplysia known as long-term habituation. The results of this project  should 
              provide important general insights regarding  the  cellular  mechanisms  of LTD
              and the role that LTD plays in learning.  It  is  expected  that  these 
              insights will advance  knowledge  about  how  nervous systems mediate learning
              and memory.
