Title       : Appetitive and Consummatory Reward Systems in the Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9808865

Award Number: 9808865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl B. Neill dneill@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9808865  LAY ABSTRACT         The idea of a "reward system" in the brain has
              become popular in  neuroscience in the past decade. The most common idea is of
              a single  reward system; the favorite candidate for such a system is the 
              mesoaccurnbens dopamine system, originating in the ventral tegmental area  of
              the midbrain and terminating in the nucleus accumbens of the  forebrain. The
              experiments in the proposal are designed to test the idea  of two separate
              reward systems. One centered in the nucleus accumbens,  receives a
              glutamatergic input from the subiculum and a dopaminergic  input from the
              ventral tegmental area. It is involved in activating the  motor programs of
              "appetitive" behaviors, such as exploration and  locomotion. The second,
              centered in the ventrolateral striatum, receives  a glutamatergic input from
              the sulcal prefrontal cortex and and  dopaminergic input from the substantia
              nigra. It is involved in  activating the motor programs of "consummatory"
              behaviors, particularly  feeding.       The experiments are largely devoted to
              behaviorally examining  hypothesized roles of glutamatergic, dopaminergic, and
              GABAergic  neurotransmission at the accumbens and ventrolateral striatal nodes
              of  these functionally distinct systems. This will be done by intracerebral 
              microinjections of drugs, which affect specific receptor subtypes of the 
              glutamatergic, dopaminergic, and GABAergic systems. The injections are 
              proposed to modify responding of rats for electrical self-stimulation of 
              ventral subiculum or sulcal prefrontal cortex in ways consistent with  known
              electrophysiological effects of these drugs.       These experiments also
              emphasize the idea that these "reward  systems" are actually "behavior
              systems," wherein dopamine modulates  activity in hierarchically organized
              neural systems of cortical origin.  Self-stimulation of subiculum and sulcal
              prefrontal cortex develops very  slowly; the development seems dependent upon
              the number of stimulations,  not the number of responses. Thus  it appears more
              like neural activity-  dependent plasticity than response-dependent learning.
              To examine this  phenomenon, the investigators will test the idea that the
              development of  this brain stimulation reward depends on activity at glutamate
              receptors  of the NMDA subtype.
