Title       : Direct and Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9808629

Award Number: 9808629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Rauter cmraut0@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Proposal Number:  9808629
PI:  Rauter, Claudia
              
Title:  Direct and Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care

Parental
              care, where either one or both parents provide resources or protection of their
              offspring, is widespread among nearly all animal tax. There is a large
              literature within behavioral ecology on the importance and consequences of
              parental care behavior.  Not all individuals perform parental care in the same
              way.  Environmental causes of differences in parental care behavior among
              individuals in a species have been extensively studied.  However, less well
              studied are genetic components of such variation in parental care behavior. 
              This research will provide empirical data on the extent to which genetic
              effects are responsible for variation in parental care in a burying beetle,
              Nicrophorus oricollis.   These data will permit estimation of evolvability of
              parental care; i.e. they will provide information on the extent of evolutionary
              change that is possible in parental care behavior in this beetle species. 
              Further these data will provide information genetic influences on traits that
              may be correlated with the behavioral variables, such as morphological,
              physiological and life historical characters.  Such genetic correlations can
              reflect functional groups of traits and will provide insights into any traits,
              other than behavior, associated with parental care.  The research will foster
              our understanding of the evolution of parental care and why parental care may
              vary among individuals in a species.

