Title       : Database of Classified Proteins Based Upon a Composite Property Description
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9808706

Award Number: 9808706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya N. Shindyalov shindyal@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip E. Bourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  Proteins are aptly referred to as nature's building blocks.  Understanding
              how these proteins function is key to  understanding life's processes.  On the
              other hand,  understanding why these proteins do not function, or function 
              incorrectly, tells us much about particular diseases and  illnesses. 
              Therefore, it is not surprising that the amount of  experimental data available
              on proteins, like most other  biological data, are growing exponentially as we
              attempt to  unravel these mysteries.  Effective use of these data requires 
              usable and current databases.  Most public databases contain  only one form of
              data, either sequences, structure, and to a  lesser extent functional
              information, on a large variety of  loosely classified proteins.  While these
              resources are  clearly very useful, other types of resources are needed that 
              are publicly available yet can be maintained at very low cost.  This project
              encompasses the development of one such database  that will contain an
              automated classification of proteins  based on an extensive set of properties
              more properties than  considered by any other resource.  The Database of
              Classified  Proteins (DCP) is a generalization of previous work for  supporting
              information specifically on the protein kinase  family of enzymes (see
              http://www. sdsc.edu/kinases).  The DCP  will contain an extensive set of
              physical and derived  properties (a composite property description) including 
              sequence, structure, evolutionary information (e.g.,  correlated mutations) and
              functional sites (initially derived  from structure but later predicted from
              the composite  description).  New protein structures deposited with the PDB 
              will be, where possible, aligned to an existing composite  property description
              defining a protein family.  The outcome  of this work will be an all-by-all
              comparison of proteins for  which structures are known derived using the
              compute resources  of the National Partnership for Advanced Computational 
              Infrastructure (NPACI).  That comparison wil l be publicly  available as the
              DCP and maintained on a 7/24 basis.  The DCP  will provide new opportunities
              for comparing proteins and  visualization tools are pro-posed to make this
              possible  through the Web.  The DCP should provide new insights into  protein
              function by revealing hitherto undiscovered functional  sites.  Furthers the
              DCP should be useful as a fold  recognition database for use in threading
              sequences with  unknown structure on to known folds.  The DCP will contain 
              much more information than could hitherto be applied to the  structure
              prediction problem.  ***
