Title       : Role of Vaospressin and Oxytocin in Development of Partner Preferences and
               Parental Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9808814

Award Number: 9808814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25163              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa M. Lee terrilee@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Microtine rodents are an ideal genus in which to study  the role of the
              environment on the covariation of  affiliative social relationships and
              patterns of paternal  and maternal behaviors, and to determine what 
              neurobiological variations are responsible for these  behaviors. Extensive
              field and laboratory data are available  on a number of closely related species
              with different social  and parental patterns of behavior. Microtus ochrogaster 
              (prairie voles) are primarily monogamous, with pair-bonding  and biparental
              care. In contrast, Microtus montanus (montane  voles) are promiscuous breeders
              and males rarely share the  nest of the female or care for young in the field. 
              Intermediate between these two extremes is Microtus  pennsylvanicus (meadow
              voles), which have a non-monogamous  mating system. During the summer breeding
              season, males are  rarely found in the nests of females or seen caring for 
              young. However, during the colder months of the year, males  are found in the
              field nests with the female and pre-  weanling young. Successful meadow vole
              colonies are rare and  cost only slightly more than mice to maintain. In
              contrast,  starting a new colony from wild caught individuals is  difficult,
              costly and time consuming. Thus, maintaining a  colony for access by other
              researchers and to maintain our  ongoing research examining variation in
              reproductive  behaviors across closely related species is valuable and 
              cost-effective.  During a year of support, while seeking  additional sources of
               funding,  the PI will continue to test the hypothesis that  photoperiod and
              duration of cohabitation will influence the  formation of partner preferences
              and paternal behavior in  non-monogamous meadow voles, and behaviors may be
              equivalent  to those of monogamous prairie voles under some conditions.  Dr.
              Lee will determine the rate of development and the  extent of partner
              preferences demonstrated by male and  female meadow voles cohabiting under
              winter or summer  photoperiods and paternal behavior  of males. By manipulating
               the environment (photoperiod), the PI expects to alter the  amount of
              affiliative and paternal behavior of meadow voles  and the rate at which these
              behaviors develop. Because males  in summer conditions are aggressive towards
              unfamiliar  animals and not prepared to live in groups, while animals in 
              winter conditions live in groups and are not aggressive, Dr.  Lee hypothesizes
              that full paternal care will be evident in  male meadow voles housed in SD
              without prior exposure to  pups. Alternatively, she may find no influence of 
              photoperiod on development of affiliative behaviors or  paternal behavior,
              indicating that seasonal changes in  sociality may not correlate with altered
              development of  these behaviors.
