Title       : Conflict Over Male Production in Stingless Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9808809

Award Number: 9808809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Strassmann strassm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Queller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nontechnical  Abstract  Proposal Number:  9808809 PIs:  Strassmann and  Queller 
              The theory of kin selection, which has been  supported by numerous studies,
              predicts that  there will be conflicts within social insect  colonies, yet they
              display extraordinary degrees  of cooperation.  An important possible 
              explanation is that if workers have a collective  interest, they may use their
              greater numbers to  win conflicts and suppress other parties, in  particular
              the queen.  Strassmann and Queller  will test this theory in stingless bees, a 
              large, tropical group closely related to honey  bees. Specifically, they will
              study conflict  over male production. Using DNA microsatellite  markers to
              precisely "genetically fingerprint"  individuals, they will determine who
              produces  the males (queen or workers) and whether this  result indicates that
              workers do reproduce  directly or if worker reproduction is  suppressed. They
              will also perform observations  to test theoretical predictions about the
              degree  of behavioral conflict such as overt fighting  that occurs in colonies,
              and contrast the  results with similar research done on honey  bees.  This
              research is expected to reveal much about  the expression and resolution of
              genetic  conflicts within social groups.  This is a topic  of importance not
              only for social insects, but  also for all other social organisms.  It also 
              bears on the coherence of other levels of  biological organization, such as
              multicellular  animals and the eukaryotic cells.  Finally, the  research will
              also increase basic knowledge of  an important group of tropical pollinators.
