Title       : LEXEN: Biodiversity of Microorganisms in Ancient Polar Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9808676

Award Number: 9808676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott O. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Castello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Starmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Rogers, Scott
9808676

A surprising number and variety of
              microorganisms can be recovered from the interior of deep-core samples of polar
              ice in Greenland and Antarctica, perhaps dating back 250, 000  years. Although
              filamentous fungi, yeast, bacteria, and a plant virus have recently been
              detected in samples of this ancient ice--carefully protected from modern
              contaminants--systematic surveys of these cores for microbes have not been
              conducted These discoveries confirm the opinion that glacial (polar) ice is a
              natural air-sampling mechanism, which has trapped wind-transported
              microorganisms through geological epochs. These organisms (representing taxa
              that are endemic to the polar regions, as well as exotics from temperate and
              tropical regions) originated from aerosols generated by sea wave action,
              wind-borne pollen and soil particles, infected plant surfaces, and many other
              sources. Thus, glacial ice provides a unique global source of microorganisms
              that presents a view of both contemporary and ancient fungal, bacteria!, and
              viral diversity.

The main goal of this work is to characterize microbial
              biodiversity within ancient communities of fungi, bacteria, and viruses for
              comparative studies with contemporary species. Specific objectives are to:
              identify and characterize endemic and exotic fungi, bacteria, and viruses
              entrapped in glacial ice; identify those in ice of the same age from both
              Greenland and Antarctica; and study phylogeny and longevity in selected
              persistent species. A potential objective of this study is to use the above
              profiles to compare the relative proportions of the various fungi, bacteria,
              and viruses, and to correlate these with environmental characteristics
              (climatic conditions, vulcanism, etc.) at each of the time points.
              

Hypotheses to be tested are: First, viruses that infect humans, animals,
              plants, and bacteria are present and can be detected in polar ice. Second,
              identical fungi, bacteria, and viruses occur in ice of the same age from
              Greenland and Antarctica. Third, specific fungi, bacteria, and viruses (or
              their nucleic acids) persist in ice over long periods of time.

Profiles of
              successively older ice strata from cores collected in Greenland and Antarctica
              will be utilized to test the hypotheses.  The proposed temporal and spatial
              analyses will extend the assessment of microbial biodiversity to geologic
              timeframes. If identical microbial species can be detected in ice of similar
              age collected from both polar regions, as evidence of global distribution, they
              might then be utilized in subsequent studies as bioindicators of global changes
              in climate, and geologic and human activity. Thus, bipolar studies are
              essential. 

The protocols developed and tested may contribute to future
              searches for microorganisms in Martian polar ice or recently discovered lunar
              ice. Therefore, for comparative purposes it will be essential to know what
              microorganisms are present in ancient Earth ice.


