Title       : Genetic Dissection of the Specificity of Leucine Zipper Dimerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9808474

Award Number: 9808474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Hu jimhu@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                HU  MCB 9808474    1. Technical     How proteins recognize other proteins is
              of fundamental importance in  virtually every biological process.  Leucine
              zippers, which form a variety of small alpha-helical oligomers, provide an
              ideal system to study the forces determining the stability and specificity of
              protein-protein interactions. This study builds on earlier genetic studies to
              examine how amino acid sequences determine the dimerization specificities of
              leucine zippers.  Previously, mutant zippers with altered dimerization
              specificities were isolated with changes at the a, e, and g positions of the
              characteristic heptad repeat (abcdefg)n.  Mutants with substitutions at the a
              positions fell into mutually exclusive classes and clear rules predicted their
              specificities.  In contrast, the dimerization specificities of mutants altered
              at the e and g positions were complex and inconsistent with simple predictive
              models involving intersubunit ionic interactions. Two classes of questions will
              be addressed.  First, how do the thermodynamic stabilities of homodimers and
              heterodimers determine the specificities of these mutant and wild-type zippers?
               Thermodynamic parameters for homodimeric and heterodimeric leucine zipper
              peptides will be measured by circular dichroism and fluorescence methods. 
              Second, how do sequence patterns at the a, e, and g positions affect
              dimerization specificity?  New mutants will be isolated using selections and
              screens for particular patterns of homodimer and heterodimer formation that
              were not found in earlier studies.  The specificities of mutants will be are
              compared to naturally occurring leucine zippers, evaluated in a common assay. 
              These data should provide a critical test of models and algorithms designed to
              predict dimerization specificity.    2. Non-technical    A variety of small
              alpha-helical peptides is enriched in the amino acid leucine, and such a family
              of structures  is hence named leucine zippers. These sequences pr ovide an
              ideal system to understand the forces determining the stability and specificity
              of protein-protein interactions, as many proteins dimerize by interacting
              through their leucine zippers.  In this study, mutated sequences with changed
              dimerization specificities or with substitutions are compared, using circular
              dichroism and fluorescence methods. The questions to be addressed are: (1) how
              do the thermodynamic stabilities of homodimers and heterodimers determine the
              specificities of these mutant and wild-type zippers?  and (2) how do sequence
              patterns at specific positions affect dimerization specificity?  These results
              will provide a critical test of models and algorithms designed to predict
              dimerization specificity of proteins.
