Title       : Structural Dynamics of Actin-Myosin Function in Cytokinesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9808240

Award Number: 9808240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Fishkind Fishkind.l@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The cytoskeletal microfilament protein, actin, and its molecular motor,
              myosin, play critical roles in fundamental eukaryotic cellular functions that
              involve movement, whether whole cell locomotion or intracellular movements such
              as cytokinesis (cell division).  The overall goal of this project is to gain a
              more thorough understanding of the actin-myosin mediated contractile mechanisms
              that govern cell shape, movement and division by characterizing the
              organization of actin and myosin in intact cells and by identifying the
              molecular interactions involved in regulating cytoskeletal assembly and
              function. The apparent interplay between force production and assembly of the
              contractile apparatus has important implications in mechanically regulating
              cell division.  To address this problem, it is critical to obtain more complete
              information on the molecular organization of actin and myosin during active
              cell division.  As with muscle contraction, knowledge of both the global
              orientation and polarity of actin filaments is crucial to determining how
              forces are applied to the membrane, while information on the molecular
              organization of myosin is essential to understanding how and where force
              production is generated during cell division.  The experiments will focus on
              understanding the structural assembly and regulation of actin-myosin in
              actively motile, dividing cells using a combination of imaging, biochemical,
              biophysical, and molecular biological approaches.  Specifically, experiments
              will focus on mapping the global organization, orientation, polarity, and
              interaction of actin and myosin filaments followed in live dividing NRK cells, 
              with subsequent analysis of molecular structure using high-resolution
              ultrastructural methods.  Methodology will include high-resolution, single-cell
              analysis on actively dividing cells and single cell correlative light and
              electron microscopy methods, combined with the development and application of a
              variety of molecular probes for actin and myosin function (including
              conventional fluorescent reagents, GFP-analogs, and photoactivatable caged
              probes) to define the molecular structure, filament polarity, and axial
              organization of actin and myosin within actively cleaving cells.  This work is
              expected to produce the first structural-dynamic analysis of actin-myosin
              contractility in dividing cells, and will directly test specific aspects of the
              "contractile ring" hypothesis originally put forward in the literature nearly
              30 years ago.  The results of these studies will provide a comprehensive
              integrated understanding of the biomechanical basis for cell cleavage, and will
              provide a foundation of knowledge for subsequent experiments addressing the
              role force plays in regulating actin-myosin based contractility in cytokinesis.
                





