Title       : Regulation of DNA Elimination in Paramecium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9808285

Award Number: 9808285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Forney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Forney
9808285
Developmentally controlled DNA rearrangements commonly occur in
              eukaryotic cells and include examples such as the somatic recombination of
              immunoglobulin genes in mammals and mating type switching in yeast.  Ciliated
              protozoa provide a unique and rich source of developmentally controlled DNA
              rearrangements.  They occur on a massive scale during each round of sexual
              reproduction in which the macronuclear genome is formed from the germline
              micronuclear DNA.  The entire genome is remodeled by events that include site
              specific chromosome breakage, de novo telomere addition and the precise removal
              of DNAs called internal eliminated sequences (IESs).  More than 10,000 IESs are
              excised from the Paramecium genome during the few hours required to form a new
              macronucleus.  These relatively small DNA sequences (27-882 bp) are located in
              open reading frames as well as in non-coding regions.  Recent studies of
              Paramecium IESs have identified a consensus inverted terminal repeat that has
              similarity to the ends of transposons in the Tc1/mariner family.  This is the
              most widespread of all class II (DNA) transposon families.  Members have been
              found in nematodes, insects, fungi, and mammals.  It is possible that the
              precise and highly efficient excision of IESs in Paramecium evolved from
              transposons.  The primary objective of this proposal is to identify the cis
              acting DNA elements that regulate IES excision.  This will be accomplished with
              two methods.  1) The isolation and analysis of mutant cell lines that are
              defective for IES excision, and 2) the use of an in vivo assay to analyze
              mutations inside and flanking a 28 bp IES.  Mutants will be isolated by
              treating mutagenized cells with anti-serum against the A surface protein.  The
              A gene contains seven IESs within the coding region and failure to eliminate
              any IES prevents A protein expression.  A-mutants surviving the treatment with
              anti-serum will be isolated and the subclass with defects in IES excision will
              be identified.  This procedure has proven successful for the isolation  of
              mutants containing defects in IES excision.  The in vivo assay will allow any
              nucleotide to be analyzed for its function in DNA excision.  Site-directed
              mutations will test the hypothesis that the consensus inverted terminal repeat
              is required for IES excision.  Deletions of the flanking DNA sequence will
              determine whether sequences outside the 28 bp IES are required for
              excision.

Studies of the extensive DNA elimination events during Paramecium
              macronuclear development may uncover novel molecular mechanisms or provide
              insight into similar but less common DNA rearrangements in other organisms. 
              The relationship between Paramecium IESs and the Tc1/mariner transposons could
              reveal the evolutionary transfer of an activity originally encoded by a
              transposon into a function used by the host cell.


