Title       : Molecular and Genetic Studies of Endogenous Transposons in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a9808215

Award Number: 9808215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel M. Crawford ncrawford@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Crawford
9808215
Tag1 is an autonomous element in Arabidopsis thaliana that is
              a member of the Ac (or hAT) superfamily of elements that duplicates 8 bp of
              genomic sequence upon insertion.  The pattern of Tag1 excision shows that the
              timing of excision is restricted in shoot development producing independent
              germinal revertants and very small somatic sectors in leaves, sepals, and
              siliques, behavior similar to that of Mutator in maize.  In some cases, Tag1
              somatic excision shows a burst of activity during the mid to late stages of
              leaf expansion that follows a wave from the leaf tip/edges to the petiole,
              similar to what has been described for sink to source transitions that occur in
              leaves.  Transcription of Tag1 produces a major 2.3 kb transcript that encodes
              a putative transposase with nuclear localization sequences and whose abundance
              increases dramatically following Agrobacterium-mediate transformation with Tag1
              sequences.  The long term goal of this research is to elaborate the mechanisms
              and identify the host genes that control the timing of Tag1 excision.  The
              present aims are to (I) determine how the timing and pattern of Tag1 excision
              activity during leaf expansion correlate with sink to source transitions in
              Arabidopsis and how environmental and genetic factors affect Tag1 excision
              behavior, (II) identify mutations in both Tag1 and the Arabidopsis genome that
              alter the timing and pattern of excision, (III) identify the sequences within
              Tag1 that activate transcription of endogenous Tag1 elements following
              transformation and (IV) identify transposase components and transposase binding
              sites required for Tag1 excision.

Transposable elements provide powerful
              tools for studying genetic and molecular mechanisms that control development. 
              Their transposition produce sectors that follow the cell lineages of the host
              and generate new mutations in the host's genome.  These properties have been
              exploited for mutagenesis, gene shuttling, gene isolation and cell lineage
              studies.  Analysis of the frequency and timing of transposition have revealed
              transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms (including methylation,
              alternative splicing and promoter activation) that control when and where
              transposition occurs.  These studies will advance our knowledge of the
              developmental and genetic control of transposition in plants, improve the
              usefulness of Tag1 as a tool for genome analysis and contribute to our
              understanding of how genomes evolve and how developmental processes are
              regulated.

