Title       : Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus (STEDT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9808952

Award Number: 9808952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Matisoff matisoff@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9808952
MATISOFF

The Sino-Tibetan (ST) languages constitute one of the great
              language families of the world, with well over a billion speakers. Yet despite
              the rapid development of ST studies in recent decades, they remain poorly
              understood; indeed, some branches of the family are still virtually unstudied.
              To fill this vacuum in historical linguistic research, the STEDT (Sino-Tibetan
              Etymological Dictionary and Tl~esaurus) project was started in 1987, charged
              with gathering data from both extant published works and the growing body of
              fieldwork and integrating them into a coherent whole. The concrete goal of the
              project is the publication of an etymological dictionary of the ancestor
              language, Proto-Sino-Tibetan (PST), spoken perhaps 6000 years ago. The
              Dictionary is organized by semantic fields, so it will constitute a "thesaurus"
              of PST.

The reconstructed proto-roots will serve as main entries in the
              Dictionary, followed by those words which derive from them in the modern ST
              languages. Along with the first fascicle of the Dictionary itself, a number of
              electronic and hardcopy versions of materials supporting the reconstructions
              have been or will be published, including a directory of language names
              (published in 1995), a compendium of phonological inventories (published in
              1997), and detailed sound correspondences in the form of a "sound law
              database."

In order to provide the linguistic community with access to the
              data in as timely a fashion as possible, the project is planning to modify its
              approach to the publication of the fascicles. Certain verified and legally
              distributable portions of the "raw data" in the database will be made available
              electronically during 1998 via CDROM and the WWW. As new fascicles become ready
              they will be included in these electronic media, and printed versions will be
              "demand published" in much the same way that new software releases are created.
              Thus, users of the database will be able to "upgrade" their versions of the
              database and fascicles as soon as results become available. While this will
              make some of the results of the research initially tentative and subject to
              revision, it will also allow STEDT to make valuable resources quickly available
              and to collect early feedback on the work from colleagues all over the world.

