Title       : A Fluid Simulation Methodology and Tool for Complex Large Scale Net-works
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9808964

Award Number: 9808964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224436             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Nicol nicol@cs.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal a complete study of fundamental issues, both experimental
and
              analytical, in ultra-wideband (UWB) radio is presented.  The proposed
work
              involves a strong interaction between experimental and analytical
components,
              so that experimentally derived models can be used to design
optimized
              algorithms, which can in turn be tested. For this purpose, radio,
video, and
              test  equipment is requested to complement existing facilities in
the
              ultra-wideband radio lab (UltRa  Lab).  This equipment will be used for
three
              closely related research projects that support the development of
fully mobile
              indoor video communication systems.  The motivating wireless
technology is
              spread-spectrum impulse radio, which alleviates multipath
problems, but must
              coexist in the same spectrum with signals in the
frequency range from roughly
              500 MHz to 2 GHz.  The experiments are aimed at
(1) quantifying the ability of
              different radio systems to coexist in the
same band without mutually
              interfering, (2) quantifying the distortion
properties of ultra-wideband
              antennas and propagation environments, and (3)
measuring the effects of indoor
              radio performance anomalies on video
transmissions.  The equipment requested
              includes anechoic chamber
components, a flexible software video compression
              system, high quality LANs
that can be utilized in both the video and radio
              interference experiments,
and a bit error rate tester and other components
              necessary for interference
and coexistence tests. These experiments will
              result in a database of
channel measurements which characterize propagation,
              antenna, and
interference effects.  The database will be used to extract
              statistical
models which, in turn, will be used to develop algorithms for
              receiver
signal processing and video rate control.  This process of
              experimentation,
model extraction, and algorithm development will be iterated
              throughout the
duration of the requested support.    Each of these experiments
              is briefly
described below.
>
>(1)  Interference Rejection and Coexistence
              Experiments and Analysis
(Scholtz and Chugg).  This experimental work will
              explore the ability of
impulse radio  with power spectrum thinly spread
              roughly from 500 MHz to 2
GHz to coexist over short range channels with the
              myriad of other electronic
systems in that broad spectrum.  This effort will
              test coexistence with
LANs, cordless phones, microwave ovens, wireless TV
              links, etc.  The
processing gain of the spread spectrum techniques employed in
              the impulse
radio will be checked and the dynamic range of current impulse
              radios will
be tested.  These experiments will determine the direction of
              research
efforts on impulse radio implementation.
>
>(2)  Characterization
              of ultra-wideband antennas and propagation
environment (Prata, Chugg,
              Scholtz).  The experimental work to be carried
out in the controlled
              environment of an anechoic chamber supports the
characterization of
              ultra-wideband antennas for impulse radio, and the
characterization of
              narrower-band antennas to evaluate their ability to
receive/reject impulses.
              This environment will be used to evaluate new UWB
antenna designs that provide
              more robust spatial coverage, better pulse
shaping characteristics,
              polarization diversity, and to study the
propagation of UWB signals through
              different kinds of materials.  The
equipment purchased under this grant is
              destined for an anechoic chamber at
least 15' (w) x 15' (h) x 30' (l) to be
              constructed in the near future
(architectural work on the building containing
              this chamber is beginning
>now).
>
>(3)  Experiments with
              Software-Compressed Asynchronous Video over UWB
Wireless Links (Ortega,
              Chugg).  Two stages are planned in the experimental
work with robust
              asynchronous video transmission.  In a first stage, laptops
and wireless LAN
              equipment will be used to test techniques, which are
currently under study for
              rate control over a time varying channel. All
video functions (compression,
              rate control, error correction,
retransmission, etc.) will be implemented in
              software.  In a second stage
the algorithms will be adapted to operate over an
              experimental impulse radio
link.  At that point the results from the initial
              stage will be incorporated
and also changes needed for the particular
              transmission conditions of
impulse radio will be implemented.
>
>
>Each of
              the student researchers supported under the requested funding will
be involved
              in all three of these aspects.  This research will be further
supported by the
              UltRa Lab infrastructure, which has been developed recently
under the support
              of NSF and through the Integrated Media System Center ERC
and our industrial
              sponsors.  The infrastructure includes laboratory space,
equipment, a team of
              undergraduate merit scholars to assist in laboratory
procedures, and access to
              circuit and semiconductor process expertise from
both USC collaborators and
              industrial partners.  The research described in
this proposal is a portion of
              the fundamental investigations required to
develop and demonstrate UWB indoor
              radio multimedia systems (complementary
investigations into integrated circuit
              design are also necessary, but are
not part of the research proposed herein).
              The original equipment budget for
this proposal has been revised to reflect
              equipment acquisitions from other
sources and no other proposals for this work
              are currently pending.
>
>

