Title       : Molecular Biology of Plant Cuticular Waxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9808559

Award Number: 9808559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Schnable schnable@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Basil J. Nikolau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9808559  Schnable  Survival requires that organisms produce a protective
              barrier between themselves and their environment.  Because organisms must be
              able to sense and respond to environmental signals, this barrier must also
              allow for an exchange of molecules and information.  In plants, the cuticle
              serves as this barrier.  In addition to functioning as a water barrier, it has
              been suggested that the cuticle provides frost and UV resistance and plays a
              role in plant-pathogen interactions.  Furthermore, the nature of the cuticle
              greatly affects the deposition and behavior of agricultural chemicals such as
              pesticides, growth regulators and foliar nutrients sprayed on plants.    
              Cuticular waxes are an important component of the cuticle.  They are complex
              mixtures of acyl derivatives of very long-chain fatty acids made in plant
              epidermal cells by VLCFA elongase enzyme systems.  A maize gene (gl8)
              responsible for the production of one of these enzymatic functions has been
              cloned, and the other genes required for the production of functional VLCFA
              elongase enzyme systems will be cloned.    This integrated research approach
              will enhance our understanding of the mechanism by which the elongation of acyl
              chains occurs.  Because similar types elongation reactions are important in the
              biosynthesis of many classes of molecules (including polyketides, flavonoids,
              and stilbenoids) which function as antibiotics, plant-pathogen toxins, pigments
              and protective compounds, the proposed studies will impact our understanding
              and ability to manipulate many fundamental biological processes
