Title       : Molecular Analysis of the Drosophila Hybrid Sterility Gene, Odysseus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9808425

Award Number: 9808425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-I Wu ciwu@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nipam H. Patel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A gene, Odysseus (Ods), which contributes to reproductive isolation in
              Drosophila species was recently cloned in this laboratory. Introgression of an
              appropriate D. maturitiana chromosomal region containing the Ods locus causes
              male sterility in D. simulans. Preliminary evidence suggests that Ods is a
              homeodomain-containing gene but an unusual one in that the homeodomain has
              experienced extremely rapid amino acid substitution in Drosophila species. It
              is suggested that its rapid evolution  coupled with its unusual expression in
              the male germline is expressed as hybrid male sterility. The specific
              objectives are 1) to prove that the cloned gene Ods is the molecular basis for
              hybrid male sterility by germline transformations  2) to study the expression
              pattern of Ods by in situ antibody staining and 3) to investigate the molecular
              basis of Ods divergence by exon swapping and germline transformation. The
              correlation between expression in male germ cells and the rapid sequence
              evolution of the homeodomain will be explored.    Speciation can be the result
              of reproductive isolation. Although that has been an accepted dogma of biology
              for several decades, little progress has been made in understanding the
              molecular genetic basis for speciation. The recent studies which have
              identified several genetic elements responsible for reproductive isolation
              between two species of Drosophila has resulted in the cloning of one of the
              suspected responsible genes, Odysseus (Ods). This work will continue the
              characterization of the Ods gene and collect supporting evidence for its role
              in speciation.
