Title       : Negatives and Register, An Acoustic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9808994

Award Number: 9808994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcah L. Yaeger-Dror malcah@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                A prosodic analysis will be carried out on 'not' negatives in different
              discourse settings. Negatives are both theoretically and practically important,
              since they critically influence the significance of an utterance. The
              difference between 'I can not do it myself.' and 'I can do it myself.' is one a
              listener must attend to, and respond to appropriately, so one may claim that
              the negative should be articulated prominently to be heard clearly. This claim,
              called here the Cognitive Prominence Principle, is supported by phonetic
              studies in which negatives were produced with pitch prominence in read
              sentences.   Conflicting data come from other analysts who have shown that a
              Social Agreement Principle predisposes speakers to prefer agreement in
              conversation and minimize signs of disagreement. This results in speakers not
              emphasizing the critical negative information, undermining the Cognitive
              Prominence Principle in many interactive situations. Thus, the use of negatives
              provides a unique insight into contrasting cognitive and interactional
              principles. Close analysis of prosodic variation on negatives can enrich
              linguistic theory by determining the degree to which one of these principles
              dominates language use in a given situation, and the degree to which both must
              be taken into consideration.  Analysis of 'not' negation also requires
              attention to specific sociolinguistic variables. The study will compare three
              specific social situations with contrasting relationships to social agreement:
              situations in which agreement is near mandatory will be compared with those in
              which it is dispreferred, and those in which it is presumed to be neutralized. 
                Computer assisted acoustic analysis of debates, supportive conversations, and
              neutrally informational speech will permit a statistical multivariate analysis
              of both social and linguistic parameters, using prosodic prominence as the
              primary linguistic variable, and social situation and culture as
              sociolinguistic variables. The results will be of interest to both theoretical
              and applied linguists because they will address both theoretical and practical
              questions.  Evidence for the influence of cultural and situational factors on
              what has been considered a 'purely linguistic' variant may alter the way
              linguistics will be done in the future. This evidence can later be utilized by
              those who wish to 'fine tune' speech recognition and synthesis algorithms for
              different social and interactive environments, and by those who teach others to
              communicate effectively in specific intercultural settings.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
