Title       : RUI: Temporal Expression and Targeting of Parasporal Inclusion Proteins of
               Bacillus Thuringiensis Subspecies Finitimus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9808878

Award Number: 9808878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134894             (Estimated)
Investigator: LaJoyce H. Debro ldebro@jsucc.jsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      700 North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    256/782-5284

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0510600   Integrated Pest Management              
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bacillus thuringiensis (BT) is a Gram positive sporulating bacterium that
              produces a variety of biopesticidal proteins that are active against (toxic to)
              major crop pests and disease vectors.  Depending on the organism, these
              pesticidal proteins accumulate in the cytoplasm of cells during late
              exponential phase, stationary phase, or sporulation, to form crystalline
              inclusions.  Typically, inclusion proteins are formed inside the vegetative or
              sporulating cell and either secreted or liberated at the end of the autolysis
              stage of sporulation.  Exceptions to this rule have been noted in only a few
              strains of BT and in certain other related Bacillus species.  In the case of
              the BT subspecies finitimus, two crystalline inclusions are formed.  The major
              proteins comprising each of these two inclusions are similar in size but have
              unique antigenic determinants, are formed at different temporal stages of
              sporulation, and accumulate at different sites in the cell with respect to the
              exosporium.  One, a minor inclusion, forms outside the exosporium and is
              released into the environment independently of the spore.  The second, major,
              inclusion and the spore itself are together surrounded by the endospore's
              exosporium.  The inclusion and the spore are released together, and the
              inclusion remains attached to the spore after autolysis.   Of the thousands of
              known strains of the bacterium, such exosporium enclosure of the parasporal
              inclusions is a rare event.  The mechanism for targeting parasporal inclusion
              proteins within an exosporium is not known, and is the subject of this research
              project.

The objective of this project is to use the parasporal inclusion
              proteins of subspecies finitimus to determine the relative contribution of the
              intrinsic properties of inclusion proteins and the environment in which the
              protein is expressed upon exosporium enclosure.  Cloning techniques will be
              used to isolate the genes for exosporium enclosed and free parasporal inclusion
              proteins.  The genes will be sequenced and the regulatory regions of the two
              genes will be identified and compared.  Molecular techniques will be used to
              exchange the regulatory regions on the two genes and then monitor the site of
              inclusion and accumulation as a measure  of the relative effects of time of
              synthesis on exosporium enclosure of inclusion protein.  The cloned genes will
              be introduced into alternative cell environments (sporulation+, inclusion-
              variants) by electroporation and the site of inclusion accumulation with
              respect to the exosporium will be monitored to determine the relative
              contribution of the cell environment on targeting of parasporal inclusion
              proteins.  Regions of the coding sequences will be exchanged and site directed
              mutagenesis will be used to alter the coding sequences to determine if
              targeting is sequence specific.

Biopesticides based on parasporal inclusions
              are commercially produced to control economically and medically important
              pests.  The biopesticide is either distributed as a dried powder or the toxic
              component of the inclusion protein is expressed in transgenic plants.  The
              effectiveness of the biopesticides is limited by environmental availability and
              continued use has selected pest resistant strains.  Increased availability and
              decreased selection of pest resistant strains will improve the effectiveness of
              the natural pesticide. In particular, exosporium enclosed parasporal inclusions
              are less susceptible to environmental degradation than free inclusions.  The
              exosporium bestows hydrophobicity on the spore-inclusion complex, and protects
              the enclosed inclusion from degradation.  The exposporium thus prolongs the
              availability of the inclusion-spore complex in the environment, causes the
              complex to concentrate at the air-water interface of an aqueous environment,
              and creates a natural "time-release" effect. Understanding the mechanism of
              exosporium enclosure of parasporal inclusions thus has economic and
              agricultural significance as a means of improving the delivery of the natural
              pesticide to the environment and controlling its expression.  

