Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Proteasomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9808305

Award Number: 9808305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Belote jbelote@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Belote
9808305
Our previous work characterized two dominant
              temperature-sensitive lethal mutants, DTS5 and DTS7, that encode abnormal
              B-type subunits of the proteasome. The dominant and conditional property of
              these mutants make them useful tools for examining the role of
              proteasome-mediated protein degradation in specific cellular and developmental
              processes. Our previous work also identified and characterized three new a-type
              subunit genes, a3t, a4t1 and a4t2, that are expressed exclusively in the male
              germline. This current proposal focuses on investigating the extent of
              developmentally-regulated proteasome subunit isoforms, and examining in detail
              the role of these testes-specific a-type subunits in spermatogenesis. A
              combination of molecular, immunological, and mutational approaches will be used
              to address the following questions:

-How many proteasome subunits have
              testes-specific isoforms encoded by distinct                                   
                         genes, and are there other examples of developmentally-regulated 20S
              subunit genes? 
-Where and when during spermatogenesis are the testes-specific
              proteasome subunits expressed? 
-What is the importance of proteasome-mediated
              protein degradation in spermatogenesis, and what is the      functional role of
              the testes-specific subunits in this process?

Regulated protein degradation
              is important for normal cell function, playing a key role in such diverse
              processes as growth control, metabolic regulation, embryonic development, and
              cell cycle progression. Targetted protein breakdown is also important for
              protecting cells against a variety of abnormal conditions. For example,
              selective proteolysis acts to destroy malformed polypeptides, and it is
              necessary for intracellular processing of viral proteins so that infected cells
              can be eliminated by the body's immune system. Thus, an understanding of how
              cells selectively identify unwanted proteins and target them for destruction
              has fundamental importance for the study of development, mechanisms of aging,
              processing of viral antigens, and tumorigenesis. An essential component of
              intracellular proteolysis is the proteasome, a large, multi-subunit complex
              that acts as the proteolytic core of the ubiquitin-dependent protein degrading
              machinery, responsible for the removal of abnormal polypeptides and short-lived
              regulatory proteins from eukaryotic cells. Recent work, using the tools of
              biochemistry and cell biology, have revealed much about the physical and
              biochemical properties of proteasomes, but many aspects of their biological
              function are unclear. For example, among the fundamental questions that remain
              to be answered are, "Are there different types of proteasomes, and if so what
              is the functional significance of this heterogeneity?"; and "What role do
              proteasomes play in specific cellular or developmental events?" To address
              these questions, a genetic and molecular analysis of proteasomes in Drosophila
              melanogaster has been undertaken, and this research is aimed at continuing and
              extending these studies.

