Title       : Federal Statistics Fellowship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9808594

Award Number: 9808594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $783994             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Smith williambsmith@amstat.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray A. Waller  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Continuation of the Federal Statistics Fellowship Program is jointly supported
              by the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Bureau of the Census (Census),
              the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the National Center for Education
              Statistics (NCES).  The program fosters collaborative and interdisciplinary
              research efforts that stimulate the development and advancement of methodology
              and social science research relevant to issues on which Federal statistical
              agencies seek to provide information.  This is accomplished by bringing
              academic researchers to work with statisticians and social scientists in the
              three Federal statistical agencies for up to one year.  Candidates for Fellows
              submit proposals for their research in a competitive application process. 
              Review Boards composed of prominent scientists appointed by the American
              Statistical Association (ASA), in consultation with Census, BLS, and NCES,
              review the proposals and select the Fellows.  ASA manages the publicity and
              outreach of the program to the academic community and the solicitation of
              Fellowship proposals, convenes the Review Boards, and administers the
              Fellowship Program, obtaining from each agency periodic progress reports on its
              Fellows.  NSF support gives national visibility and scientific credibility to
              the program within the academic community, which stimulates Fellowship
              proposals of high quality.  NSF support also strengthens the links between
              academia and the Federal statistical agencies.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
