Title       : The Role of Actin Binding Proteins in Embryogenesis and Embryonic Polarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9808911

Award Number: 9808911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raffi V. Aroian raroian@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The object of this grant is to gain a better understanding of how the actin
              cytoskeleton functions during early embryonic development and in the
              establishment of polarity. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the actin
              cytoskeleton plays a prominent, but poorly understood, role during the early
              embryogenesis of multicellular organisms and an important role in the
              establishment of embryonic polarity. The early C. elegans embryo provides an
              excellent system for investigating these topics since: (1) its development is
              well-characterized and displays striking actin-dependent asymmetries; and (2)
              it is amenable to study by forward and reverse genetics, lineage analysis, cell
              biology, molecular biology, and biochemistry.

The investigator's laboratory
              has identified by biochemical chromatography 17 C. elegans actin binding
              proteins (CABPs) from oocytes (Aroian et al., 1997). Since actin binding
              proteins (ABPs) are important mediators of actin function, studies of CABPs are
              apt to provide significant new insights into the functions of the actin
              cytoskeleton during early embryogenesis. One CABP, CABP11, was cloned by
              screening an expression library and shows limited homology to a known ABP,
              Coronin. CABP11, is asymmetrically localized, and, based on data using
              RNA-mediated interference (RNAi), plays a role in establishing embryonic
              polarity and blastomere identity. It is hypothesized that CABP11 is involved in
              organizing the early embryonic cortex and plasma membrane. Using mass
              spectroscopy (MS), the sequences of two other CABPs have been recently
              identified. One of these is a member of the myosin II family and is
              asymmetrically localized; the other is a heat shock protein.

Given what is
              known about the important role of the actin cytoskeleton in early
              embryogenesis, the investigator's research aims to help fill in a significant
              gap in knowledge. Studies on early embryogenesis are apt to lead to a better
              understanding of cell identity, cell polarity, and cell division, all of which
              play prominent roles during this time of development. Information on the
              regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is potentially relevant for understanding
              signal transduction, cell-cell signaling, cell motility, control of cell shape
              and integrity, and wound healing.
