Title       : Theoretical Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9808116

Award Number: 9808116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshiko Ichiye ichiye@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Toshiko Ichiye  MCB 98-08116      1. TECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Water plays an
              important role in the structure and function of proteins such as in folding,
              enzymatic activity, and interactions with other molecules.  However, water is a
              complex solvent whose properties are still not completely understood.  The
              interaction of water with proteins is particularly complex because they are
              large molecules with a variety of functional groups and no regular structure. 
              Thus, the development of theories of aqueous solvation for proteins is crucial
              to understanding their structure and function.  The long-term goals of this
              study are 1) to develop fast, accurate treatments of solvent effects in
              computer simulations of biological macromolecules and 2) to understand the
              nature of protein solvation, including phenomena such as the hydrophobic effect
              and ionic solvation.  Specific aims are: 1) to incorporate PI's new model of
              water into computer simulations of proteins, 2) to apply PI's macromolecular
              integral equation theory to proteins, and 3) to investigate aqueous solvation
              of proteins via PI's nonlinear continuum theory and simulations.  The main
              methods are statistical mechanical theory and molecular dynamics computer
              simulations.  In the first aim, the new soft, sticky dipole (SSD) model of
              water previously developed by PI's group will be implemented for computer
              simulations of proteins.  The SSD model is a considerable advance over the
              three-site models commonly used for biological simulations because it has
              better structural, dielectrical and dynamical properties and yet is seven times
              faster in Monte Carlo and three to four times faster in molecular dynamics
              simulations.  An SSD water molecule is composed of a Lennard-Jones sphere with
              a point dipole and a tetrahedral "sticky" potential mimicking hydrogen bonding
              interactions.  The energy parameters are simply given in terms of the position
              and orientation of a water molecule, whereas the three-site models are given in
              terms of the positions of the oxygen  and the two hydrogens.  The SSD model
              will be implemented in CHARMM, a molecular mechanics computer program, and
              tested in molecular dynamics simulations of proteins.  In addition, further
              testing of the solvation properties and including   explicit electronic
              polarization are proposed. In the second aim, a theory for solvation of
              globular molecules previously developed by   PI's group will be implemented for
              proteins.  This model allows the replacement of explicit solvent in computer
              simulations with an implicit model that accurately describes the important
              features of aqueous solvation with less computer time.  The theory models the
              molecular nature of solvation using statistical mechanical integral equation
              theories, which have been highly successful in predicting the structure of
              simple liquids.  Specifically, an approximate Ornstein-Zernike equation theory
              with a modified hypernetted chain closure is used to predict the distribution
              of water molecule positions and orientations around a solute.  The important
              features of this approach are   the retention of the full three-dimensional
              distribution and the separation of the density and orientational parts of the
              distribution.  The theory predicts molecular properties such as hydrogen
              bonding, which cannot be obtained by simple continuum models, and yet maintains
              the correct macroscopic limit electrostatics.  The theory will be used to    
              predict solvation energies of proteins. Finally, a theory of ionic solvation
              previously developed in PI's group will be used to analyze   molecular dynamics
              simulations of proteins and simple model systems.  This will increase the
              understanding of water structure at the protein-water interface; in particular,
              the orientational structure, which determines the polarization energy of the
              solvent.  The theory is a quasi-continuum approach based on the works of
              Onsager and Kirkwood that predicts the orientation of water molecules but does
              not include specific molecular interactions.  It goes beyond simple Born th
              eories of solvation by including non-linear effects such as dielectric
              saturation and, with a recent modification, electrostriction.  Also, further
              extensions of the theory will be investigated, such as including molecular
              effects heuristically and increasing the predictive capabilities for complex
              solutes such as proteins.      2. Non-technical    Water plays an important
              role in the structure and function of proteins such as in folding, enzymatic
              activity, and interactions with other molecules.  However, water is a complex
              solvent whose properties are still not completely understood.  The interaction
              of water with proteins is particularly complex because they are large molecules
              with a variety of functional groups and no regular structure.  Thus, the
              development of theories of aqueous solvation for proteins is crucial to
              understanding their structure and function.  The long-term goals of this study
              are 1) to develop fast, accurate treatments of solvent effects in computer
              simulations of biological macromolecules and 2) to understand the nature of
              protein solvation, including phenomena such as the hydrophobic effect   and
              ionic solvation.  The main methods are statistical mechanical theory and
              molecular dynamics computer simulations.  The specific aims are to implement
              and extend models/theories previously developed by PI's group which include 1)
              a soft, sticky dipole (SSD) model of water 2) a theory for solvation of
              globular molecules, and 3) a theory of ionic solvation. The SSD model is a
              considerable advance over the three-site models commonly used for biological
              simulations because it has better structural, dielectrical and dynamical
              properties and yet is seven times faster in Monte Carlo and three to four times
              faster in molecular dynamics simulations. It will be tested for computer
              simulations of proteins. The solvation model allows the replacement of explicit
              solvent in computer simulations with an implicit model that, in less computer
              time, describes molecular properties such as hydroge n bonding and yet
              maintains the correct macroscopic limit electrostatics.  The ionic theory is to
              analyze molecular dynamics simulations of proteins and simple model systems. 
              This will increase our understanding of water structure at the protein-water
              interface; in particular, the orientational structure, which determines the
              polarization energy of the solvent.
