Title       : Flagellar Glycoprotein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9808846

Award Number: 9808846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bloodgood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808846   Bloodgood          The unicellular alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
              exhibits two different forms of locomotion.  The best-studied form is swimming,
              in which the wave-like beating of the two flagella at one end of the cell
              causes the cell to move through its aqueous environment.  Far less well
              understood is the ability of Chlamydomonas to glide on a solid substratum. 
              This gliding motility also involves the flagella, although the mechanism is
              quite different from swimming.  The cell glides at the point of contact between
              the flagellar membrane outer surface and the solid substratum.  Previous work
              from this laboratory suggests that this gliding is a carefully regulated
              sequence of events that requires the flagellar surface to exhibit both sensory
              and motor functions.   This entails a signaling pathway, involving calcium ion
              regulation and protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, that couples the
              sensory and motor functions of the flagellar surface.  A variety of
              circumstantial data strongly point to a high molecular weight flagellar
              membrane glycoprotein, FMG-1, as being central to both the sensory (substrate
              contact initiated transmembrane signaling) and motor (coupling of the activity
              of a motor protein complex to substrate adhesion sites) functions of the
              flagellum.  The goal of the research project is to use coordinated molecular
              and biochemical approaches to understand the function of the FMG-1 flagellar
              membrane glycoprotein.  To do this, the gene for FMG-1 will be cloned and
              sequenced.

A two-pronged approach will be taken to cloning the gene coding
              for FMG-1.  In the first, oligonucleotide probes, designed using peptide
              sequence data obtained by mass spectrometry, will be used in two PCR
              (Polymerase Chain Reaction) approaches, starting with genomic DNA or with mRNA
              from cells undergoing flagellar regeneration.  In the second, a Chlamydomonas
              expression library will be screened using an affinity purified polyclonal
              antibody prepared against a synthetic peptide whose sequence comes from the
              FMG-1 glycoprotein and which has been shown to recognize the authentic
              protein.

