Title       : Estimation of Gross Domestic Product for Colonial North America: The Lower South
               as a Pilot Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9808516

Award Number: 9808516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Mancall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua L. Rosenbloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work will produce estimates of gross domestic product for one
              region of the British North American colonies at benchmark dates in the 18th
              century. Conjectural estimating methods are applied to the economy of the Lower
              South region, an area composed of the present day states of North Carolina,
              South Carolina, and Georgia. This study of that region is a pilot project to
              show more conclusively that these methods can be successfully applied to the
              colonial period, and to improve the procedures used in the estimation. If
              successful , these improved techniques will be applied  to the other major
              colonial regions: New England, the Middle colonies, and the Chesapeake. With
              those estimates for all four regions the authors would then combine them to
              obtain estimates for the colonies as a whole which could be linked to the GDP
              series for the early 19th century.  GDP figures for the Lower South will be
              constructed using the conjectural method of estimation. In this pilot project,
              conjectures about colonial economic growth are refined and extended. The
              conjectures will draw on the rich and extensive literature on wealth and
              standards of living in the colonies of the Lower South that has accumulated
              over the past several decades, and will make use of the probate samples and
              other data sets that have been compiled as well. An annotated bibliography of
              probate samples and a database containing the data on variables pertinent to
              estimating GDP for the region is also prepared.  The estimates take into
              account the economic activity of Native Americans. Whether one thinks that
              Native Americans should be treated as though they were part of the colonial
              economy or as a separate nation (or nations) and trading partner, their
              economic activity and its impact on the colonists should be taken into account.
              Native Americans were simply too important quantitatively to be ignored,
              especially so in the earlier part of the 18th century. The study includes
              establishing more clearly and firmly the size and location of the Indian tribes
              in the Lower South, the nature and extent of their economic interaction with
              the colonists, and making estimates of their production in such a way that
              their activity can be combined with that of the colonists or kept separate as
              though the Indians were another trading nation.  By offering comprehensive
              estimates on the economy of British America, creating a database to facilitate
              inquiries by other scholars, and incorporating Indian economic activity in the
              conjectures, this project will integrate the various efforts of scholars who
              have provided analyses of this export oriented region.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
