Title       : Domestic Violence: Cultural, Personal and Situational Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9808164

Award Number: 9808164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dov Cohen dcohen@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project explores the cultural, personality, and situational
              factors that help perpetuate violence against women among three groups.
              Specifically, it tries to examine the factors that give rise to violence among
              Latinos, northern Anglos, and southern Anglos within the United States. The
              project explores sets of interrelated themes that are hypothesized to
              contribute to domestic violence. These themes include: a) notions of male honor
              that make cuckoldry a matter of deep shame and support the man's use of
              violence against either his partner or male transgressors; b) traditional sex
              roles that legitimize a man's brutish behavior as `natural` and make it a
              woman's responsibility to curb such behavior; and c) romantic notions of love
              and jealousy that equate extreme jealousy with extreme love, creating an
              implicit formulation that violence = jealousy = love and therefore excusing
              violence that arises from such passions. These themes may be particularly
              strong in southern Anglo and Latino culture. They are not absent in northern
              Anglo culture either, and their manifestation here may be driven by individual
              differences and situational factors that are important to discover (from both a
              theoretical and practical perspective). Domestic violence is a major problem in
              this country and in cultures around the world, and this research project is
              intended to help us understand the cultural, personality, and social factors
              that contribute to this pervasive crime. Applications for knowledge gained in
              this research can include: a) identification of people and subpopulations at
              heightened risk for domestic violence; b) creation of more effective public
              health campaigns, which can target the most relevant messages to relevant
              audiences, and c) development of potential therapeutic techniques that are
              maximally culturally sensitive and effective for both male and female
              participants.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
