Title       : Molecular Genetics and Biosynthesis of Loline Alkaloids by Mutualistic
               Endophystes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9808554

Award Number: 9808554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Schardl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lowell P. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9808554  Schardl  The defenses of plants against insects include diverse
              nitrogen-containing chemicals called alkaloids.  In grasses that possess
              symbiotic fungal endophytes several important anti-insect alkaloids are
              produced by the endophytes, which thereby protect the grass plants from
              herbivorous insects.  This project focuses on the lolines, fungal alkaloids
              that are unique to grass-endophyte systems, highly insecticidal, and
              exceptionally abundant.  building on the finding that the endophyte is the
              source of lolines, the biochemistry and genetics of loline alkaloid production
              will be conducted.  First, culture methods will be refined to induce or
              suppress fungal expression of lolines.  Making use of these methods, the
              specific fate of proposed loline alkaloid precursors will be determined. 
              Finally, genes that may code for steps in the biosynthetic pathway to lolines
              will be identified based on differences in expression under loline
              alkaloid-expressing and non-expressing conditions.  This work will advance
              understanding of the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites that play important
              roles in biological protection of plants from their pests, and in ecological
              interactions between plants and beneficial microorganisms.  A likely applied
              benefit to society will be more informed and widespread use of biological plant
              protection systems in agriculture and horticulture, helping reduce the use of
              ecologically damaging chemicals and practices.
