Title       : Database of Protein Modifications: Enhancements for Visualization, Modeling and
               Internet Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a9808414

Award Number: 9808414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy H. Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Garavelli  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Biomedical Res Found
	      3900 Reservoir Rd NW
	      Washington, DC  200072187    202/687-2121

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Protein Information Resource (PIR), established at the  National Biomedical
              Research Foundation (NBRF) by Margaret  Dayhoff, collaboratively collects and
              publishes the PIR  International Protein Sequence Database, the oldest database
               of biomolecular sequences and annotation. As part of its  effort to produce a
              protein sequence database that is  comprehensive, accurate, precise and
              consistent, the PIR  maintains a number of auxiliary annotation databases.
              RESID a  prototype auxiliary database was constructed for modified  amino acid
              residues annotated as features in the PIR Protein  Sequence Database. Consulted
              by annotators and outside experts  the RESID Database provides      more
              detailed chemical information than is possible in the  protein sequence
              database,      appropriate annotations to accompany features in the Protein 
              Sequence Database, and      a means to calculate correct molecular weights for
              modified  peptides.    It is also used as the standard for automatic checking
              of  syntax and vocabulary in feature records. It is the only  publicly
              available, human- and computer-readable database  comprehensively documenting
              protein structural modifications,  and has been recognized as a resource useful
              in identifying  post-translationally modified peptides by mass-spectroscopy.   
              The objectives of the proposed two-year effort are:       to  undertake  the 
              enhancements necessary  to  make  RESID  accessible on the Intemet,      to
              construct molecular descriptions for the database that    will enable graphical
              presentation and assist researchers    in generating molecular models of
              post-translationally    modified peptides, and      to   integrate  software 
              that  will  display  the  chemical    structure  of  modified  residues  with 
              existing   sequence    database access programs.    When this project is
              completed, the enhanced RESID Database  will provide users of ATLAS and the PIR
              World Wide Web Site  with visual display and molecular modeling information not
               previously available,  a comprehensive collection of protein 
              post-translational modifications. It will also support  interoperability
              between the PIR and other biomolecular  structural databases such as the
              Brookhaven Protein Databank.    Abstract               July 25, 1998           
                         1
