Title       : Manganese (II) Oxidation by Spores of Marine Bacillus Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9808915

Award Number: 9808915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley M. Tebo btebo@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              TEBO
The oxidation of soluble manganese(II to insoluble Mn(llI) and Mn(IV)
              oxides and oxyhydroxides has a profound effect on the environment. The highly
              reactive Mn oxide mineral phases that form have highly charged surfaces that
              scavenge numerous heavy metals and are strong oxidants capable of oxidizing a
              number of toxic xenobiotic, aromatic, and other organic and inorganic
              compounds. Mn oxides also serve as electron acceptors for growth of anaerobic
              bacteria. Although abiotic formation of Mn oxides can occur, in nature most Mn
              oxides form through the activities of microorganisms, primarily bacteria.
              Although Mn(lI)-oxidizing bacteria have been known from the beginning of the
              20th century, the mechanisms of Mn(II) oxidation and the biological functions
              it serves remain enigmatic. This project focuses on the mechanism and function
              of Mn(II) oxidation in the marine Bacillus species strains SG-1 and PL-12 whose
              mature, dormant spores bind and oxidize Mn(II). Although Mn(II) oxidation is a
              thermodynamically favorable process under most environmental conditions, the
              spores increase the rate of oxidation up to five orders of magnitude compared
              to the abiotic rate. Spores such as these have been shown to be dominant
              members of the Mn(ID-oxidizing community in surficial marine sediments where
              they bind and precipitate a variety of other heavy metals. Previous research
              has demonstrated that in spores of both SG-1 and PL-12 Mn(II) is oxidized by
              proteins in the outermost spore layer. The amino acid sequence of the proposed
              Mn(II)-oxidizing protein from strain SG-1, MnxG, suggests it is a member of the
              family of multicopper oxidase proteins in which multiple copper ions function
              as redox active cofactors for the enzyme oxidation of a substrate. MnxG appears
              to be a bacterial homolog of cemloplasmin, a multicopper oxidase protein that
              is involved in iron oxidation and uptake in the blood stream of mammals.
              Recently two other unrelated Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria were shown to have
              Mn(II)-oxidizing proteins  with copper binding domains suggesting that copper
              may play a universal role in Mn oxidation. This research will further
              characterize the Mn(II)-oxidizing proteins from strains SG-1 and PL-12 to
              establish that they are truly multicopper oxidases and to compare their genes
              and proteins to those of other Bacillus species and Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria.
              The primary function of the Mn(II)-oxidizing proteins for the bacteria will
              also be evaluated.    Bacteria play a central role in the biogeochemical
              cycling of metals in the environment, but the molecular and biochemical
              mechanisms for most of these processes are not well understood. The results of
              this project should provide valuable information regarding the molecular basis
              and function of Mn oxidation, the factors that influence Mn oxidation, and the
              possible universal role of copper in this biogeochemically important process.
              This information will contribute to the knowledge base on microbial metal redox
              reactions in natural ecosystems and how these organisms might be utilized to
              benefit society. Characterizing the mechanisms of Mn oxidation in marine
              Bacillus spores may also provide the fundamental basis for biotechnological
              applications. The inherent physically tough nature of spores, combined with
              their unique capacity to bind and precipitate metals over a wide range of
              environmental conditions without having to sustain their growth, makes
              Mn-oxidizing spores particularly attractive for environmental remediation and
              metal recovery processes.
