Title       : Conservation and Divergence of Floral Regulatory Gene Function in Angiosperm
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9808349

Award Number: 9808349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Schmidt rschmidt@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the long term goal of understanding how differences among
              conserved regulatory gene products and their patterns of expression have
              contributed to the evolution of distinct floral morphologies among divergent
              angiosperms. Studies in model systems like Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum have led
              to the formulation of a model to explain the interaction among floral organ
              identity genes in specifying the basic whorls of the dicot flower, the sepals,
              petals, stamens and carpels. To what degree this model can account for the
              development of flowers with strikingly different morphologies, such as those
              found in grass species, is largely unknown. Furthermore, the evolutionary
              relationship between the nonreproductive organs of grass and dicot flowers has
              long been the subject of debate. Dr. Schmidt's lab will approach these
              questions by elucidating the underlying mechanisms controlling floral organ
              specification and development in Zea mays.
MADS-box genes have been shown to
              be primary determinants of organ identity in dicot flowers, and are major
              contributors to the ABC model of organ specification. By a combination of gene
              cloning, phylogenetic analysis, comparison of patterns of gene expression, and
              mutational analysis, Dr. Schmidt's group has been able to establish orthologous
              relationships between specific maize MADS-box genes and corresponding organ
              identity genes from Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum. They are now in a position to
              explore in some detail the role of these maize MADS-box genes in specifying the
              development of the grass flower, a flower in which the floral morphology is
              distinct from that of dicotyledonous plants. These studies will enable their
              group to directly test the degree to which the ABC model of floral organ
              identity applies to the highly derived grass flowers of maize. In addition,
              these studies will provide genetic and molecular data that will help resolve
              the question concerning homologies between the perianth organs of dicots and
              the nonreproductive organs of the grass spikelet. These studies will provide
              important insight into understanding how divergence in regulatory genes can
              contribute to the evolution of distinct morphologies.

