Title       : Software Tools for Interoperable Taxonomic Databases: The ICTVdB Prototype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a9808037

Award Number: 9808037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois D. Blaine lblaine@atcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna R. Maglott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Type Culture Collect
	      10801 University Boulevard
	      Manassas, VA  201102209    703/365-2700

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project will research new tools for improved data  structures and
              management of a major biological database in an  effort to standardize
              nomenclature, conceptual information and  semantic content, all key problems of
              community databases. The  prototype system developed earlier will lead to a
              fully  evolved, distributed system during this phase. The Universal  Virus
              Database (ICTVdB), an advanced, biological database  maintained for the
              International Committee on the Taxonomy of  Viruses (ICTV), serves as the
              prototype. An international team  will collaborate to develop and test software
              for functional  integration and web-based access to two widely used, stand- 
              alone special purpose software tools that have been  independently developed to
              handle taxonomic data. The tools to  be refined and integrated for ICTVdB are
              DELTA (Description  Language for Taxonomy) and Micro-IS (Microbial Information 
              System). Integration will preserve the unique features of  each, while
              providing the widest capabilities for disparate  requirements of various user
              groups, through a conversion  program that automatically translates DELTA
              formatted data to  Micro-IS format. DELTA, with its supporting suite of 
              applications, facilitates both the building oftaxonomic  descriptions in
              natural language and the identification of  unknown biological entities by
              matching with known entities.  Micro-IS is designed for the storage,
              management, and analysis  of biological data via an object oriented database
              engine. The  resultant tools will be applicable to any biological database 
              that seeks to make the most effective use of information from  a multitude of
              levels. The ultimate goal of this project is to  provide software tools with
              common standards to be used as  Windows 95/NT desktop and/or web-based
              applications. These  will convert ICTVdB from a reference resource to a
              research  tool for studies of phylogeny and evolutionary relationships.  The
              tools will also enhance access to a well-curated community  database in v
              irology for client use and facilitate routine  submission of emerging data. All
              of the products of this  research project will be available to investigators in
              other  fields for existing applications and further enhancements.    Abslract  
                          July 25, 1998                       I
