Title       : Dissertation Research: Determinants of the Kin Assistance Patterns of Garifuna
               Men
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9808521

Award Number: 9808521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6736               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hillard S. Kaplan kaplan@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to advance our understanding of the causes of variations in
              the levels of contributions men make towards raising their own children as
              opposed to their contributions towards raising other related children.  The
              project involves the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist from
              the University of New Mexico, studying the Garifuna ethnic group of Honduras,
              Central America. Among this society some men are fully involved in the
              upbringing of their children, while others are minimally involved and direct
              much of their income towards their maternal home to support their adult sisters
              as they raise children, nieces and nephews of the men.  Hypotheses about
              features of society which cause these patterns will be tested quantitatively
              using structured interview techniques.  Features of the kinship system,
              marriage system, local economic conditions, migratory labor patterns and 
              household types will all be examined as potential determinants of paternity
              support.  An understanding of what motivates and what discourages the parental
              involvement of men is of increasing interest as evidence accumulates world-wide
              on the negative impact of paternal absence on a wide range of childhood
              outcomes. The new knowledge from this project will be useful to evolutionary
              theorists as well as planners concerned about parental involvement in
              children's welfare.  In addition the project will advance ther training of a
              young social scientist and improve our knowledge about this important area of
              the world.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
