Title       : Mechanisms Mediating Motor Pattern Selection from a Multi-Functional Neuronal
               Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9808356

Award Number: 9808356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Nusbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9808356  Nusbaum    LAY ABSTRACT  The goal of this proposal is to
              understand, at the cellular level, how  specific rhythmic motor patterns are
              selected from a multifunctional  neuronal network. Previous work in several
              invertebrate and vertebrate  systems has shown that the networks generating
              rhythmic movements are  functionally flexible. That is, the same neuronal
              ensemble generates  distinct rhythmic motor patterns when influenced by
              different  neuromodulatory inputs. We do not fully understand how any
              individual  motor pattern is selected for activation from such a network. Motor
               pattern selection, however, is likely involve the coactivation of  distinct
              inputs from higher centers. This and related issues regarding  motor pattern
              selection are readily addressed in the stomatogastric  nervous system. This is
              a very well-characterized model system that  contains a set of distinct but
              interacting networks that generate the  motor patterns underlying rhythmic
              contractions of striated foregut  muscles involved in the ingestion, chewing
              and processing of food. As  is true for all rhythmically active networks, these
              networks can still  operate in the completely isolated nervous system, where
              all  experiments will be performed. The working hypothesis is that motor 
              pattern selection from a multifunctional neuronal network results in  part from
              different input pathways (i.e.- different sensory systems)  having distinct
              effects on overlapping subsets of modulatory projection  neurons. To examine
              the validity of this hypothesis, we proposed to  examine whether: (1) different
              input pathways evoke different motor  patterns from the same network; (2) these
              different input pathways  activate different subsets of projection neurons that
              influence this  network; (3) different co-transmitters released by an
              identified  sensory neuron are used to influence spatially separate neuronal 
              targets, and (4) an individual sensory pathway exhibits an activity-  dependent
              compartmentalization of action. Combining   electrophysiological,
              pharmacological and anatomical approaches will  attain these aims. This
              proposed study will provide novel physiological  information regarding how the
              nervous system selects different motor  patterns from a multifunctional
              neuronal network. This will be a  valuable model for comparable but less
              accessible events occurring in  the numerically more complex vertebrate nervous
              system. It will also  provide extensive technical and intellectual training for
              pre- and post-  doctoral students interested in the functional organization of
              the  central nervous system.
