Title       : Natural Selection in Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9808690

Award Number: 9808690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Blume   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Easley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The most common theoretical defense of the hypothesis that firms maximize
              profits is that otherwise they will be driven out of the market. The idea is
              that only those firms which for whatever reason succeed in maximizing profits
              will able to attract or accumulate enough capital to survive and grow. Although
              this intuition has been around for a long time (see Alchian (1950), Friedman
              (1953) and Winter (1964, 1971)) it has not been investigated in a general
              equilibrium setting. The argument also has its critics. In particular, Koopmans
              (1957) argued that referencing an external dynamic process to support the
              validity of a key behavioral assumption is not really a satisfactory way to
              proceed.  In the work leading up to this proposal we have examined this
              hypothesis in a simple general equilibrium model in which firms fund current
              operations from retained earnings, without access to external financial capital
              markets. This dynamic, much like that discussed by Winter, drives the scale of
              firm operation. We found that among all firms having access to the same
              technology only those that come closest to maximizing profits survive. But
              Koopmans is nonetheless right. The tendency to select for profit maximizers
              does not generate a corresponding selection for aggregate producer efficiency.
              In the absence of markets for financial capital, the retained earnings dynamic
              is not able to reallocate funds across firms so as to achieve producer
              efficient outcomes. The addition of capital markets `solves` the problem in
              that if all investors have rational expectations, and markets are dynamically
              complete, then the equilibrium is efficient. But this begs the question. More
              interesting is what happens if not all investors have rational expectations. In
              this case the result can be even worse than without financial capital markets. 
              Our research plan can be characterized as taking Koopmans' concern seriously.
              We are interested in what does happen when firms do not necessarily maximize
              profits, and investors are not necessarily rational, but the forces of economic
              natural selection are at work. What characteristics does the sequence of
              equilibria display? What are the asymptotic properties? Are there any
              optimality properties for either the sequence of equilibria or for the limit
              equilibria? We know that profit maximizers are selected for in some settings
              and not in others, but can the fit decision rules be characterized generally? 
              These questions are particularly interesting when profits are random and firms
              cannot be valued through arbitrage. In this case it is not clear what objective
              to attribute to a firm. Our preliminary investigation suggest that there is no
              tendency to select for expected profit maximization even when that is what
              capitalists want. Instead we conjecture that there will be selection for firms
              that act so as to maximize the expected growth rate of their retained earnings.
              This is not consistent with expected profit maximization, but it is consistent
              with popular commentary about the objectives of large corporations.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
