Title       : Drosophila Even-Skipped Regulation and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2001   
File        : a9808931

Award Number: 9808931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Jaynes J_JAYNES@lac.jci.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to characterize the downstream region of the Drosophila
              even-skipped (eve) gene, which plays a central role in the segmentation of
              early embryos.  Dr. Jaynes' lab will define the precise location of regulatory
              DNA responsible for the full eve expression pattern, and use this knowledge to
              study how the gene is regulated in the embryo, as well as to determine the
              functional requirements for the gene in the various tissues in which it is
              expressed.  Transgenic analysis in flies will be employed both to study
              regulatory DNA and to express the gene product, EVE, in part of its normal
              pattern, an approach useful in analyzing protein function.  A construct that is
              capable of complementing the lethality of an eve null allele will be used as a
              starting point, allowing the construction of tissue specific mutants of eve by
              removing or altering specific regulatory DNA.

Studies of the specific
              requirements for eve function in the organism will focus on three
              uncharacterized aspects of its pattern: early stripe 1, the nervous system, and
              the posterior region. Although early function has been well studied in stripes
              2, 3, and 7, there are indications that stripe 1 function is distinct from that
              of other early stripes, as it occurs at the boundary between head and thorax,
              and is required for initiation of cephalic furrow formation during
              gastrulation.  EVE is required in the nervous system for proper neuronal fate
              specification, but detailed analysis of its functions in specific neuronal
              lineages is only now becoming feasible.  Its requirements in the posterior
              region of the embryo are of interest because of the conservation of this aspect
              of its expression in highly divergent species, suggesting that its functions
              here may be ancestral. The results obtained should provide novel insight into
              transcription factor regulation and function, both in the embryonic ectoderm
              and in the nervous system.

