Title       : The Role of Telomeres in Chromosome Pairing in Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9808000

Award Number: 9808000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Dresser dresserm@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The essential function of meiosis is to haploidize the genome, a process which
              depends on chromosome pairing in meiotic prophase.  A long history of
              cytological and genetic studies have suggested a role for telomere-mediated
              movements in meiotic chromosome pairing but there has been little experimental
              evidence for the role and few insights into the molecular mechanisms involved. 
              The meiotic telomere protein Ndj1p is required for normal telomere organization
              and for normal meiotic chromosome behavior in S. cerevisiae, its absence
              causing delays-in axial element formation, synapsis and entry into the first
              meiotic division-and defects in chromosome recombination and segregation. 
              Thus, Ndj1p may function at telomeres to facilitate chromosome pairing, perhaps
              at the early meiotic stage of bouquet formation.  The hypothesis that Ndj1p
              fosters telomere-mediated homologous pairing by moving chromosomes together
              and/or by stabilizing pairing interactions will be tested by examining telomere
              positions in fixed, embedded material using a quantitative immunocytological
              approach and also by analyzing the movements of green fluorescent
              protein-tagged chromosomes in vivo.  In addition, axial element formation,
              synapsis, and recombination will be compared in wild-type and NDJj1 deletion
              cells using a quantitative immunocytological approach, with particular
              attention to the kinetics of these events with respect to subnuclear locations.
               The hypothesis that NdJ1 is required for subtelomeric pairing associations
              that persist in the absence of recombination will be tested by assessing
              pairing near the telomeres using an in situ hybridization-based assay.  The
              hypothesis that NDJ1 influences recombination by affecting DNA double-strand
              break formation will be assessed by comparing the frequency and positions of
              double-strand breaks and the kinetics of break formation in different wild-type
              backgrounds and in mutant backgrounds where breaks persist and are stable. 
              Finally, essential genes which are candidates for interaction with NDJ1 will be
              evaluated for meiosis-and NDJ1-specific function using a plasmid-shuffle
              approach to identify separation-of-function and /or conditional mutations.  The
              questions addressed by these experiments are of general significance for their
              importance in understanding mechanisms of meiotic chromosome pairing and of
              telomere-mediated positioning of chromosomes in the nucleus, which can
              influence any process sensitive to nuclear architecture, and thus affect the
              fidelity of chromosome segregation.
