Title       : RUI: Antigen-Induced Changes in B and Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9808724

Award Number: 9808724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Owen jowen@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB9808724  Owen, Judith      Abstract    The project is part of an ongoing
              effort to determine how the repertoire of antigen-specific surface receptors
              displayed by populations of lymphocytes changes during the course of an ongoing
              immune response.  This is a central issue of immunology that defines how
              lymphocytes differentiate and adapt in a way that optimizes their antigen
              specificity during an immune response. This project focuses on the specific
              question of whether there is a maturation of the receptor repertoire in
              cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), those cells responsible for cellular immune
              responses, that is similar to what is observed for the B lymphocytes, those
              lymphocytes responsible for making secreted antibodies.  The first part of the
              project will be a comparison of the sequence repertoires of the two polypeptide
              chains of CTL receptors to a specific antigen to determine if there are
              differences in the repertoires in primary and secondary (memory) responses. 
              Differences will be related to the way the genetic elements responsible for the
              receptors are selected and rearranged during cell differentiation.  The effect
              of antigen concentration on repertoires and possible differences in receptor
              density on the surface of cells will also be explored.  The second part of the
              project is a study of B lymphocytes to determine if subpopulations of this
              class of cells can be identified that would account for preferential expression
              of certain receptor structures by these cells.  A third part of the project is
              to initiate a survey of B lymphocyte genes to identify those genes that are
              differentially expressed during cell selection and maturation in response to
              antigen.  The project has a major educational component to train undergraduates
              in cell biological research through their direct involvement in the planned
              studies.
