Title       : Optimal Learning in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9808947

Award Number: 9808947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Blume   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Many areas of economics, political science and related disciplines rely on a
              theory of strategy to investigate issues such as market structure, voting
              rules, the law, the theory of organizations, and business strategy.  In this
              theory it typically is assumed that the participants in a strategic situation
              have the same description of that situation, i.e., that they share a common
              language.  In practice however, it is often the need for building a common
              language that delays decisions in an organization, prolongs contract
              negotiations, or, on a positive note, prevents collusion among firms in
              markets. This makes it important to try to understand how strategic agents
              learn to develop a common language. This project investigates this learning
              process both in theory and with experiments.   The grant funds a set of related
              projects on learning a common language from a partial language. In the
              theoretical investigation, I assume, as a benchmark, that the lack of a common
              language is the only constraint on agents' learning behavior and that otherwise
              they learn optimally. The goal of the first project is to develop a conceptual
              framework that permits one to vary and study the role of a partial language.
              This involves the use of some elementary group theory as a means for providing
              a coherent framework in which to investigate partial languages, and of fast
              learning phenomena, where the partial language does not guarantee immediate
              coordination but permits a complete common language to be built rapidly.  The
              second project investigates the optimal learning paradigm in simple models of
              repeated information transmission. The focus is on how learning is influenced
              by differences in incentives between sender and receiver, and on the tension
              between the need  to communicate in the  present and  the desire to build a
              language for the future.  The third project begins an investigation of how
              efficiency induces structure (a partial language) in communication. It is
              fairly intuitive that a language is easier to learn if it has a modular
              structure, e.g., if as in natural language the past tense is (almost) always
              indicated in the same way, or if there are standardized rules as in accounting
              conventions. However, it is not so obvious how to articulate this intuition
              formally. Here an attempt is made to use the conceptual framework developed in
              the first project in order to identify plausible conditions (e.g., costs of
              message length, preexistent partial languages) under which efficiency
              necessitates modularity.  The fourth project will experimentally investigate
              the predictions of the optimal learning theory in instances where the optimal
              learning rule is unique. This should provide an interesting contrast with
              current research on adaptive learning rules such as stimulus response learning
              and fictitious play.  This research addresses foundational issues in game
              theory such as rationality, coordination and learning. Adaptive learning
              models, rational learning models and experiments on learning are at the center
              of current game theoretic research. The proposed study of optimal learning in
              environments with a partial language adds a new perspective to this research
              agenda. It has important implications for the study of communication,
              institutions, contracting, tacit collusion etc.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
