Title       : Force-Induced Conformational Transitions in Single Polysaccharide Molecules by
               AFM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9808310

Award Number: 9808310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr E. Marszalek marszalek.piotr@mayo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. M. Fernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andres F. Oberhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mayo Foundation
	      200 First Street South West
	      Rochester, MN  55901    507/284-2220

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  MARSZALEK  MCB9808310    Polysaccharide molecules have been found to behave
              as entropic springs with complex force-dependent elasticity.  Polysaccharides
              can adopt a variety of secondary structures in solution due to different types
              of monomers and glycosidic linkages between the monomers (e.g. alpha-(1-4),
              beta (1-4), alpha-(1-6), etc.).  This study examines the hypothesis that the
              elasticity of polysaccharides is related to their secondary structures, and
              seeks to identify force-induced conformational transitions that may abruptly
              affect the length and elasticity of these molecules.  Towards these aims a
              representative group of linear polysaccharides that tend to adopt distinct
              secondary structures - extended and ribbon-like cellulosic chains, wide helical
              amylosic chains, and flexible dextran-like chains - will be investigated by
              stretching single molecules vertically in the atomic force microscope. 
              Different derivatives of polysaccharides will be used to study how the steric
              and electrostatic effects of the substituted groups affects chain elasticity. 
              The kinetics of the force-induced conformational transitions (continuous or
              discontinuous) will be probed by varying the rate at which extension of the
              molecule and the elastic force is generated.  Molecular dynamics (MD)
              simulations of disaccharide segments will be carried out to investigate how an
              external mechanical force affects geometry of covalent bonds and conformations
              of the glucopyranose ring.  This will help to identify the mechanism underlying
              enthalpic elasticity and possible force-induced conformational transitions. 
              Information derived from the AFM experiments and MD calculations will be
              integrated to construct a kinetic model, using Monte Carlo simulation, of
              polysaccharide elasticity that will reproduce force-extension characteristics. 
                 The elastic and viscoelastic properties of polysaccharides are widely
              exploited in nature and they have many industrial applications.  The proposed
              studies will generate valuable inform ation on the atomic basis of
              polysaccharide elasticity.  In addition, deciphering the nature of
              conformational transitions in stretched polysaccharides may shed light on the
              mechanisms of force-induced transitions in more complex macromolecules, such as
              DNA.
