Title       : SGER: Development of a Rapid and Sensitive Fluorescence- Based Method to Detect
               and Characterize Irreversible Oxidative Sidechain Crosslinks in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9808017

Award Number: 9808017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Branchaud bbranch@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727613  Branchaud  Recently, irreversible oxidative amino acid sidechain 
              crosslinks have been found in several proteins.  Such  crosslinks can occur
              spontaneously under mildly oxidative  physiological conditions.  Oxidative
              amino acid sidechain  crosslinks can serve useful purposes, to provide
              structural  stability to proteins (tyrosinase) or to provide novel built-  in
              redox cofactors at enzyme active sites (galactose  oxidase, glyoxal oxidase,
              and methylamine dehydrogenase).  Oxidative amino acid sidechain crosslinks are
              also an  undesired but inevitable consequence of oxidative  metabolism.  For
              example, ortho-tyrosine and dityrosine are  believed to be markers for
              oxidative stress and for aging  processes.  Irreversible oxidative crosslinking
              of amino  acid sidechains may be more widespread than currently  believed. 
              Such crosslinks could be easily overlooked using  existing methods to analyze
              for amino acid composition of  proteins.  This research will develop a novel,
              general and  highly sensitive method for fluorescence detection of  sidechain
              crosslinked amino acids in proteins utilizing  excimer formation by pyrene to
              make the sidechain  crosslinked amino acids "light up" and uniquely stand out 
              against a background of normal amino acids in fluorescent  HPLC analysis of
              complete protein digests.  Mass spec  troscopic analysis of isolated purified
              HPLC fractions will  identify the amino acid compositions and chemical
              structures  of crosslinks.    Combustion of food provides the energy necessary
              to support  life. Approximately 1-6% of the oxygen used to burn food is  not
              completely consumed but instead produces reactive oxygen  species (ROS).  ROS
              damage molecules, cells and organs in  the body.  This research project will
              develop a new method  to detect oxidative damage to proteins.  Proteins are
              major  building blocks of living things.  There are many possible  applications
              of the method both in fundamental biochemical  and applied biomedical research.
