Title       : An Econometric Approach for Evaluating Spatial Equilibrium Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a9808951

Award Number: 9808951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holger Sieg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Spatial equilibrium models have been analyzed extensively in public finance,
              urban and environmental economics. While economists have gained a good
              understanding of the theoretical properties of these models, there is an
              apparent need to estimate and test these models. This project is an effort in
              that direction. Building on work by Epple and Sieg  the empirical approach
              outlined fully specifies and estimates a general equilibrium model. As such, it
              allows for the potential endogeneity of public good provisions, housing prices,
              tax rates and the underlying distribution of agents across communities.
              Parameter estimates obtained by estimation of the structural model can then be
              used in simulations of alternative policy regimes. The research has been
              organized to meet the following objectives:  The project provides a
              methodological contribution to research in public finance by developing a new
              empirical approach for analyzing the impact of locally provided public goods
              and other locational amenities on residential decisions of households in system
              of jurisdictions.  It develops a class of spatial equilibrium estimators which
              allow for the endogeneity of community characteristics.  This research provides
              an analytical framework for applied policy analysis. Based on the estimation
              results, one can simulate the benefits of policy interventions like improvement
              of educational achievements in local schools, crime prevention, improvements of
              air and water quality. Benefit measures are behaviorally consistent since they
              account for general equilibrium effects.  This approach provides a unified
              framework for measuring the impact of government policy on the socio economic
              composition of communities and neighborhoods. It can therefore be used to
              evaluate the distributional effects of these policies.  By gathering a unique
              data set which combines available information from different sources like the
              census, government agencies and commercially available data on housing
              transactions, this approach avoids some of the data problems which have plagued
              previous research.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
