Title       : Protein Phosphorylation as a Biophysical Switch: NMR Determination of Structural
               and Dynamic Responses to Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9808727

Award Number: 9808727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Nicholson lkn2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nicholson                          
9808727
The objectives of this study are
              to determine the structural, dynamic, and functional effects of
              phosphorylation, addressing the biophysical basis of protein regulation by
              reversible phosphorylation.   Three distinct types of molecular switches that
              employ phosphorylation as a trigger mechanism are studied: (1) the SH3 and SH2
              domains of pp60c-Src, which represents switches in which phosphorylation of an
              adjacent polypeptide segment alters the specificity and affinity of modular
              binding domains, and (2) a specific tyrosine residue (Y213) within the SH2
              domain which represents switches in which phosphorylation of a residue in close
              proximity to a binding site may alter the specificity of a modular binding
              domain, and (3) three residues in the 47-residue C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of
              the amyloid precursor protein (APPc), which represents switches in which
              phosphorylation of specific residues in a cytoplasmic tail of a transmembrane
              protein alters interactions with cellular factors such as components of the
              endocytosis or signaling machinery.  A combination of approaches such as
              multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for structure
              determination and dynamic characterization, site-directed mutagenesis and
              overexpression of the recombinant proteins, and titration microcalorimetry as a
              functional assay for quantitative evaluation of changes in ligand specificity
              and affinity is employed. Reversible protein phosphorylation is known to be
              involved in the control of a diverse array of regulatory processes, further
              understanding of which is fundamental and potentially useful to biotechnology.
              This endeavor provides a foundation for training undergraduate and graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows in NMR spectroscopy.  Several outreach
              activities designed to educate the general public about the molecular world 
              also will be undertaken.

Nature has designed a broad array of molecular
              switches that direct and control the flow of information, energy, and molecular
              cargo through living cells.  Reversible protein phosphorylation, or the
              attachment and removal of a phosphate group at a specific site on a protein, is
              a regulatory strategy that is used in the control of almost all biological
              processes.  This study aims to provide an atomic level description of three
              model switches involved in protein-protein recognition: the first and second
              probe how phosphorylation of residues either in an adjacent polypeptide segment
              or in close proximity to the binding site alters the ability of a modular
              binding domain to discriminate between binding partners, while the third
              investigates how phosphorylation of specific residues in the cytoplasmic tail
              of a transmembrane protein alters interactions with cellular partners. These
              studies will provide fundamental principles that will enable the function of
              designed proteins to be altered as desired, and will have great value for
              biotechnology applications.  For these studies, NMR spectroscopy is applied to
              elucidate the structure and dynamics of both phosphorylated and
              unphosphorylated proteins, and isothermal titration calorimetry used to
              quantitatively evaluate the functional effects of phosphorylation on binding to
              known partners. Undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
              are involved, and outreach activities will be undertaken in conjunction with
              this project.


