Title       : Experiments in Majoritarian Bargaining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9808179

Award Number: 9808179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca B. Morton rebecca-morton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Baron-Ferejohn model (BF) of legislative bargaining is one of the most
              widely used formal frameworks in the study of legislative politics.  Variants
              of the model have been used in the study of legislative voting rules, committee
              power, pork-barrel programs, government formation, multi-party elections, and
              inter-chamber bargaining.  In considering a simple version of the model where
              there are three political parties with no party having a majority of the votes
              in the legislature, the BF model predicts that the party with proposal power
              will propose a minimal winning coalition.  This will consist of it and one
              other member, leaving the third party with zero.  As in the Rubinstein model
              the proposing party will give its proposed coalition partner just the amount
              necessary to secure an acceptance.  The amount (or continuation value) equals
              the coalition partner's expected pay-off if the proposal was rejected and the
              bargaining continued.  Proposals are thus always accepted in the first round. 
              The investigators note that the proposing party will always choose as its
              coalition partner the party with the lowest continuation value.  The division
              of spoils will in general be highly unequal, especially if the parties'
              discount factors are low.  The research team has conducted a series of
              experiments testing the predictions of the BF model in a controlled laboratory
              environment.  The preliminary research shows that the BF model's predictions
              are rarely supported.  In particular, proposers often allocate to all three
              players and, in two-player coalitions, allocate more proportionally than
              predicted.  In this project the researchers investigate why the predictions
              fail, both theoretically and empirically.  The first goal in the project is to
              examine the robustness of the findings to changes in the game form.  In the
              preliminary experiments five and four period models used.  One may object, for
              instance, that these models are too demanding for subjects to fully comprehend.
               the first priority is thus to replicate their findings in a simpler game with
              fewer periods.  Thus, the researchers conduct new treatments with two and three
              period versions of the game.  Next, the researchers intend to investigate
              possible theoretical accounts for earlier findings of equal splits and then
              test them in the laboratory.  In their investigation of these theoretical
              accounts they conduct additional experiments and, in some cases, computer
              simulations, as well as the theoretical research.  They focus on three possible
              explanations for the results:  1) equilibrium concepts with non-trivial error,
              2) norms of fairness or altruism, and, 3) conventions and focal points.  Since
              the Baron-Ferejohn model is a widely used approach to understanding legislative
              majoritarian bargaining, the proposed research should help in understanding the
              limits of the model and, legislative majoritarian bargaining as a consequence. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
