Title       : Poly(A) Removal and Translational Silencing of Maternal mRNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9808196

Award Number: 9808196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W.Michael Wormington ww2t@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808196  WORMINGTON  Oocytes synthesize and accumulate a large pool of maternal
              mRNAs. Some of these are actively translated throughout oogenesis while others
              remain quiescent until they are activated or "unmasked" at subsequent
              developmental stages. This translational control is the principal mechanism to
              regulate protein synthesis before the onset of zygotic transcription. Extensive
              analyses have established that the 3' untranslated region (3' UTR) is a
              critical determinant of maternal mRNA translation in organisms as diverse as
              nematodes, flies, clams, frogs and mice. In many cases the 3' UTRs of maternal
              mRNAs activate or repress translation by directing the stage-specific addition
              or removal of 3' poly(A) tails. This project addresses the molecular basis for
              the deadenylation-dependent translational inactivation of two distinct classes
              of maternal mRNAs during the meiotic maturation and subsequent fertilization of
              Xenopus oocytes. One class of mRNAs is polyadenylated and translated throughout
              oogenesis, but is deadenylated and translationally silenced at maturation.
              Poly(A) removal in mature oocytes does not require specific cis-sequences and
              is a default pathway of translational inactivation. Conversely, another class
              of mRNAs is not translated before progesterone-induced maturation. These mRNAs
              contain a specific 3' UTR sequence termed the cytoplasmic polyadenylation
              element (CPE) which is required for their poly(A)-elongation and translational
              activation. The presence of a CPE is sufficient to prevent default
              deadenylation in mature oocytes. However, a subset of CPE-mRNAs also contain a
              discrete 3' UTR sequence termed the embryonic deadenylation element (EDEN)
              which promotes their deadenylation at fertilization and thereby restricts their
              translation to unfertilized eggs. An intrinsically poly(A)-specific
              deadenylating nuclease (DAN) that catalyzes default poly(A) removal in mature
              Xenopus oocytes has been purified. A human cDNA encoding an immunocrossreactive
              and catalytically equivalen t poly(A) nuclease has been isolated using peptide
              sequences derived for the purified Xenopus DAN. This project will utilize
              immunological and nucleic acid reagents derived from the human DAN and a
              combination of molecular biological and biochemical approaches to address the
              following aspects of poly(A) removal and maternal mRNA translational
              inactivation in Xenopus oocytes and embryos: First, to investigate the
              developmental regulation of the Xenopus DAN. Antibodies and cDNAs corresponding
              to two DAN isoforms will be used to examine their expression during oogenesis
              and embryogenesis. These initial studies will be extended to establish the
              causal relationships between stage-specific changes in the synthesis,
              post-translational modification and nuclear-cytoplasmic distribution of DAN
              isoforms that correlate with alterations in deadenylation activity. Second, to
              determine if the Xenopus DAN that catalyzes default deadenylation in mature
              oocytes also participates in the sequence-specific deadenylation of
              EDEN-containing mRNAs in embryos. Complementary approaches will ascertain
              interactions between DAN and an EDEN-specific RNA binding protein. Third, to
              initiate the delineation of functional domains within Xenopus DAN required for
              its poly(A)-specific 3' exonucleolytic activity and developmental regulation.  
                During egg maturation, the expression of many genes is controlled at the
              level of protein synthesis.  The synthesis of a specific protein is inhibited
              by the removal of a tract of polyadenosine located at the 3' end of the mRNA,
              which can be regulated by any one of several pathways.  This project will
              examine various aspects of this regulatory system, including a characterization
              of the deadenylating nuclease that removes the poly(A).  Understanding the
              molecular basis of this regulatory process will provide insight into how egg
              mRNAs direct regulated protein synthesis during the early steps of vertebrate
              development.  Their elucidation is of fundamental importance to numerous
              problems in de velopment biology and post-transcriptional gene regulation.
