Title       : Period Patterning in Feather Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9808874

Award Number: 9808874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng-Ming Chuong chuong@pathfinder.hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective of the Chuong laboratory is to understand the molecular
              basis of pattern formation in embryonic development. Along this line, the PI
              has been using feather morphogenesis as a model and studying its molecular
              mechanisms. In this proposal, the PI will focus on signals involved in periodic
              patterning of feather primordia.

The formation of periodic patterns is
              fundamental in biology.  Theoretical models describing these phenomena have
              been proposed for feather patterning.  However, no molecular candidates have
              been identified.  Based on  results and preliminary data, the Chuong lab
              hypothesizes that the mechanism of periodic patterning in feathers has a global
              and a local component. 1 ) Local activators (candidates: FGFs, SHH) and
              inhibitors (candidates: BMPs) triggered from initial unstable small cell
              aggregates act in a reaction-diffusion mechanism to form individual primordia
              through competition for survival. 2) A global wave of competence (candidates:
              beta-catenin, signaling molecule receptors) propagating from one end of the
              primary row, imposing additional activator activities, thus organizing
              competent cells in the tract field progressively and effectively into a
              functional feather tract.

The general approach is to map and analyze, with
              in situ hybridization and immunochemical localization, the expression sequences
              and modes of candidate molecules in normal and experimental conditions.
              Signaling molecules coated on beads and candidate genes and their mutated forms
              carried in retroviral vectors will be used to perturb feather
              formation.

Induction is the key event in organ formation. Many researchers
              have focused on the pursuit of the inducer. Previously, the PI showed that SHH
              is one of the earliest molecules in feather initiation, but what molecules are
              upstream of SHH?  If it is X, what is upstream of X? This type of pursuit will
              have no ending.  Somewhere, there should be a forming process resulted from
              intrinsic cell properties, rather than from a specific molecular marker.  This
              proposal represents a new approach to answer the fundamental "induction"
              question. The Chuong lab will test alternative ideas, molecules and to revise
              the hypotheses depending on the results obtained from the laboratory and the
              field.  The works will contribute to the understanding of the cellular and
              molecular mechanisms of organogenesis in general.

