Title       : The Motor Cortical-Olivocerebellar Axis: A Multielectrode Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a9808353

Award Number: 9808353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Lang lange01@popmail.med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT    IBN-9808353  Cerebro-Olivo-Cerebellar Pathways: A
              Multi-Electrode Approach         The experiments of this proposal will have
              significant impact  on the fields of cerebellar physiology, motor cortical
              physiology,  and  motor  control.  The  role of the olivocerebellar  system  in
               cerebellar  functioning has been the subject of many  debates  and  several
              hypotheses. In order for the field to move forward  it  is  necessary  to 
              determine  which of these hypotheses,  if  any,  is  correct.  The proposed
              experiments will provide critical tests  of  the  assumptions  underlying  two 
              of  these  hypotheses  for  the  function  of the olivocerebellar system,
              namely the proposal  that  the  olivocerebellar  system acts as a  timing 
              device  for  motor  coordination  and the idea that it functions as  a 
              comparator  of  intended and actual movements.         The   motor  cortex  and
               olivocerebellar  systems  are  both  critical  for  motor  control.  As such 
              their  activity  must  be  coordinated.  Yet most studies focus on the role  of
               one  or  the  other.  The present experiments address this relatively 
              unstudied  question  of how these two motor systems interact by investigating 
              the  response  of  the olivocerebellar system  to  motor  cortical  activity 
              and the pathways that mediate these responses. In  doing  so  they  may  alter
              our conception of the how  the  motor  cortex  functions. Currently motor
              cortex control of movements is  thought  to be exerted primarily via the
              corticospinal pathway, despite the  fact  that  this pathway represents only a
              minority of  the  total  motor  cortical output. The experiments here begin to 
              investigate  the  significance of the other motor cortical outputs by  studying
               how  the  motor  cortex  influences  the  olivocerebellar  system. 
              Understanding  the  function  of the cortico-olivocerebellar  axis  represents
              a step toward a more complete view of the motor cortex,  one  in  which the
              motor cortex is not viewed as simply  the  last   processing  stage of the
              motor command before leaving  the  brain,  but  rather  as  one of a series of
              interconnected  regions  whose  integrated activity underlies motor
              coordination.
