Title       : Neural Hormonal Regulation of Sound Pattern Recognition and Sexual Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9808834

Award Number: 9808834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Stout stout@andrews.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon J. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Andrews University
	      
	      Berrien Springs, MI  49104    616/471-7771

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9808834         Several   animal  model  systems  have  been 
              successful   in  illuminating our understanding of how the nervous system 
              controls  behavior.   The  response  of  female  crickets  to   behaviorally 
              significant  sounds representing potential mates is one  of  these  models  and
               it  offers  several advantages.  Most  important  the  cricket's   nervous 
              system  is  rather  accessible  and   single,  identified auditory nerve cells
              play demonstrably important  roles  in  the  regulation of the rather complex
              orientation response  of  females  to  the  calls of males. The single nerve 
              cells  can  be  photoinactivated (killing an individual cell using a laser  and
               a  fluorescent  dye) prior to behavioral testing, to  determine  that  cell's 
              role  in  behavior. The goal of studying this  system  has  been,  and will
              continue to be to determine how the cells involved  in  the  auditory system
              work together in a circuit to  allow  the  female  cricket to recognize the
              calling song of the male  of  its  species  and to locate the source of that
              call. Since most animals  and  human  communication  systems also  involve 
              recognition  and  localization  of  the communicative signal,  what  is 
              learned  by  examining  this  model system will further our  understanding  how
               animal  communication  is accomplished and controlled  by  nervous  systems in
              general. Besides these goals, which focus on increasing  our   understanding 
              of  communication  systems,   several   other  accomplishments  are  planned. 
              Post-doctoral  opportunities  will  involve   training   and  experience  in 
              neurobiology   including  learning/using  these photoinactivation/behavioral 
              techniques  to  evaluate  causal  relationships between nerve  cell  activity 
              and  behavior.  The  investigators of the grant and these post-doctoral 
              candidates  will  provide specific training  and  involve  several  graduate 
              students  (at the MS level) and undergraduates  in  this  research.  The 
              research trai ning program at  Andrews  University,  where  this  work will be
              done, has and will continue  to  attract  minorities  and  women  into 
              laboratory  courses  that  lead   to  opportunities   for  undergraduate 
              research  including   research  opportunities in neurobiology outlined in this
              proposal.  Many  of  the  students that participate in such a project would be
              able  to  continue  on  for  more advanced training in the  rapidly  growing 
              fields of neuroscience.
