Title       : Metal Cluster Active Sites in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9808350

Award Number: 9808350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Que que@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Que                   
9808350
	Proteins with active sites consisting of
              carboxylate-bridged diiron centers comprise a new subclass of metalloproteins. 
              This growing class includes proteins of various functions such as the dioxygen
              carrier hemerythrin, a number of hydrocarbon monooxygenases, ribonucleotide
              reductase, fatty acid desaturases, purple acid phosphatases, and Ser/Thr
              protein phosphatases.  This project concentrates on how the active sites of the
              different proteins are interrelated and how the metal centers perform their
              respective functions. Spectroscopic studies on enzymes involved in 2e-
              oxidation focuses on obtaining the metric parameters for the diiron site in its
              various oxidation states by EXAFS including catalytically relevant high valent
              intermediate states.  These enzymes include the soluble enzymes, methane
              monooxygenase, stearoyl acyl carrier protein desaturase, and toluene
              4-monooxygenase, as well as the membrane-bound alkane hydroxylase.  Resonance
              Raman studies will be used to characterize intermediates at the
              diiron(III)-peroxo, diiron(IV)-oxo, and diiron(III)-product states. For
              ribonucleotide reductase, allosteric effects of the redox potential of the
              diiron cluster, the source of the "extra electron" required for tyrosyl radical
              formation, and the putative diiron(III)-peroxo precursor to the high-valent
              intermediate X are studied.  Physical techniques used in these studies include
              UV-vis, resonance Raman, EPR, M÷ssbauer, EXAFS, and spectro-electrochemistry,
              together with the use of mutant proteins to enhance prospects for trapping
              certain intermediates and for probing long range electron transfer pathways.
              The purple acid phosphatase from porcine uterus, uteroferrin, will be  used as
              a model for studying the mechanism of dinuclear hydrolases in general and the
              Ser/Thr protein phosphatases involved in cell signaling in particular.  The
              uncompetitive inhibitor fluoride will serve as a very useful mechanistic probe
              for the catalytic mechanism, since fluoride very likely substitutes for the 
              nucleophile responsible for phosphate ester hydrolysis.  The interaction of
              fluoride with the enzyme-substrate complex will be  investigated by EPR, EXAFS,
              and resonance Raman techniques to gain insight into the nature of the
              enzyme-substrate complex prior to hydrolysis.  Similar experiments will be
              carried out on calcineurin and lambda protein phosphatase.

This project is
              aimed at understanding how metalloenzymes with active sites consisting of two
              metal centers catalyze metabolically important reactions.  For example, methane
              monooxygenase converts methane to methanol under mild conditions, in contrast
              to the current energy-intensive industrial process.  Ribonucleotide reductase
              is responsible for making deoxyribonucleotides, the building blocks of DNA,
              during cell growth.  Understanding how to control this enzyme can provide
              strategies for inhibiting the runaway growth of tumor cells. Cell signaling
              phosphatases are yet another group of enzymes that use two metal centers; they
              are important for regulating cellular processes.  Using a variety of
              spectroscopic methods as probes, the active sites of these enzymes in their
              various forms will be compared to understand their structural relationships,
              how they catalyze their respective reactions, and the roles of the individual
              metal centers in carrying out the reactions.

