Title       : Two-Dimensional Models of Distributed Neural Processing in the Saccadic System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9808204

Award Number: 9808204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Keller elk@ski.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith-Kettlewell Eye Rsch
	      2318 Fillmore Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941151813    415/345-2000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-08204 KELLER.  The goal of this research project is to  provide a deeper
              understanding of how the brain controls movements  in response to visual
              inputs.  The eye movements used to examine  the visual surround are called
              saccades.  Saccadic eye movements,  which rotate the line of sight in two-
              dimensional space, are  among the most rapid and accurate movements that humans
              are  capable of executing. At the same time the mechanical system in  the
              orbits consisting of the eye and its muscles is relatively  simple compared to
              multi-jointed limb control systems.  Therefore  the saccadic system has served
              as a model system for exploring the  general problem of how sensory input is
              converted to motor  behavior.  In the current project Dr. Keller will develop 
              distributed models of the sensorimotor processes underlying the  control of
              saccades.  The model is distributed because no single  dynamic processing
              element in the model (elements in the model are  meant to represent simplified
              single neurons in the brain) codes  the control signals needed to transform
              visual inputs to saccades.  Rather such signals are represented by large
              populations of active  elements at each stage of the transformation.  The
              hypothesized  connectivity between various elements within layers of cells and 
              between layers of cells are determined in the model by an  optimization process
              that uses a biased random walk algorithm.  The algorithm is generally
              considered to have biological  relevance.  One common sign of disease in motor
              systems is that  the trajectories used to move, for example, the hand from one 
              point to another, or the eye from one direction to another, become  highly
              curved instead of following the straight-line approach seen  in normal
              movements. The underlying basis for curved trajectories  will be explored by
              placing simulated lesions in the connections  or processing elements in the
              model. The type of feedback used in  the saccadic system to insure accuracy of
              the movements in the  face of long proce ssing delays in the visual system will
              be  explored with the model.  The model will help to unify and explain  large
              amounts of complex neurophysiological data currently being  gathered in other
              studies, and will also provide guidance for  further anatomical and
              physiological research into the operation  of the saccadic system.  In
              addition, emergent properties of the  model may reveal general principles
              applicable to distributed  motor control with large ensembles of neurons.
