Title       : Conformations and Dynamics of Damaged DNA by NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9808633

Award Number: 9808633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. P. Spielmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
9808633
Spielmann

The goal of this study is to improve our understanding
              of how damage affects the conformation and dynamics of DNA and whether some of
              these conformations may be the recognition motif for nucleotide
              excision
repair (NER).  NER is the primary cellular system for the removal of
              most DNA lesions in humans and it is active in all cellular organisms.  NER
              recognizes and removes a wide variety of structurally unrelated lesions from
              DNA, but, the actual structural motif(s) that signals damage and begins the
              process of DNA repair are not obvious.  Because DNA lesions that are repaired
              do not pose a mutagenic threat, it is of particular interest to understand what
              triggers the recognition of damaged DNA by NER.  The long term goals of this
              study are to understand the factors involved in the molecular recognition
              between damaged nucleic acids and repair proteins.  As a means to realize these
              goals,   the internal dynamics and conformational equilibria in damaged and
              undamaged DNA oligonucleotides will be analyzed.  The specific aims are:

1) 
              To determine the internal dynamics of undamaged and damaged DNA oligomers by
              NMR techniques, testing the hypothesis that lesion recognition and subsequent
              adduct removal require a conserved and common structural element in the damaged
              DNA not present in the parent, undamaged molecule that manifests itself as
              unusual internal dynamics.

2)  To measure the torsion angles of the damaged
              and undamaged DNA molecules, testing the hypothesis that for damaged DNA
              molecules data fitting to a two-state interconverting deoxyribose sugar pucker
              model is inadequate, but that a two state model is adequate for undamaged DNA. 
              These studies will provide fundamental new information on the conformational
              states of damaged DNA and new insights into the recognition of damage by the
              NER system.

2. Non-technical

The goal of this study is to improve our
              understanding of the conformational changes induced in DNA by mutagens and
              environmental toxins that may be the signal for damage recognition by
              nucleotide excision repair (NER).  The environment is full of compounds that
              react either directly or indirectly with DNA and these DNA adducts have been
              implicated in mutagenesis.  The basis for recognition of DNA damage by NER is
              not well understood and these studies will help make clear the molecular
              interactions between damaged nucleic acids and repair proteins. This study is
              to examine the structure and conformations of a family of DNA molecules having
              significant differences in overall structure as a consequence of covalent
              damage.  Particular emphasis is focused on the differences in backbone
              conformations among members of this family of damaged DNA molecules, as
              revealed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  Comparison of damaged DNA
              with undamaged DNA is expected to yield fundamental new information on the
              conformational states of damaged DNA and new insights into the recognition of
              damage by the NER system.

 

