Title       : Frameshift Mutations in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9808886

Award Number: 9808886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Jinks-Robertson jinks@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maintenance of the integrity of genetic material during genome duplication
              requires that mutation rates be very low. The overall fidelity of DNA
              replication is determined at three steps: (1) the error rate of nucleotide
              incorporation during polymerization, (2) the efficiency with which the
              exonucleolytic proofreading activity of DNA polymerase removes terminal
              nucleotides that are incorrectly base-paired, and (3) the efficiency with which
              post-replicative mismatch repair (MMR) systems remove any remaining errors.
              Mutations that result from persistent, unrepaired replication errors generally
              can be classified as either insertion/deletion events involving a small number
              of nucleotides or base substitution events. Frameshift mutations are
              specifically those nucleotide insertion/deletion events that do not occur in
              multiples of three and consequently alter the reading frame of the translated
              mRNA. Whereas base substitution events often are phenotypically silent,
              frameshift mutations almost invariably compromise protein function. Given the
              very deleterious nature of frameshift mutations, it is important to understand
              the mechanisms for generating insertions/deletions during DNA replication, as
              well as the editing functions that prevent fixation of such replication errors.
              This laboratory has developed a frameshift-specific assay system that allows a
              broad spectrum of frameshift events to be readily identified in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This system is based on reversion of a defined +4
              frameshift allele (lys2deltaBgl) at the LYS2 locus. Previous analyses of
              lys2deltaBgl reversion events in wild type, proofreading-defective (Exo-) and
              MMR-defective strains have demonstrated that almost all of the compensatory
              frameshifts are second site, 1 bp deletion events. This project extends the
              previous analyses and has three specific aims:
1. Previous analyses of
              lys2deltaBgl reversion events will be extended by constructing yeast strains
              that are defective in both of the pathways that remove replication errors:
              exonucleolytic proofreading and MMR. An examination of the lys2deltaBgl
              reversion spectrum in Exo-MMR- strains will allow a direct determination of the
              frameshift errors that are made during DNA replication. Comparison of the
              Exo-MMR-spectrum to the Exo-MMR+ spectrum will allow direct determination of
              the replication intermediates removed by the MMR machinery. Similarly,
              comparison of the Exo-MMR- spectrum to the Exo+MMR- spectrum will reveal
              replication errors subject to proofreading.
2. Frameshift spectra obtained in
              proofreading-defective (Exo-) mutants will be used to investigate the relative
              roles of yeast DNA polymerase II and DNA polymerase III in leading versus
              lagging strand synthesis during DNA replication. Reversion spectra obtained
              with lys2deltaBgl in its normal orientation on chromosome II will be compared
              with spectra obtained after inverting the locus, a process which switches the
              identities of the leading and lagging strands. If a given polymerase is
              specialized for either leading or lagging strand synthesis, then one would
              predict that the Exo- frameshift spectrum should change significantly upon
              reversal of the leading and lagging strands. In contrast, if a polymerase is
              involved in both leading and lagging strand synthesis, then the spectrum should
              not change significantly when the mutational target is inverted.
3. The
              lys2deltaBgl system allows examination of -1 frameshifts, but does not allow
              the detection of the other major class of frameshift events: 1 bp insertions.
              An alternative to the lys2deltaBgl system that will allow identification of
              predominantly + 1 frameshift events is being developed. This will be
              accomplished by subjecting the region of LYS2 containing the lys2deltaBgl
              reversion window to site-directed mutagenesis, which will convert the -1
              frameshift window into a window for specifically identifying 1 bp insertions.
              As with the lys2deltaBgl -1 frameshift window, the molecular natures of +1
              frameshifts in wild type, MMR-defective and proofreading-defective strains will
              be examined.

