Title       : Functional Consequences of Olfactory Deprivation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9808149

Award Number: 9808149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Wilson dwilson@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sensory input from the nose in mammals is carried by the olfactory nerve first
              to a brain structure called the olfactory bulb, and then relayed to various
              parts of the cortex of the brain.  A major area for olfaction is called the
              anterior piriform cortex.  In contrast to our knowledge about how inputs are
              integrated from the two eyes or the two ears, we know very little about how the
              olfactory cortex integrates input from the two nostrils, or nares, on each side
              of the nose.  It is possible that the bilateral input (from both sides) is
              important for signal amplification, or for redundancy, or bilateral access to
              olfactory memories.  Recent studies have shown that single nerve cells, or
              neurons, in the anterior piriform cortex are usually about equally responsive
              to odors in either naris.  This new study builds on current ideas that
              bilateral stimulation is important to form and maintain the connections in
              certain local circuits among neurons in the brain.  Anatomical and
              physiological techniques will be used to measure cellular features and trace
              the connections in this olfactory system during development under conditions of
              unilateral deprivation, so that only one side of the nose receives odors.  The
              results should reveal some of the anatomical and physiological mechanisms for
              experience-dependent plasticity, in which responsiveness is partly determined
              by coordinated spatial and temporal patterns of input.   
   This work
              addresses very important questions about the organization of olfactory cortex,
              about which we still know little, and will also have an impact on studies of
              development, plasticity and learning.   A major part of this work also involves
              the training of a graduate student with breadth across the areas of
              neurophysiology, anatomy, development and learning.

