Title       : Mechanisms of Cyanide Assimilation in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9808653

Award Number: 9808653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Kunz kunz@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kunz
 Cyanide is a notorious poison. Although highly toxic it represents a
              normal part of our environment for which mechanisms of biological generation
              (cyanogenesis) and degradation exist. While considerable information is
              available on enzymes responsible for cyanogenesis, much less is known about
              enzymes involved in cyanide turnover. The main objective of this project is to
              extend our knowledge about these enzymes by investigating the mechanisms used
              by bacteria for detoxifying and assimilating cyanide as a nutritional nitrogen
              source. Recent research has shown that in addition to the involvement of a
              novel enzyme (cyanide oxygenase  CNO ), utilization of cyanide in the aerobic
              bacterium, Pseudomonas fluorescens, requires the excretion of (-keto acids
              (e.g., pyruvate). These findings have led to a two-step reaction model in which
              cyanide is first detoxified outside of the cell prior to being further
              assimilated within. The a-keto acids are believed to function as cyanide
              scavenging agents forming cyanohydrins as reaction products, and these
              compounds, rather than free cyanide (CN'/HCN), are thought to serve as
              enzymatic substrates for further assimilation. A fundamental objective of the
              project is to determine the mechanism by which the cyanohydrins are
              enzymatically metabolized. Research will be conducted both at UNT and at the
              University of Wisconsin, the latter while the PI is on a one-semester faculty
              development leave. The specific aims of the project are: (i) to clone and
              purify the CNO enzyme from P. fluorescens, (ii) to perform biochemical studies
              aimed at elucidating the reaction mechanism for CNO and enzymatic steps in
              cyanohydrin breakdown, and (iii) to isolate new anaerobic cyanide-utilizing
              bacteria for comparative studies with those ongoing in P. fluorescens. Work at
              UNT will focus on gene cloning and purification of the CNO enzyme using
              conventional molecular approaches. Research at UW will focus on learning new
              anaerobic cultivation techniques and will be conducted in collaborat ion with a
              resident anaerobic microbiologist (ARS, Dairy Forage Research Center). One
              objective of this collaborative effort will be to determine whether an
              anaerobic enzymatic counterpart to CNO can be shown to exist in bacteria that
              grow anaerobically on cyanide. Aside from basic new information on microbial
              enzymes and cyanide recycling in the biosphere, novel approaches for mitigating
              human and animal exposure from cyanide intoxication are expected. Related
              treatments for exposure from industrial contamination or deliberate release of
              cyanide as a genocidal agent are also anticipated.
