Title       : Evolution of Calcium Channel Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9808386

Award Number: 9808386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-08386  ANDERSON     Voltage-gated calcium channels are complex proteins
              found in the  membranes of many types of cell that are essential for many of 
              their functions. Structurally, they usually consist of a pore-  forming alpha1
              subunit, and associated beta, gamma, and  alpha2/delta subunits.  Because there
              are at least 7 varieties of  alpha1 subunit in mammals, and 6 beta subunits,
              there is enormous  structural and functional diversity within the calcium
              channel  family. The project will determine whether the structural  diversity
              of calcium channels in higher animals has been selected,  in the evolutionary
              sense, to fulfill the many different functions  of calcium channels, or rather
              is an 'accidental' consequence of  gene duplication and subsequent
              tissue-specific or developmental  gene isolation. The hypothesis is that in
              cnidarians (jelly fish  and their relatives), the earliest existing animals to
              have a  nervous system, there are very few calcium channel types, but that 
              they can meet the needs of a fully functional nervous system. If  this
              hypothesis is correct, it would argue that enormous  structural diversity among
              calcium channels is not required for a  functioning neuromuscular system.  Aim
              #1 of this proposal is to  identify all calcium channel subunits in the
              jellyfish Cyanea  using conventional molecular cloning techniques.  Aim #2 is
              to map  the distribution of those subunits in all stages of the animal's  life
              cycle using immunohistochemistry, and to identify any  patterns of
              co-localization of the subunits. Aim #3 is to express  the cloned subunits in
              oocytes (developing eggs) from the clawed-  frog Xenopus together with the
              previously cloned pore-forming  alpha1 subunit and to characterize the types of
              calcium currents  produced by the various subunit assemblies identified during
              Aim  #2.  The proposed research will provide fundamental information  about the
              evolution of calcium channels.
