Title       : Inductive Interactions in Patterning of the Posterior Body in a Vertebrate
               Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9808351

Award Number: 9808351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Ho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to determine if an "organizer" for the development
              of the posterior body of the zebrafish embryo exists and if so, whether it is
              developmentally and/or molecularly related to the organizer region responsible
              for the proper patterning of head and trunk regions. The "Spemann Organizer"
              has been well documented as playing a necessary role in the early development
              of perhaps all vertebrate embryos. However, classical observations as well as
              recent genetic studies have suggested that the development of the tail region
              of vertebrates may be under separate controls from that of the head and trunk
              region. In addition, fate mapping and molecular expression studies show that
              development of the posterior body involves mechanisms significantly different
              from development of the more anterior regions. The development of the
              vertebrate posterior body will be studied in the following manner:

I) It
              will be determined if a tail organizer exists and whether it is functionally
              related to the organizer region of the trunk. Transplantation methods will be
              used to move zebrafish tailbud tissues into younger host embryos to examine
              organizer-specific activities both in terms of tissue interactions (i.e. the
              formation of a secondary posterior axis) and the induction of "immediate
              response" genes indicative of posterior tissue formation. In a systematic
              fashion, it will be determined which specific regions of the tailbud are
              responsible for these activities during normal posterior development.

II) It
              will be determined if specific tailbud cell movements and/or tissue regions are
              perturbed in mutant lines of zebrafish which display posterior body
              abnormalities. A high-quality fate map has been previously produced and used to
              extensively analyze the cell movements and the expression of genes during
              posterior body development in the wild-type zebrafish embryo. This fate map
              information will be utilized to compare the posterior development of wild-type
              embryos with that of mutant zebrafish; in particular the no tail, spadetail,
              floating head, mercedes and lost-a-fin mutations. Abnormalities indicative of
              defective organizer activity and/or downstream tissue patterning will be
              studied in order to determine how they are responsible for causing these mutant
              phenotypes.


