Title       : Social Contracts and Sex Allocation Theory in an Annual, Eusocial Wasp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9808788

Award Number: 9808788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Nonacs pnonacs@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Nonacs  9808788         Wasp nests in the genus Polistes are often initiated by 
              several cooperating females. Such nests grow to considerably  larger sizes than
              nests initiated by a single wasp. However,  most of the offspring are the
              progeny of one dominant female,  which leads to a question of why do the other
              females accept  their subordinate status rather than nest on their own. One 
              explanation is the theory of 'social contracts', where  dominants cede to
              subordinates a fraction of the reproduction  as incentive to stay and help.
              That is they allow the  subordinates to rear some of their own young. This
              fraction  can be either in sons or daughters, which makes the social  contract
              dependent also on the sex ratio produced by the  entire nest. However, sex
              ratios are potentially affected by  environment as well as social interactions
              taking place on  the nest. Experimental manipulation of wasp nests in the 
              field and genetic analysis of foundresses and offspring in  the laboratory will
              directly measure the lifetime  reproductive success of subordinate wasps and
              test several  theoretical models of sex allocation.       Wasps exhibit
              complicated social interactions and have  extensive parental care for their
              young not unlike birds and  mammals. Therefore the theoretical insights
              resulting from  this research are relevant for many social species. 
              Furthermore, the wasps' greater abundance and ease of  observation makes them
              an ideal model system for testing  general questions about social evolution and
              parental  behavior. A better understanding of the colony initiation  process
              will also have practical considerations in pest  control.
