Title       : Collaborative Research: ECOHAB: Gulf of Maine-The Ecology and Oceanography of
               the Toxic Alexandrium Blooms in the Gulf of Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9808173

Award Number: 9808173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1666730            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne R. Geyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis J. McGillicuddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1650,4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Harmful algal blooms, commonly called `red tides` or HABs,  are a serious
              economic and public health problem throughout  the world. In the U.S., the most
              serious HAB problem is  paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), a potentially
              fatal  neurological disorder caused by human ingestion of shellfish  that
              accumulate toxins as they feed on dinoflagellates of  the genus Alexandrium.
              These organisms cause human illness  and death due to PSP, repeated shellfish
              harvest  quarantines, and the mortality of fish and marine mammals.  This
              phenomenon, which affects thousands of miles of U.S.  coastline and numerous
              fisheries resources, has expanded  dramatically in the last two decades,
              especially in the Gulf  of Maine. The ECOHAB-GOM addresses several fundamental 
              issues regarding Alexandrium blooms in the Gulf of Maine: 1)  the source of the
              Alexandrium cells that appear in the fresh  water plumes in the western Maine
              coastal current (WMCC); 2)  Alexandrium cell distribution and dynamics in the
              eastern  Maine coastal current (EMCC); and 3) linkages among blooms  in the
              WMCC, the EMCC and on Georges Bank. Utilizing a  combination of numerical
              modeling, hydrographic, chemical,  and biological measurements, moored and
              drifting current  measurements, and satellite imagery, we will characterize 
              the structure, variability and autecology of the major  Alexandrium habitats in
              the Gulf of Maine.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
