Title       : Supramolecular Structuring of Hydrogels and Transient Polymer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9808433

Award Number: 9808433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Moore moore@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Wolynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9808433  Moore    The proposal outlines an experimental and theoretical study on
               the structure and behavior of synthetic amphiphilic polymers.  The research
              plan calls for the design, synthesis, and  characterization of macromolecular
              architectures containing  oligomeric segments that adopt a well-defined
              secondary  structure.  These folded segments expose information-rich  surfaces
              that can self-organize into higher-order forms.  Five  different types of
              amphiphilic polymer architectures are  proposed.  Three of these will involve
              sequence-specific  phenylene ethynylene oligomers, either attached as grafts or
              end-  groups to water-soluble polymers, or, chain-extended with a  hydrophilic
              comonomer to produce a multiblock main-chain  architecture.  Two others contain
              conformationally restricted  phenylacetylene macrocyclic segments, which will
              either be  grafted as pendant groups onto a hydrophilic polymer or attached  to
              the ends of a water-soluble chain.  The architectures  containing macrocyclic
              segments are predisposed toward nano-  tubular organizations that result from
              face-to-face hydrophobic  association between planar rings.  In contrast to the
              macrocyclic  systems, architectures that incorporate oligomeric segments can 
              exist in either conformationally ordered or disordered states.  Thus it should
              be possible to design sequences that fold or  unfold in response to an external
              stimulus.  This may lead to  transient networks and gels that reversibly
              assemble or  disassemble in a prescribed fashion.  %%%  The proposed research
              is being performed to better understand the  structure and properties of
              amphiphilic macromolecules.  Amphiphilic polymers are used in many commercial
              applications  (e.g., detergents and waterborne coatings), and they show 
              considerable promise in a variety of medical applications and as 
              stimuli-responsive materials.  From a fundamental standpoint, it  is
              interesting to consider that proteins too, are amphiphilic  macromolecules. 
              Given the versatile functions perf ormaed by  protein molecules, it is a
              worthwhile endeavor to mimic their  behavior with synthetic substances.  ***
