Title       : Crystallographic Structure Determination/Refinement Using Atomic Electron
               Density Functions, and Optimization of Appropriate Force Fields for Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9808098

Award Number: 9808098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Chapman chapman@sb.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project will develop (1) methods to facilitate  macromolecular
              structure determination and improve its  accuracy, and, (2) methods to
              determine force field  parameters appropriate for prediction of variants of
              known  structure of proteins and viruses.  Central to these efforts  to improve
              crystallographic structure determination is  exploitation of a method to
              quickly calculate the expected  electron density of an atom in a way that for
              the first time  accounts fully for the resolution limit of the experiment. 
              Refinement methods that optimize the agreement between model  and experimental
              electron density will be developed further.  The electron density function will
              also be applied to the  placement of trial atoms in the Shake-and-Bake direct
              method  of phase determination.       The development of real-space refinement
              will lead to a  more precise description of atomic structure.  The research 
              into force fields will allow much more reliable prediction  of the effects of
              modifications upon structure.  Together,  these advances will greatly
              facilitate the determination of  which atomic interactions are critical for
              catalysis,  specificity and for other functions in many systems.
