Title       : Tools for the Linguistic Analysis of the CHILDES Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9808974

Award Number: 9808974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. MacWhinney macw@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is the development of computational tools to
              facilitate the linguistic analysis of transcript data in the CHILDES (Child
              Language Data Exchange System) database. The three areas being targeted are
              lexicon, morphosyntax, and phonology.  The goal of the lexical initiative is
              the construction of a keyed relational database that will serve as a dynamic
              lexical frequency dictionary for each of the major languages in the database.
              This database will be available to researchers in electronic form. A canonical
              form of the dictionary will also be published in book format. A series of
              demonstration studies based on the use of this database will be completed to
              illustrate to researchers how a lexical database can serve as the foundation
              for modern crosslinguistic studies of lexical development.   The goal of the
              morphosyntactic initiative is the construction of tools to permit automatic
              tagging and parsing of the corpora in the CHILDES database. Using these parsed
              and tagged structures, additional programs will be designed to compute morpheme
              usage and omission, phrasal structure, clause structures, and sentence
              structure. These measures can be used to compare across languages, age levels,
              and clinical subtypes.   The goal of the phonological initiative is the
              construction of a set of tools for developing and analyzing phonological
              databases. Although these data will initially be represented in standard
              CHILDES file format, they will also be converted into a relational database
              that will facilitate a variety of analyses of phonological processes.   The
              completion of this work will markedly improve the usability of the CHILDES
              database for more advanced forms of linguistic analysis.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
