Title       : Structure Function Correlation of G-Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9808638

Award Number: 9808638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arieh Warshel warshel@invitro.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9808638  Warshel  The combined Quantum Mechanical (ab initio)/ Langevin
              Dipoles (QM(ai)/LD) model developed in this laboratory will be used to obtain
              reliable free energy surfaces for phosphate hydrolysis in solution.  This study
              will focus on validating the calculated surfaces by reproducing the main
              experimental results in the field.  The validated and refined potential
              surfaces for the solution reaction will be used for calibrating Empirical
              Valence Bond (EVB) potential surfaces for studies of phosphate hydrolysis in
              proteins.  The calibrated EVB surface will be used for interpolating the
              energetics of the solution reaction to protein environments and eventually for
              elucidating the actual mechanism of p21ras. Ab initio calculations and EVB
              modeling will be used in order to extract more unique mechanistic information
              from the emerging structure of G-proteins and their transition state analogs. 
              GTP-binding proteins are involved in the regulation of cellular function in
              virtually all living organisms, and control signal transduction processes. 
              Understanding the detailed actions of these proteins is one of the important
              current challenges of molecular biology.  The studies of p21ras and other
              related G-proteins are undergoing a "structural revolution" from which new
              structures of G-proteins and their complexes with the corresponding accessory
              proteins are rapidly emerging.  In addition, exciting information about the
              structure of G-proteins with their assumed transition state (TS) analogs is
              becoming available.  This offers a unique opportunity for elucidating the
              detailed molecular mechanisms of the action of these proteins.  The
              continuation of the structural revolution in the field of G-proteins provides
              an exciting opportunity for computer-aided structure-function analysis of these
              systems.
