Title       : Presynaptic Mechanisms Responsible for Synaptic Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9808631

Award Number: 9808631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Cooper RLCOOP1@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-08631  COOPER      The nerve cell ("neuron") is chemically integrated
              with other  cells at morphologically-identified locations called synapses. 
              Just how much effect a neuron has on its synaptic targets varies.  The
              characteristics of neurons' differences in synaptic efficacy  are affected by
              their intrinsic activity.  Different levels of  activity modulate long-term
              alterations in both structure and  performance of synapses.  There are
              chemicals, "neuromodulators,"  endogenously released within an animal, which
              may enhance or  suppress synaptic efficacy.  These in turn affect the animal's 
              behavior.  Neuromodulators affect cellular processes by  stimulating various
              signaling cascades mediated by different  classes of ligand receptors (protein
              molecules in the cell  membrane which neuromodulators specifically recognizes
              and bind  to). Such changes are believed to play roles in learning and  memory,
              as well as in behavior. There are two objectives to the  present study:  1) to
              determine if neuromodulators acutely affect  different neuromuscular synapses
              (synapses from neurons onto  muscle cells, through which the nervous system
              causes muscles to  contract) differently, and  2) to examine the long-term 
              physiological and anatomical effects neuromodulators have on such  synapses.
              The crustacean nervous system is being used because it  easily lends itself to
              experimentation in this area. The activity  of individual synapses on
              identified single cells can be analyzed,  the synapses and cells can be marked,
              and the same synapses can be  identified later for structural investigation by
              electron  microscopy. The crayfish model systems described here provide  direct
              correlation of structure and function at individual  synapses of identified
              single cells. This model nervous system not  only makes it possible to assess
              effects of neuromodulators on  well-characterized behaviors, but it also allows
              direct  correlation between identified synapses and certain behavioral 
              components. It permits the ide ntification of specific cellular  mechanisms
              responsible for the various manifestations of synaptic  differentiation. 
              Progress in this area will provide a clearer  general understanding of the
              mechanisms by which neuromodulators  modify behavior by altering the fine
              structure and cellular  physiology of the nervous system. The project will
              examine how  altering synaptic efficacy by neuromodulators affects motor neuron
               structure and function, and will analyze how these changes affect  the muscles
              they innervate.
