Title       : Morphogenesis of the Zebrafish Organizer Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9808224

Award Number: 9808224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara T. Wakimoto wakimoto@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Cooper  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to determine the cellular interactions and
              behaviors that underlie the        morphological sub-division and structural
              transformation of the Zebrafish Organizer Region, from the midblastula
              transition to late-gastrulation.

Prior work has shown that the dorsal
              marginal zone (DMZ) of late-blastula stage zebrafish embryos differentiates
              into two spatially-distinct domains of cells that can be distinguished on the
              basis of cell behavior.  These domains are (1) the dorsal involuting marginal
              zone, or DIMZ, and (2) the non-involuting endocytic marginal (NEM) cell
              cluster.  The more superficial NEM cell cluster occupies a location homologous
              to the Organizer Epithelium of Xenopus, and accurately predicts where the
              zebrafish embryonic axis will form at the onset of gastrulation.  NEM cells
              express unique endocytic activity, and can be selectively labeled by applying
              membrane-impermeant fluorescent probes to the intact zebrafish embryo.  The
              onset of this unique endocytic activity in the NEM cell cluster occurs 1-2
              hours before early-acting dorsal marker genes become spatially-restricted to
              the Organizer Region.

Preliminary evidence has been obtained that the NEM
              cell cluster represents a derivative of the putative zebrafish Nieuwkoop
              Center, which initially constitutes a syncytial cytoplasmic domain on the
              presumptive dorsal side of the mid-blastula stage embryo.  During the mid- to
              late-blastula period, this region of the embryo sub-divides into (1) a
              cellularized domain composed of dorsal marginal blastomeres (NEM cell
              precursors), as well as (2) a syncytial cytoplasmic domain, the dorsal-YSL.  In
              this study, detailed confocal time-lapse imaging of the DMZ will be performed
              to determine the sequence of morphogenetic cell behaviors involved in the
              structural transformation of the Zebrafish Organizer Region during this time
              period.

The progressive morphogenesis of the Zebrafish Organizer Region,
              from the midblastula transition to late gastrulation, will also be examined
              using (i) wild-type, (ii) mesoderm-deficient, as well as (iii) dorso-ventral
              mutant embryos.  By studying Organizer morphogenesis in mutant embryos with
              specific genetic deficiencies, altered patterns of cell behaviors may be
              identified and linked to failed cell fate specification during Organizer
              formation.  The results of the above project should reveal (1) the sequence of
              morphogenetic cell behaviors that underlie the formation of organ-forming
              domains within the zebrafish dorsal marginal zone, and (2) whether the
              activities of the dorsal-YSL and associated NEM cells play early roles in
              organizing zebrafish morphogenesis.
