Title       : CONF: Sixth FASEB Summer Conference on "Mechanisms in Plant Development" August
               15-20, 1998, Saxton's River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9808650

Award Number: 9808650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Meeks-Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Martienssen, Robert A.  IBN 98-08650        This application is for the sixth in
              a very successful series of FASEB conferences on plant molecular biology, which
              have been devoted to plant development since 1994. The conference will be
              entitled "Mechanisms in Plant Development" and will be held from August 15-20,
              1998 at Saxton's River, Vermont. Plant development has become an enormously
              popular field, and the last few years have seen major discoveries that
              illuminate the principles and theories debated by plant biologists in the past.
              In particular, we!l-characterized genetic models such as pea and snapdragon,
              and especially maize and Arabidopsis thaliana, have provided insights into the
              molecular genetic basis for many key processes in plant development. The
              widespread availability of gene finding tools such as insertional mutagens, and
              rapid progress in genome mapping and sequencing make the isolation of mutants
              in virtually any aspect of plant development, and the molecular isolation of
              the corresponding genes, a routine procedure. The field is now, or soon will
              be, in a position to directly address the molecular mechanisms of development
              using these sophisticated tools.    The scientific sessions in this meeting
              have a more mechanistic bias than the previous conference, but the overall
              progress through the plant life cycle, from gametogenesis to flowering, has
              been retained. There is a new session on epigenetics, an area of considerable
              biotechnological as well as fundamental interest, and increased the emphasis on
              cell-cell interactions, hormonal and environmental regulation of development.
              The invited speakers include both young and established investigators from
              within and outside the U.S.. Additional speakers will be drawn from attendees
              on the basis of submitted abstracts. By bringing together investigators who
              study these various systems, we hope to facilitate an exchange of ideas and
              information, and we hope that some understanding of the underlying mechanisms
              of plant development wil l begin to emerge.
