Title       : Kinesin-Like Proteins in Eukaryotic Flagella and Cilia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9808654

Award Number: 9808654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Satir satir@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell Bernstein  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808654  Bernstein    The kinesins are a diverse superfamily of cytoplasmic
              microtubule (MT)-dependent motor proteins that transduce chemical energy into
              mechanical forces that are applied during a variety of critical cellular
              events, including mitosis, meiosis, and vesicular transport.  Over eighty
              different kinesin-like proteins (klps) have been identified, whose known roles
              fall into two broad categories:  those involved in transport of membranous
              cargo and those required during mitosis.  The precise function of most klps,
              however, is unknown.  Recently, klps have been described in flagella and cilia,
              the MT-based structures that eukaryotic cells use to either swim through an
              aqueous environment or move the aqueous environment past the cell's surface. 
              The objective of this project is to understand the function of two kinesins in
              ciliary and flagellar function, using a combination of molecular genetic,
              biochemical and cytological approaches with the unicellular eukaryotes,
              Chlamydomonas  and Tetrahymena.     Klp1 is a Chlamydomonas flagellar klp found
              in flagellar central pair MTs.  It has been suggested that Klp1 is required for
              flagellar beating.  To test this hypothesis, the phenotype of Klp1-deficient
              flagella will be determined.  The deficiency will be achieved by construction
              of dominant-negative Klp1 mutations in vitro by site-directed alteration of the
              ATP binding site of Klp1, followed by transformation of the mutant genes back
              into Chlamydomonas cells.   Cells expressing mutant forms of Klp1 will be
              assayed for fine-structural cytological defects  and both in vitro and in vivo
              for defects in flagellar function.  Immunoblot analysis has indicated that Klp1
              is also present in the cilia of Tetrahymena.  The Tetrahymena Klp1 gene will be
              cloned using PCR and a klp1 null mutant of Tetrahymena will be constructed. 
              The Tetrahymena klp1 null mutants will be examined for defective ciliary
              motility and for ultrastructural cytological defects.  Two-dimensional gel
              analysis will be used to det ermine if ciliary polypeptides are missing from
              Klp1-deficient cilia.  To determine if Klp1 is required for proper orientation
              of central pair MTs, serial thin sections will be examined to compare the
              position of the central pair MTs relative to the outer doublet MTs in mutant
              versus wild type cilia.    The flagellar kinesin-like protein Fla10 is a member
              of the kinesin II/Kif3 subfamily of kinesins that is present in Chlamydomonas
              flagella, and which is required for flagellar membrane-associated motilities
              and for flagellar growth and maintenance.  A new Fla10-related kinesin, Kin5,
              has been cloned from Tetrahymena by PCR.  The complete genomic clone for Kin5
              will be obtained and used in transformation and gene replacement protocols to
              generate a Tetrahymena delta-kin5 deletion mutant.    The delta-kin5 mutant
              will be analyzed for ciliary beating, and video enhanced DIC microscopy will be
              used to examine mutant cilia for the membrane-associated motility.      The
              results of these experiments will advance our understanding of the structure
              and function of the cytoskeleton, and specifically the functions of
              kinesin-like proteins and eukaryotic cilia and flagella.  Due to the highly
              conserved structures and biochemical compositions of cilia and flagella,  MTs,
              and the kinesin-like proteins, the insights into kinesin and ciliary/flagellar
              function that will be gained by studying these easily manipulated protozoans
              will be applicable to klps and cilia/flagella of higher eukaryotic cells.  In
              addition, the concepts gained by studying flagellar and ciliary kinesins may be
              useful in understanding other, more complex and dynamic, MT arrays, including
              the mitotic spindle.      The studies described impact science education and
              human resource development in that they will be carried out as part of the
              training of graduate students.  By carrying out the studies described, the
              students will be trained academically and technically to become independent
              scientists in the field of cell biology who are expected  to eventually
              contribute significantly to intellectual and technical advances in either an
              academic or industrial setting.
