Title       : The Role of Sequential Signals and Immunocompetence in Female Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9808863

Award Number: 9808863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Borgia borgia@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Borgia  9808863    In many species, females choose their mates based on a 
              complex suite of characteristics. The function of multiple  elements in complex
              male courtship displays is not well  understood. Male satin bowerbirds have
              extremely complex  multifaceted displays involving decorated bowers,
              constructed  and maintained by the male, and courtship behaviors. Three 
              different studies are proposed to explore how the components  of male display
              affect mate choice by females. Low quality  bowers will be enhanced and female
              visitation patterns at  bowers will be monitored to test the hypothesis that
              females  match the quality of display traits important in initial  assessment
              of males with those used in later stages of  assessment. A study of signaling
              using female bowerbird will  help identify the function of and constraints on
              courtship  displays in female assessment of males. A test of the 
              immunocompetence hypothesis ( that suggests there is a trade-  off between a
              male's display competence and the competence of  his immune system due to on
              the physiological effects of high  testosterone levels) will assess the
              coastlines of male  display and how that may affect the ability of males of 
              different quality to produce effective multifaceted displays.  These
              experiments will help resolve the function of multiple  elements in male
              display, and illuminate the ways in which  females integrate these diverse
              elements in the process of  mate selection.    Mate choice is a fundamental
              process that affects social  interactions and the evolution of many
              characteristics. The  proposed research will allow important hypotheses about
              the  function of mate choice to be evaluated.
