Title       : The Strategic Impact of Information on Firms and Markets: The Case of the
               Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9808992

Award Number: 9808992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177731             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Moorman cmoorman@bus.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Moorman  Abstract   `The Strategic Impact of Information on Firms and Markets: 
              The Case of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990.`  This research
              proposal examines the impact of information in firm behavior and market
              dynamics and addresses situations in which the flow of information goes beyond
              in a single firm to where information is available regarding most firms in an
              industry.  The flow of information might result from proactive competitive
              moves by firms or from the actions of regulatory bodies or consumer groups.. 
              For example, regulations may be removed and free the floe of information into
              markets or regulations may require the disclosure of information by firms. 
              These external information flows are termed market information.  The context
              for examining the impact of market information in this research is the influx
              of information created by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA)
              passed by Congress in 1990 and implemented in 1994.  The NLEA forced food
              manufacturers to communicate nutrition information using a standardized format
              referred to as the `Nutrition Facts` label.  All of the projects investigated
              in this grant utilized a longitudinal quasi-experimental design with
              appropriate controls.  This grant investigates several research issues.  The
              first issue is to examine the impact of market information on product quality
              measures.  This proposal extends initial work in this area by examining more
              complex, multi-attribute approaches to the measurement of product quality
              (e.g., taste and nutrition) and by assessing the impact on market efficiency
              and the nature of competitive rivalry among firms.  The research will then
              examine the impact of firm resources and capabilities on the level and timing
              of product quality changes.  If firm differences are found to produce
              differences in firm responses to market information, research will then
              investigate the impact of market information on the structure and dynamics of
              the food industry.  A final component of this research program is to collect
              additional data to examine the impact of market information relative to control
              conditions.  By utilizing historical data, non-food data, and international
              data, this research proposal provides a solid basis for establishing the impact
              of information on market dynamics.  In terms of implications, this research
              seeks to augment existing theories by utilizing and interdisciplinary approach
              to the development of research questions and associated hypotheses.  This
              approach produces several counter-intuitive predictions for each research topic
              and articles disseminating these results will be targeted across disciplines in
               marketing, strategic management, economics, and public policy.  In addition to
              theoretical impact, this proposal also seeks to influence policy design. 
              Specifically, by demonstrating that consumer behavior, managerial
              decision-making, firm-level responses, and industry-level effects are different
              from what might be expected from straight extrapolations of economics theories,
              regulators will have a better understanding of implications of various policy
              design choices.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
