Title       : ELF3 Regulation of Circadian Rhythm and Flowering in Arabidipsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9808208

Award Number: 9808208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Meeks-Wagner wagner@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Meeks-Wagner
9808208
The Early Flowering 3(ELF3) gene has been cloned from
              Arabidopsis thaliana and has been found to lack any similarity to genes in the
              available databases.  Results to date suggest that ELF3 functions as a novel
              key regulator of the circadian oscillator, as well as a regulator of
              inflorescence and floral meristem identity genes.  The hypothesis that the ELF3
              gene product regulates photoperiodism by functioning as a component of a
              photosensory pathway that controls the activity of circadian clocks will be
              tested.  The role of ELF3 in regulating the genetic pathways that control
              floral initiation and flower meristem development will also be investigated. 
              The specific aims are:  1) To characterize the spatial and temporal regulation
              of ELF3 transcription and translation 2) To create and characterize
              -developmentally and for circadian responses- various transgenic lines that
              overexpress or ectopically express ELF3 by using the endogenous ELF3 regulatory
              sequences, and constitutive, tissue specific, inducible promoter systems 3) To
              define the genetic pathways related to ELF3 gene function that regulate floral
              initiation and meristem identity in Arabidopsis 4) To identify gene products
              that interact with ELF3 to facilitate proper circadian response and flowering
              and to identify genes regulated by ELF3 function which may be downstream genes
              or genes that are autoregulated components of the circadian clock.

The
              long-term goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms that
              regulate plant developmental responses to changes in daylength.  Responses such
              as floral initiation are likely to be controlled by photosensory pathways that
              also impinge upon the function of the circadian clocks of plants.  A molecular
              genetic approach to understanding the photoperiodic control of flowering in
              Arabidopsis will be taken, focused upon the ELF3 gene, isolated and
              characterized in this laboratory.  Previous results suggest the possibility
              that ELF3 represents a link between photosensory input pathways to the
              circadian oscillator and developmental responses in higher plants.  The
              development of a framework for the genetic and molecular basis of
              photomorphogensis and floral initiation in the model plant will make it
              possible to better engineer desirable modifications in commerically important
              plants.


