Title       : Characterization of Choline Transport by Choroid Plexus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9808616

Award Number: 9808616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111943             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Larry Renfro jlrenfro@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Renee A. Villalobos  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN98-08616  VILLALOBOS      Choline is an immediate precursor to acetylcholine,
              the  neurotransmitter for the central neuronal pathways involved in  sleep-wake
              cycling and learning or memorization.  The amount of  choline is rate-limiting
              in the synthesis of acetylcholine.  Therefore, maintaining appropriate levels
              of choline in the fluid  that bathes the neurons in the brain is critical to
              both their  individual and integrative function.  Most of this extracellular 
              fluid is produced by the choroid plexus, a very small non-neuronal  organ,
              weighing about 2 grams in the average adult human.  It is  located in the
              ventricles, or cavities, of the brain.  The choroid  plexus also plays an
              important role in regulating the levels of  choline, as well as other inorganic
              and organic ions, in the  extracellular fluid by transporting choline from the
              brain into  the blood.  More precisely, specialized cells of the choroid 
              plexus are responsible for the transport of choline out of brain;  however, the
              mechanism that mediates choline transport remains  poorly understood.  Dr.
              Villalobos will define the mechanism by  which choroid plexus transports
              choline and will investigate how  this mechanism might be modulated.  The
              movement of choline by  plexus can be most directly and effectively studied in
              tissues  that are isolated and allowed to grow and reform a single sheet of 
              interconnected cells.  Using choline labeled with radioactive  isotopes, Dr.
              Villalobos will determine how choline is transported  into and out of the
              choroid plexus under different conditions.  In  this manner, for example, the
              dependence of choline transport on  sodium and potassium can be determined.  In
              addition, a  specialized microscope will be used to visualize the internal 
              scaffolding, or cytoskeleton, of the cell and to study how  modulation of
              elements of the cytoskeleton may alter the ability  of choroid plexus to
              transport choline. With these methods the  effects of physical and chemical
              stress on choline transport will  a lso be investigated.  Determination of the
              cellular mechanism by  which choline is transported from the brain to the blood
              by  choroid plexus will provide the basic information necessary to  probe
              further both the regulation of this specific transport  process and the
              regulation of choline levels in the brain.
