Title       : Improved Potential Energy Functions for Molecular Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9808317

Award Number: 9808317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay W. Ponder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The project intends to improve and extend the accuracy  and application of
              empirical potential energy functions for  peptides and proteins.  These
              functions form the basis of an  extensive set of modeling techniques widely
              used to  rationalize and predict the structure and conformational  energetics
              of organic molecules and biopolymers.  Based on  simple principles from
              classical chemical physics, this type  computer modeling software is widely
              used in a variety of  settings ranging from undergraduate chemistry and 
              biochemistry to research at the forefront of structural  biology.       While
              empirical potential energy functions often  exhibit exquisite accuracy in
              modeling nonpolar organics,  their application to typical biological systems
              presents  several additional difficulties.  The major goal of this  project is
              to find solutions to the problems that most limit  current application of this
              methodology in protein modeling:  (1) achieving chemical accuracy for protein
              structure and  energetics as governed by basic physics, and (2) describing 
              widely varied chemical environments such as the solvent  exposed surface of a
              protein and its hydrophobic interior.  Since the treatment of electrostatic
              interactions is the  largest source of error in these calculations, particular 
              emphasis will be placed upon developing an atom-centered  approach to
              electrostatics with inclusion of dipole  polarization effects.  A class of
              hybrid methods is proposed  for further development, using a shell of explicit
              water  coupled with a reaction field treatment of long range bulk  solvent
              effects.
