Title       : The Colonization of Land By Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9808144

Award Number: 9808144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan C. Wright jcwright@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leland G. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Carefoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Wright  9808144    The onsicidean isopods or woodlice constitute the only
              major group of  crustaceans to have colonized land, and the extant fauna shows
              an unusually  complete representation of evolutionary radiations. At least 5
              independent  lineages have colonized land, and include species occupying a
              number of  transitional habitats from intertidal to fully terrestrial. This,
              combined  with recent advances in isopod phylogeny, makes the Oniscidea
              particularly  suited to studies of evolutionary physiology. Research will focus
              on  comparative physiology of four main systems, all expected to undergo major 
              adaptive modification during an aquatic-terrestrial transition: water  vapour
              absorption; ammonotely and alternative avenues of nitrogenous  excretion;
              haemolymph osmoregulation; and the thermal and osmotic tolerance  of embryos.
              Examples of specific projects include studies of membrane  transport in the
              pleopodal gills and possible homology between its role in  water vapor
              absorption, intertidal salt excretion, and aquatic  osmoregulation. Comparative
              physiology within lineages provides a means to  understand the preadaptive
              basis of such terrestrial adaptations as water  vapour absorption and ammonia
              volatilization. Comparisons between lineages  will explore how different
              colonization routes - from the high humidity and  thermal stability of
              interstitial habitats to the microclimatic extremes of  the marine littoral
              zone have both shaped and constrained the evolution of  physiological systems.
