Title       : The Political Economy of Public Sector Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a9808596

Award Number: 9808596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Case   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves research on three sets of questions in political economy:
              the determinants of state and local public sector employment and wages; the
              determinants and evolution of institutions governing public sector bargaining;
              and the measurement of the social welfare cost associated with political
              behavior in public sector labor markets. The goal is to use public sector labor
              markets to learn more about the functioning of state and local governments more
              broadly. The extent to which political considerations influence public sector
              employment and earnings in the U.S. states is determined. Several aspects of
              this question are addressed by building models of the behavior of politicians,
              voters and public sector workers, and taking these models to the data. To
              begin, the aim is to explain the presence of electoral cycles in state and
              local public sector employment. The extent to which politicians gain by
              changing the employment and earnings of government workers prior to an election
              is determined. Votes appear to be influenced by changes in the level of
              government bureaucracies in the period just prior to an election, and one goal
              is to explain why this phenomenon exists. Public sector labor markets have
              their own institutions and laws governing bargaining. These laws have been
              evolving, state by state, for the past 40 years. Institutions develop for both
              political and economic reasons, and the authors are studying the determinants
              of the institutions within which state and local bargains are struck. An
              understanding of the evolution of institutions is important in its own right,
              and may help in analyzing the impact of labor laws.  Public sector employment,
              together with individuals' and politicians' behavior, is analyzed using a 45
              year panel of data collected on U.S. states (1950 1995). These data are
              augmented with data from the NBER Public Sector Collective Bargaining Law Data
              Set, which provides information on the bargaining environment for five types of
              public sector employees (state, police, fire, teacher, other) for each state
              from 1955 1985. These data are also augmented with information on public sector
              employment and earnings from the Census Bureau. The authors currently have data
              on state full-time employees, local full-time employees, average state worker
              salaries, average local worker salaries, from 1965 1993. These three data
              sources should allow the authors to test hypotheses about public sector labor
              markets and to shed light on the functioning of governments in political
              settings.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
