Title       : Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of the Photosynthetic Oxygen-Evolving Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9808934

Award Number: 9808934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bridgette A. Barry barry@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              98-08934
Barry
 
1.Technical

	Photosynthetic oxygen evolution occurs in
              plants, green algae, and cyanobacteria.  This process is essential for
              maintenance of aerobic, heterotrophic life on earth.  In this study, the
              techniques of infrared and difference infrared spectroscopy are used to obtain
              new information about the structure and function of photosystem II.  This
              enzyme carries out the light driven oxidation of water to form oxygen and
              reduction of plastoquinone to form plastoquinol.  This process occurs at a
              Mn-containing catalytic site, which can accumulate the four oxidizing
              equivalents necessary to generate oxygen from water.  The sequentially oxidized
              forms of the catalytic site are called the Sn states, where n refers to the
              number of oxidizing equivalents formed.  The binding sites for Mn, the
              structures of the Mn cluster in the S states, and the chemical mechanism of
              water oxidation are not understood.  An extrinsic subunit, called the Mn
              stabilizing protein, alters the catalytic properties of the enzyme by an as yet
              unknown mechanism. The specific aims of this study are: I. to continue studies
              of the S1 to S2 transition through the use of vibrational spectroscopy, testing
              the hypothesis that oxidation of Mn in the S1 to S2 transition perturbs the
              vibrational spectrum of carboxylate and carboxylic acid residues that are
              ligating to or close to the metal cluster; II. to expand studies to other S
              state transitions through the use of vibrational spectroscopy, testing
the
              hypothesis that the difference infrared spectra of other S state transitions
              can be recorded and used to obtain new information about the mechanism of
              photosynthetic water oxidation; and III. to study the photoassembly of the Mn
              cluster through the use of infrared and other spectroscopies, tesing the
              hypothesis that an intermediate in the light-driven assembly of the Mn cluster
              can be formed and studied using infrared and other spectroscopies.  The
              formation of this intermediate can be used to obtain more information about the
              structure and function of the catalytic site.





2.
              Non-technical

This research is focused on the mechanism of oxygen evolution
              in photosynthesis.  The protein or enzyme that carries out photosynthetic
              oxygen evolution is found in green plants, algae, and blue-green algae or
              cyanobacteria.  This type of oxygen-producing photosynthesis is the basis of
              human life on earth, because the process produces essential nutrients and
              maintains oxygen in the earth's atmosphere.  The energy derived from light is
              used to drive the chemical reactions of oxygen evolution.  These reactions are
              not possible unless that energy input is supplied.  Although light-induced
              oxygen evolution or "water-splitting" is a ubiquitous, very important
              biological phenomenon, the chemical reactions, which occur during this process
              on the enzyme, are poorly understood. The focus of this study is the use of
              vibrational spectroscopy to obtain more information about these chemical
              reactions.  Vibrational spectroscopy is a technique in which the frequencies
              and amplitudes of atomic vibrations are measured.  These frequencies and
              amplitudes reflect the structure of a molecule.  By using vibrational
              spectroscopy to follow the water-splitting enzyme as the reactions are
              performed, more information about the chemical mechanism will be obtained.  The
              spectra are interpreted through the use of isotopic labeling and protein
              mutagenesis.  These experiments are expected to yield new information about
              this ubiquitous, important biological process.




