Title       : Genes Controlling Cytotoxicity of Osmotin, a Plant Defense Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9808551

Award Number: 9808551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray A. Bressan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Hasegawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Meena L. Narsimhan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9808551  Bressan, Ray  Genes Controlling Cytotoxicity of Osmotin, a Plant
              Defense Protein      Review Analysis (for De-decline and Award)    Dr. Bressan
              and his co-PIs propose to study the mechanism by which osmotin, a defense
              protein secreted by many plants in response to fungal pathogens, kills target
              cells.  They plan to do so using yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as a model
              target organism.  Extensive preliminary evidence indicates that there is a
              plasma membrane protein on the fungal (yeast) cell that serves as the osmotin
              receptor and which can activate a signaling pathway in a way that leads to cell
              death.  In yeast, the pathway apparently shares some of the same components as
              the mating pheromone response pathway, a MAPK cascade and, as the PIs propose,
              may be an apoptosis pathway.  Although the osmotin receptor is distinct from
              the pheromone receptor, both are 7-pass transmembrane proteins, suggesting they
              are members of the family of G-protein-linked receptors. Complicating the
              picture is additional evidence that indicates that osmotin resistance and
              sensitivity can be modulated by mutations that affect the yeast cell wall,
              perhaps to change its permeability to osmotin.  The PIs will sort this all out
              with three specific aims.  First, they will determine the normal function of
              the putative osmotin receptor (OSS1).  Second, they will identify additional
              genes that control osmotin sensitivity in order to reconstruct the entire
              signaling pathway.  Third, they will characterize the ultimate cause of
              osmotin-induced cell death and differentiate between apoptosis and more
              generalized necrosis.    The proposal was co-reviewed by the Signal
              Transduction Program and Integrative Plant Biology Program.  Each program rated
              the proposal overall as V.  The two Sig Trans reviewers who wrote reviews rated
              the proposal individually as V and G.  The IPB panelists who wrote reviews
              rated it E and V.  Two ad hoc reviewers rated it E and V.  The Signal
              Transduction Program originally recommended that  the proposal be declined.  As
              indicated in the original Form 7 review analysis and panel summaries, the
              overriding concern shared by both panels was that yeast might not be a good
              model for this evidently very complex defense response.  The concern outweighed
              the unanimous high level of interest in this important area of plant defense
              mechanisms and the two "excellent" reviews from reviewers who felt the PIs had
              adequately justified the use of yeast.  The ambiguity of the panel ratings
              perhaps is indicated by the fact that the proposal was still rated "very good".
                 Prompted initially by a telephone call from the PI who questioned the
              funding decision based on the rating scores, the Program re-evaluated the
              proposal.  The Program specifically reconsidered the question of using the
              yeast model system in addition to all other concerns raised in the reviews. 
              The Program believes that yeast is an appropriate model based on several
              grounds.  On a priori evolutionary grounds, one can argue that osmotin would
              need to target a generally conserved component found in a wide range of fungal
              pathogens to offer an effective defense mechanism for plants.  Accordingly, it
              is predictable and would not be at all surprising that non-pathogenic fungi
              such as yeast would have the targeted receptor and pathway.   The PIs are aware
              that a close comparison with true pathogens needs to be made, although this
              proposal focuses almost exclusively on yeast.   The PIs indicate that they will
              initially make a genetic comparison of relevant yeast genes with those in the
              pathogen, Ashbya gossypii, which shows close overall genetic homology to yeast
              (p.2).  This sounds quite reasonable and easy to do.  In the meantime, the PIs
              can make use of the formidable experimental advantages of yeast to study what
              the preliminary experiments indicate is a similar osmotin effect on yeast.  The
              fact that the PIs have already identified a specific membrane component that
              acts as the osmotin target and receptor, and that this protein just h appens to
              be structurally similar to other G-protein-associated receptors suggests that
              the PIs are on an interesting track.  That the true function of the osmotin
              "receptor" in the yeast or other fungi is unknown, and that the system may be
              very complex are reasons to proceed with, not to abort the research.  The
              Program in re-review agrees with several supportive comments of the reviewers. 
              "The function of (osmotin) has been a mystery for many years, and this research
              has the potential to solve (it) and advance our understanding of the precise
              mechanisms" (Reviewer 9).  "The justification for using yeast (a non-plant
              pathogen) is compelling" (Reviewer 24).   "Based on (their) record of
              achievement it is likely that the PIs will produce very interesting and
              insightful work and will be able to decipher the complex results.  The results
              could be very important if S.c. turns out to be a good model as an
              osmotin-sensitive fungus" (Reviewer 11).  The Program believes this is a very
              good risk to take.    At least one reviewer was also skeptical of the idea
              presented by the PIs that the targeted yeast signaling pathway may be an
              apoptotic-like pathway (see pp. 5-6 of proposal, comments of Reviewer 11).  In
              fact, apoptosis in yeast is presently a very controversial and interesting
              subject (see Fraser and James, Trends Cell Biol. 8:219 (1998), copy in jacket),
              and the project may indirectly shed light on the mechanism.  The Program views
              this as a plus.    Finally, one reviewer thought that it was essential for the
              PIs to make an osmotin receptor knockout and determine its effects (see Sig
              Trans panel summary, comments of Reviewer 22).  In an update the Program asked
              the PIs to submit, they indicate that the knockout has now been made.  As
              expected the knockout confers osmotin resistance.  Intriguing, however, is that
              so far the PIs have found no effect on normal cell growth.  Nevertheless, the
              PIs are in a good position to analyze the phenotype further and to establish
              conditions under which the recep tor functions normally in yeast.  The Program
              considers these results an important step forward that strengthens the
              proposal.    Dr. Bressan is Professor of Plant Physiology in the Department of
              Horticulture at Purdue University.  He lists current support from the USDA (3
              projects), BARD, and the North Central Biotechnical Program, and two pending
              proposals at the USDA.  All are on unrelated topics.  Oddly, he has never been
              funded by the NSF, although he has submitted many proposals over the years. 
              Dr. Bressan has been very active in training graduate students (total 25) and
              postdoctoral fellows (total 29) in his lab.  Paul Hasegawa, listed as a co-PI,
              is Professor at the Center for Plant Environmental Stress Physiology at Purdue.
               He is a co-PI on all but one of Dr. Bressan's current and pending projects. 
              Meena Narsimhan, also a co-PI, apparently holds the rank of a research
              associate in Dr. Bressan's lab where she has been since 1986.  She lists Dr.
              Bressan as having been her postdoctoral adviser.  She is co-PI with Dr. Bressan
              on the project funded by the North Central Biotechnical Program but lists no
              other current or pending support.    The Program negotiated a reduced budget
              with Dr. Bressan.  As part of this negotiation, Dr. Bressan submitted a
              two-page update (dated July 7,1998) which is appended to this proposal.   
              Program recommendation is to de-decline the action of May 18, 1998, and to make
              an award.
