Title       : MIT Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a9808941

Award Number: 9808941
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25175000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Rubner rubner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc A. Kastner  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert J. Silbey  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,9146,9161,AMPP,CVIS,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9808941
Silbey
The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology supports a broad research program
              organized through five interdisciplinary research groups.   The Center has an
              extensive educational program, ranging from K-12 through the graduate and
              postdoctoral level.  These activities include a Summer Research Experience for
              Undergraduate program, which is nationally advertised and highly competitive. 
              The MRSEC has developed an innovative Science and Engineering Day Camp targeted
              at seventh and eighth grade students from underrepresented minority groups
              attending nearby public schools.   The Center supports well maintained shared
              experimental facilities which are made available to the broader scientific
              community.   The MRSEC addresses emerging scientific opportunities by
              supporting a vigorous program of competitively selected seed projects.   There
              are extensive collaborations with other academic institutions, industry,
              National Laboratories, and other sectors.

The interdisciplinary research
              group investigating microphotonic materials and structures is seeking to
              develop a new class of materials which aims to replace electrons with light as
              the chief carrier of information in optical devices.  These materials, called
              photonic crystals, will allow the control of the propagation of light in very
              small dimensions.  The group uses theoretical and experimental techniques to
              develop and test novel approaches.  A second group is investigating
              nanostructured polymers to determine how electronically active polymers
              organize and behave at the molecular level.  The objective of the group is to
              develop the chemistry and processing needed to achieve the materials properties
              desired for novel optical and electrical applications.  A third group is
              focusing on mesoscopic semiconductor systems.  These systems, involving perhaps
              a few hundred or thousand atoms, are models for the electronic semiconductor
              devices of the future.  The group seeks to understand the fundamental physical
              principles which underlie the electronic transport through and between such
              nanostructures.   A fourth group is investigating the microstructure and
              mechanical properties of polymeric materials.  The goal of the group is to
              achieve large improvements in mechanical properties by tailoring the
              microstructure of structural polymeric materials.  Fundamental physical
              phenomena are investigated by a fifth group, which focuses on substances called
              Mott insulators.  These materials include high temperature superconductors. 
              These materials hold significant, but yet unrealized, technological promise but
              also are extremely important from a basic scientific viewpoint.  The group
              seeks to study the effect of doping these solids with other constituents, which
              will increase the fundamental understanding of these materials and the ability
              to develop them for technological applications.

Participants in the Center
              currently include 43 senior investigators, 14 postdoctoral associates, 41
              graduate students, 47 undergraduates, and 19 technicians and other support
              personnel.   Professor Robert J. Silbey directs the MRSEC.

