Title       : Mechanisms of Social Recognition in Belding's Ground Squirrels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9808704

Award Number: 9808704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill M. Mateo jmm52@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mateo 
9808704

Many species, including humans, can discriminate among
              individuals according to genetic relatedness. Yet how this kin recognition is
              accomplished remains largely unexplored. Spermophilus beldingi are group-living
              squirrels that exhibit many forms of nepotism (favoritism directed at kin),
              including territory defense and predator avoidance, which require the ability
              to identify relatives. These studies will determine how this species uses odors
              for recognition, examine the limits of kin discrimination, and describe the
              development of both kin-based odors and kin recognition. Odor production and
              perception will be studied with controlled odor presentations to captive S.
              beldingi, and these results will be complemented by observations of free-living
              animals.
When these studies are completed, S. beldingi will be one of the
              first organisms for which we have a thorough understanding of favoritism based
              on kinship that spans both mechanistic and evolutionary explanations for kin
              recognition. The results can be applied to other species that are threatened
              with extinction, as an understanding of how individuals use space and
              communicate with olfactory cues may be critical to the maintenance or
              relocation of populations. Finally, kin-recognition research may shed light on
              controversies among scientists who attempt to explain human behavior in an
              evolutionary framework; namely, how and why humans would either advertise or
              conceal their relatedness to others.

