Title       : Probing a Novel Mechanism of Cholinesterase Inactivation by Phosphorothiolates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9808372

Award Number: 9808372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Thompson cmthomp@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808372
Thompson
The long-range objective of this research is to understand
              how asymmetry present in phosphorothiolates (organophosphorus compounds bearing
              a P-S-R group) regulates the rate, extent and mechanism of cholinesterase
              inactivation and reactivation.  Isomalathion, a phosphorothiolate impurity
              found in malathion, bears centers of asymmetry at both carbon and phosphorus
              and is an excellent starting point for studying interactions with various
              cholinesterases.  A co-objective is to prepare novel chiral phosphorothiolate
              structures capable of probing cholinesterase function.  Although knowledge of
              the three-dimensional structure of cholinesterase has advanced rapidly in
              recent years, the needed development of stereochemically precise active site
              probes and inactivators has lagged behind.  The development and demand for
              these novel compounds could add significantly to our knowledge of solution
              reactivity, effects of stereoisomerism on mechanism, and cholinesterase
              structure and function.  In this study, two specific aims will be undertaken;
              (1) to determine the mechanism of cholinesterase inactivation by isomalathion,
              and (2) to use specific chemical design features inherent to isomalathion in
              combination with structure-reactivity relationships to design and prepare
              P-chiral phosphorothiolate-based anticholinesterase agents to test the scope of
              dual-stage inhibition mechanisms. 

A serious chemical problem has remained
              at the forefront of public concern; "Are organophosphorus (OP) insecticides
              (e.g., malathion, diazinon, etc.) safe, and if not, what key interactions are
              responsible or correlate with toxic action and can they be readily identified?"
               In order to address and answer this question, a basic understanding of the
              chemical and biochemical mechanisms underlying organophosphate mode of action
              is required.  Although OP mechanism of action is widely understood, very little
              is known about how "left-" or "right-handedness" or symmetry in OP molecules
              alters their properties.  This research is directed toward pursuing such an
              understanding.  


