Title       : Guanylate Cyclases in the Neurvous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9808335

Award Number: 9808335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Goy mgoy@med.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808335  GOY   One feature of the brain that sets it apart from  all other
              organs is its ability to process, store, and retrieve  large amounts of
              information.  In order to do this, it maintains a  set of intercellular
              connections (synapses) that allow individual  brain cells (neurons) to
              communicate with each other.  Neurons  must initially establish their synaptic
              connections as the brain  is forming during embryogenesis. Subsequently,
              synapses are  modified throughout life as the brain takes in and stores new 
              information, and they are reorganized in response to accidental  damage, for
              example after a stroke or a head injury, as functional  capacities are at least
              partially restored in the brain.  The way  in which neurons generate synaptic
              connections during development,  regulate their strength during adult life, and
              rewire them after  an injury are among the most-studied and least-understood 
              mechanisms in the field of neuroscience.      Recently, it has become apparent
              that a specific kind of  intracellular signaling molecule, called cyclic GMP,
              helps neurons  regulate the strength of synaptic connections -- both in the 
              immature brain, when the survival or elimination of specific  synapses is
              specified, and in the mature brain, when learning and  memory require changes
              in synaptic efficacy.  This leads to an  obvious question:  if cyclic GMP
              controls synaptic strength, then  what controls cyclic GMP?  Dr. Goy's
              laboratory studies mechanisms  that regulate cyclic GMP metabolism in a simple
              nervous system,  the ventral nerve cord of the lobster, Homarus americanus. 
              This  neuronal network (an interconnected chain of 15 ganglia, each  containing
              from thousands to tens of thousands of neurons)  provides many opportunities to
              study the way that mechanisms  controlling cyclic GMP metabolism can produce
              specific changes in  synaptic organization.       Results from this project
              will generate and test specific  hypotheses about how cyclic GMP controls
              synaptogenesis and  synaptic reorganization  in a simple animal.  In turn, this
              will  lead to testable hypotheses about synapse formation in general.
