Title       : US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Determination of Alpha- Nucleus Interaction
               from Elastic, Inelastic and Particle Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9808892

Award Number: 9808892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Bary Malik fbmalik@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5989,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a collaborative research project
              between Dr. F. Bary Malik, Professor of Physics at Southern Illinois University
              and Dr. Arun Kumar Basak of the Physics Department at Rajshahi University in
              Rajshahi, Bangladesh.  The proposed work is for theoretical studies of alpha
              particle-nucleus interaction (for light target nuclei) in the low-to-medium
              energy regime.  The aim is to determine alpha-nuclus interaction for
              medium-light nuclei from the analyses of elastic, inelastic and particle
              transfer data and from an inverse scattering theory.  The large enhancement of
              cross sections at back angles in the noted reaction has, in many cases,
              remained unexplained.  The plan is: (1) to expand the functional form of
              interaction to include both monotonic and non-monotonic functions (or molecular
              potential) and emphasize surface absorption, (2) to incorporate channel
              coupling using both types of potential, (3) to allow for actual resonance terms
              in scattering amplitude, if necessary, and (4) to determine the potential from
              an inverse scattering theory, particularly if the phase shift analyses are
              available.   Scope: This project will support collaboration between two teams
              with complementary capabilities and institutional facilities.  The US P.I. is
              well-respected researcher with a long publication record.  The foreign
              collaborator has done significant work in the past.  The topic of this research
              is important, with potential for significant contributions to nuclear reaction
              theory and should help clear some longstanding issues.  The collaboration will
              have major impact on the ability of the Bangladeshi institute to do this
              important research and to have access to results from international research. 
              It will also help the US scientist accelerate his research work by having the
              excellent scientific talent available at the foreign institute.  The project
              fits within the objectives of the Division of International Programs.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
