Title       : Genetic Control of Convergent Extension in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9808475

Award Number: 9808475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Hardin jdhardin@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Convergent extension is the directed intercalation of cells in an embryonic
              tissue along a preferred axis, resulting in dramatic elongation of the tissue.
              Convergent extension is a common yet poorly understood process. In particular,
              virtually nothing is known about the cellular mechanisms or molecular control
              of convergent extension of epithelial tissues. This proposal seeks to
              investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of convergent extension in an
              epithelium, using the hypodermis, or embryonic epidermis, of the C. elegans
              embryo as a model system. The Hardin laboratory has performed extensive
              analysis of cell intercalation in the dorsal hypodermis of wild-type embryos,
              and has shown that intercalation involves the extension of basolateral
              protrusions in advance of rearrangement of junctional complexes. Intercalation
              of dorsal hypodermal cells in C. elegans is highly ordered and reproducible,
              and constitutes the simplest known system for studying convergent extension in
              vivo. In addition, studying this process in C. elegans allows the use of the
              powerful genetic and molecular techniques available in this system. Using "4D
              microscopy", laser scanning confocal and multiphoton excitation microscopy in
              conjunction with translational fusions of the green fluorescent protein (GFP)
              and adherens-junction associated proteins, as well as the membrane dye FM4-64,
              this proposal seeks to answer the following questions:

(1) What role does
              adherens junctional adhesion play during dorsal intercalation? Mutations have
              been characterized in three components of cadherin-mediated cell adhesion in C.
              elegans: a-catenin (encoded by the hmp-1 locus), b-catenin (encoded by the
              hmp-2 locus) and a cadherin homologue (encoded by the hmr-1 locus). Dorsal
              intercalation will be examined in hmr-1 and hmp-1 homozygotes as well as
              embryos from germline mosaic hermaphrodites which lack both maternal and
              zygotic hmr-1 and hmp-1 mRNA.
(2) What role does the novel gene die-1 play
              during dorsal intercalation? A novel mutation has been isolated in a gene that
              results in specific defects in both dorsal intercalation and elongation (the
              Die phenotype). The die-1 gene has been cloned; it encodes a zinc-finger
              protein of the Kruppel class of putative transcriptional regulators. The
              phenotypic defects will be characterized in die-1 homozygotes, the molecular
              lesion in die-1(w34) mutants will be determined, and the tissue-specific
              expression pattern of die-1 in embryos will be determined.
(3) What role does
              regional patterning play in regulating convergent extension? Mutations in
              several genes result in severe morphogenetic defects in the posterior of C.
              elegans embryos, including dorsal hypodermal cells derived from the C founder
              cell. These include the gene pal-1 (a caudal homologue), nob-1 (a homeodomain
              protein) and vab-7 (an even-skipped homologue). Possible dorsal intercalation
              defects will be examined in these patterning mutants, as well as alterations in
              the expression of die-1.

As a result of these studies, fundamental insights
              will be gained into the mechanisms of convergent extension, a process that is
              fundamental to a diverse set of morphogenetic events, including gastrulation,
              neurulation, wound healing, and many other morphogenetic movements.

