Title       : Characterization of Plastid Genomes in Holoparasitic Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9808752

Award Number: 9808752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Nickrent nickrent@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nickrent
9808752

Photosynthetic plants contain three subcellular organelles,
              the nucleus, chloroplast, and the mitochondrion, and each has its own distinct
              genome. Since their endosymbiotic beginnings, the chloroplast and mitochondrion
              have become interdependent upon the nucleus for their biogenesis and function,
              hence are considered genetically semi-autonomous. Understanding the degree of
              plastid dependence upon nuclear-encoded gene products has been advanced by
              studies of nonphotosynthetic, holoparasitic plants such as beechdrops
              (Epifagus) whose plastid genome is only half the size of photosynthetic
              relatives. This plastome, as well as those of other parasitic plants of
              Asteridae such as Cuscuta, are reduced in size owing to the loss of many
              photosynthetic genes, however, Northern blot analyses and other evidence
              strongly suggest functionality. There also exists other lineages of
              holoparasites, unrelated to Asteridae (the nonasterid holoparasites) that have
              been nonphotosynthetic for longer time periods of time and whose plastid
              genomes show a much higher degree of reorganization than was previously
              documented for beechdrops. Data obtained for one member (Cytinus) indicates it
              has the smallest plastid genome yet documented in angiosperms (20 kb). It is
              proposed that these nonasterid holoparasites (families Balanophoraceae and
              Rafflesiaceae) can serve as natural genetic mutants that are useful in
              exploring questions on chloroplast structure and function.  The organisms
              targeted for this sequencing effort are Cynomorium (low mutation rate) and
              Corynaea (high rate; both Balanophoraceae) and Cytinus (low rate) and
              Pilostyles (high rate; both Rafflesiaceae). Owing to the antiquity of their
              holoparasitic origins, these plants promise to better illustrate the extremes
              that can occur in genome economization. Our preliminary studies have shown that
              these parasites show much greater variation in mutation rates than has been
              documented for the asterid holoparasite Epifagus. It is predicted that ca. 100
              kb of sequence will be generated for the four parasites using standard PCR,
              cloning and sequencing methodologies. The sequences of these four nonasterid
              holoparasites will allow the following objectives to be addressed: 1 ) compare
              the organization of these genomes to the existing complete genomes of Epifagus
              virginiana and to the more distantly related plastid genome of Plasmodium
              falciparum (Apicomplexa); 2) examine molecular genetic factors associated with
              plastid genome function such as ribosomal RNA structure/function relationships,
              the presence of tRNA genes and pseudogenes, and the effects of base composition
              bias on codon usage, and 3) compare substitution rates among homologous genes
              to determine whether patterns of mutation rate acceleration mirror those
              already documented for 16S rDNA in these parasites.
The detailed sequencing
              study proposed here will fill a major void in our understanding of plastid
              genome economization in parasitic organisms.  Complete plastid genome sequences
              will not only document the number and types of genes that are present, but will
              also impact upon our understanding of nucleus-plastid interactions. Comparative
              studies of plastid genome sequences obtained from both low and high rate
              holoparasite from the same lineage will allow hypotheses to be formulated that
              address the types of events that may lead to extreme genome economization and
              will also facilitate determination of which plastid genes are indispensable and
              which are not. Comparisons made to more distant lineages such as algae,
              protists and bacteria will assess the existence of parallel patterns at the
              molecular level. The results from this work have significance to other workers
              examining the molecular genetics of nonphotosynthetic plastids from diverse
              organisms such as Polytoma and Plasmodiurn. These genetically divergent
              holoparasitic plants offer an important balance by supplementing existing
              molecular data derived from more conventional model organisms such as
              Arabidopsis.

