Title       : Purchase of Mass Spectrometric Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9808175

Award Number: 9808175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Reisler reisler@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              will assist faculty in the Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry at the
              University of California Los Angeles to acquire modern data systems to support
              two Micromass ZAB-SE mass spectrometers.  These two data systems will also be
              linked to the data system of an existing Micromass Autospec instrument in the
              UCLA Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry shared mass spectrometry
              laboratory.  The mass spectrometry equipment will be used by the faculty in a
              number of chemical studies including: 1) the synthesis of modular arrays based
              on carborane-derived subunits; 2 ) the development of new synthetic methods and
              their application to the total synthesis of biologically active natural
              products; 3) the synthesis of endohedral metallofullerenes; 4) self assembly of
              interwoven supramolecular edifices and interlocked molecular compounds - the
              so-called catenanes and rotaxanes - containing mechanical bonds; and 5) studies
              of the chemistry, structure and reactivity of dicyano-diaminothiophenes and
              dicyano-diiminothiophene quinones.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique
              used to probe intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular
              compositions of a vast array of organic, bioorganic, and organometallic
              molecules. The addition of the technique of electrospray extends the range of
              MS to protein and nucleic acid molecular weights far beyond any other
              technique. The use of electrospray ionization in combination with high
              resolution provides the latest technique available in mass spectrometry. It
              affords the chemist one of the most powerful tools available for the
              characterization of compounds. The acquisition of this capability in mass
              spectrometry is essential for the prosecution of frontier research in many
              fields of chemistry.
