Title       : Multi-Dimensional Studies of Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9808635

Award Number: 9808635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice R. Eftink Eftink@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9808635  Eftink  This research will focus on the thermodynamics of the
              unfolding of small, globular proteins, with emphasis on collecting equilibrium
              unfolding data over multiple perturbation axes (e.g., temperature, pressure,
              denaturant concentration, pH) and subjecting such data sets to global nonlinear
              least-squares in order to perform more rigorous tests of the two-state model
              for protein unfolding, to determine a full set of thermodynamic parameters
              (e.g., enthalpy, entropy, free energy, heat capacity, and volume changes,
              perturbed pKas and possibly higher order parameters such as the ((V/(P, the
              difference in compressibility).  A combined circular dichroism/fluorometer will
              be used to collect unfolding data, with both types of signals being
              simultaneously monitored.  Tryptophan analogues, including 5-hydroxytryptophan
              and the fluorotryptophans, will be incorporated into proteins to provide
              additional site-specific spectroscopic probes for monitoring unfolding.  The
              proteins to be studied include wild type Staphylococcal nuclease (used as a
              well behaved model), some of its mutants ( including a set of charge change
              mutants), an all beta protein, interleukin 1-(, and a few other small globular
              proteins of the beta type.  In addition to these thermodynamic studies, effort
              will be made to develop new strategies to resolve and quantitate the population
              of intermediate states in an unfolding equilibrium.  One such strategy will
              involve rapid freeze/quenching of proteins (at various initial conditions),
              with subsequent solid-state 19F-nmr to identify peaks for an intermediate
              (chemical exchange being halted by the freezing).  A second strategy will
              involve the use of capillary electrophoresis at moderately low temperature to
              separate species in an equilibrium.  In addition to the fundamental issues
              related to understanding the thermodynamics of protein unfolding, it continues
              to be of practical importance for researchers to be able to describe the
              stability of proteins, for example, when compar ing a set of mutant proteins. 
              How and whether data can be interpreted in terms of the stability of a protein
              depends on the unfolding model that is assumed (e.g., two-state, etc).  The
              goal of this research is to test the limits of the two-state model for selected
              proteins and to develop experimental strategies for determining the presence of
              an equilibrium  unfolding intermediate.  By exploring the limitations of the
              two-state model, it is hoped to achieve some understanding as to how to
              interpret protein stability data.
