Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Support in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9808492

Award Number: 9808492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5950               (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Bingham Powell bpow@trol.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project gathers and presents
              empirical evidence of the effect that a constitutional right to social security
              has on social policy making.  To do so, the student first analyzes court
              rulings and legislative debate in five case-study countries.  The five-country
              sample includes Germany, Italy and Sweden, which have this right, and the
              united States and Finland, which do not.  The research compares the judicial
              interpretations and legal foundations of a right to social security to its
              status in the control countries.  Legislative debate on key policy changes
              yields insight into the prominence of the right and judicial precedents in
              legislators' decisionmaking about policy structure.  Using statistical
              analysis, a larger sample of countries is used to test whether the patterns of
              policy structure in Germany, Italy and Sweden hold for other nations with this
              right.  The student travels to the Universities of Uppsala, Helsinki, and
              Bologna to gather data, and the purchase of a computer with which to test
              quantitative models.  The dissertation project investigates constitutional
              enforcement, lends empirical evidence to legal arguments, explores the
              determinants of social spending, and creates a unique dataset including
              economic, institutional and political variables.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
