Title       : Mapping Protein-Protein Interfaces by MALDI Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9808286

Award Number: 9808286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Komives   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Komives
9808286
Experiments have recently been performed that demonstate the
              feasibility of measuring hydrogen/deuterium exchange rates of amide protons
              using matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass
              spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS).  The method permits measurement of the rate of
              exchange of the very rapidly exchanging amide protons on the surface of
              proteins.  Preliminary results show that the exchange rates of the rapidly
              exchanging amides decrease if the amides are at the interface in a
              protein-protein interaction, presumably due to solvent exclusion.  In this way,
              the protein-protein interface can be rapidly mapped.  Much work remains to be
              done to generalize and quantify the method as well as to understand how solvent
              accessibility relates to protein-protein interaction interfaces.  The
              experimental plan requires first that variables that affect the degree of
              "coverage" of the protein surface and the effect of analysis time on deuterium
              retention be determined.  Second, the parameters that relate the rates of
              off-exchange in the complex to the protein concentrations and binding affinity
              shall be determined.  Third, computational methods shall be implemented to
              ascertain the number of deuteriums on each fragment so that accurate kinetics
              can be obtained.  Fourth, rapid mixing quench methods to monitor conformational
              changes upon protein-protein complexation will be developed.  This experiment
              should yield a "movie" of the conformational changes occurring upon
              complexation.

This novel method has tremendous potential impact for
              discovering the functionally important regions of proteins for which structures
              of their complexes are not available.  The interacting interfaces of new
              proteins identified by the two-hybrid screen could be rapidly identified.  It
              could also prove useful in culling genome information down to a workable size. 
              More importantly, the method provides access to information about the dynamics
              of protein-protein interfaces.  How accessible to the solvent is the
              protein-protein interface?  Does the solvent accessibility change that occurs
              at the interface depend only on the surface area, or does it also depend on the
              hydrophobicity of the interface?  Do certain regions of the interface become
              less conformationally flexible upon protein-protein interaction?  The MALDI-TOF
              MS method shall be used to answer these questions on a variety of diverse
              protein-protein interactions so that the biophysical parameters that govern
              protein-protein interactions will be better understood.

