Title       : Ultrastructural Basis For Mitotic Chromosome Movement in Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9808879

Award Number: 9808879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. McEwen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808879  McEwen    The elegant movements of chromosomes during mitosis have long
              fascinated  biologists, even before the significance of these phenomena for
              genetic segregation was fully appreciated.  The long-term objective of this
              research is to help elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for
              chromosome movement on the mitotic spindle.  This objective requires
              understanding both how chromosomes move and how their movement is controlled.  
              It is a very exciting time in mitosis research, with molecular components of
              the mechanism being discovered  at a rapid rate from a variety of molecular,
              genetic, biochemical, and functional approaches.  Despite this wealth of new
              information, we still do not have a clear picture of the molecular events that
              generate and control chromosome movement.  In particular, we still know very
              little about how different components are arranged relative to one another, and
              how that arrangement changes during chromosome motion. The strategy of the
              current project is to combine advanced techniques in light and electron
              microscopy with molecular and biochemical methods to elucidate the
              three-dimensional arrangements of selected spindle components that are involved
              in chromosome/microtubule interactions.  Specifically, the first part of the
              project uses laser microsurgery and same-cell light and electron microscopy
              (i.e., both light- and electron-microscopical examination of the same cell) to
              determine whether astral ejection forces arise from microtubules pushing on
              chromosome arms, or from microtubule motor proteins moving chromosomes away
              from the spindle pole. The second part of the project tests the hypothesis that
              the binding of microtubules to the kinetochore promotes dissociation of the
              regulatory protein mad2.  The kinetochore is a specialized appendage that
              attaches chromosomes to the spindle and serves as the binding site for several
              key proteins.  Mad2 was first identified using yeast genetics, and its
              dissociation from the kinetochore is correlated with  release of the anaphase
              cell cycle checkpoint. In the third part of the project, improved methods of
              specimen preparation and three-dimensional reconstruction will be used to
              revise our current description of the kinetochore architecture.  This
              information is a prerequisite to interpreting immuno-localization data.  The
              fourth part of the project will use immuno-localization at the electron
              microscopic (EM) level to test the hypothesis that centromere protein F
              (CENP-F) is involved in kinetochore formation during the cell cycle.  The same
              approach will be used to test the hypothesis that the newly discovered protein
              Fint 132 is directly associated with CENP-F.   ***
