Title       : Arabidopsis Flavonoid Metabolism as a Model for the Dynamic Enzyme Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9808117

Award Number: 9808117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda S. Winkel winkel@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shirley 
The assembly of cooperating enzymes into stable complexes is a
              well-established feature of cell metabolism. This organization provides the
              means to attain high local substrate concentrations, regulate competition among
              branch pathways, coordinate the activities of interdependent pathways, and
              sequester toxic or volatile intermediates from the rest of the cell.
              Unfortunately, many of these complexes are relatively shortlived or unstable
              and are therefore notoriously difficult to study using conventional biochemical
              and kinetic approaches. However, powerful new technologies are now emerging
              that offer promise for identifying the molecular mechanisms underlying the
              assembly of dynamic enzyme complexes and uncovering the true biological
              significance of these macromolecular structures. The flavonoid biosynthetic
              pathway of Arabidopsis provides a particularly useful experimental model for
              studying enzyme complex assembly and regulation. Numerous genetic, molecular
              and biochemical tools have been developed for this system, including cloned
              genes for seven major flavonoid enzymes,purified recombinant enzymes produced
              in bacterial cells, polyclonal antibodies against five of these proteins, and a
              collection of mutants that includes null alleles for several key enzymatic
              steps. Direct evidence has recently been obtained for interaction among the
              first several enzymes of the fiavonoid pathway using two-hybrid, affinity
              chromatography, and co-immunolocalization analyses. The major goals of the
              project are to define the protein domains that mediate interactions among these
              enzymes and to characterize the subcellular organization of the flavonoid
              enzyme complex. The project will also develop methods for the future analysis
              of the assembly of this complex in response to specific physiological cues.
              Protein interaction domains will be identified in vitro by extending the
              results of existing affinity chromatography assays. Interactions between
              full-length and truncated flavonoid enzymes fused to green fluorescent protein
              (GFP) will be tested in fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assays in
              bacterial cells. Experiments will also be aimed at examining interactions in
              transgenic plants, both by expressing phage-derived antibodies directed against
              specific interacting domains and using GFP-FRET. Immunolocalization, together
              with fluorescence and confocal laser microscopy of GFP fusion proteins, will be
              used to study the subcellular organization of the flavonoid enzyme complex and
              to begin to track its assembly in living cells.  This project aims to improve
              our understanding of the organization of biosynthetic pathways within cells and
              the importance of this organization for the control of metabolism.
              Specifically, the project will determine the molecular details underlying
              assembly of the Arabidopsis fiavonoid pathway into an enzyme complex. The work
              will establish the basis for future efforts to study the biological
              significance of controlled complex assembly in response to developmental and
              environmental cues. It will also provide information essential to efforts aimed
              at introducing new catalytic activities into existing metabolic pathways. A
              detailed understanding of the structure and regulation of the flavonoid enzyme
              system will contribute information essential to the rational engineering of
              metabolism in living systems, with applications ranging from agriculture to
              human gene therapy.
