Title       : Enhancement of Collections and Safety at the Museum of Texas Tech University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9808928

Award Number: 9808928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Bradley izrdb@ttacs.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clyde Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Schmidly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Richard Monk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT                                              
                                      This project focuses on immediate needs (additional 
              space, collection management, and safety enhancements) and  projected concerns
              (new partnerships and new collections)  that impact the normal operations of
              the Natural Science  Research Laboratory at the Museum, Texas Tech University. 
              The project will support needs concerning:  1) movement into  newly acquired
              space and 2) results from a self-evaluation  for accreditation by the American
              Association of Museums.  To address these challenges, basic changes in space 
              utilization, storage improvements, and minor modification of  facilities must
              be made.  These changes will facilitate  collection utilization, improve
              conditions for health and  safety of personnel, and accommodate current and
              future  growth.  These plans incorporate recently published  information about
              collection care, expansion, storage,  separation of preparation facilities from
              collection storage  areas, allocation of dedicated space for specific
              collection  areas (general collection, fluid-preserved collection, and 
              frozen-tissue collections) and operations (specimen  preparation, osteological
              processing, integrated pest  management, and supply storage).        
              Specifically, this project will support for the  following activities:  1)
              Reallocation of existing space and  expansion into newly acquired space.  This
              will enhance  utilization of facilities, allow for growth, and assist in  the
              implementation of subsequent stages of collection  enhancements.  2) Movement
              of the fluid-preserved  collections to a single, larger, dedicated facility,
              and  house the fluid-specimens in non-flammable lockers to  provide greater
              protection from fire to the collection and  personnel and facilitate collection
              growth.  Additionally,  replacement of old jars and lids in the fluid
              collection.  3) Movement of offices into newly dedicated space.  4)  Movement
              of the vital tissue collection int o a larger  dedicated space.  5) Transfer
              the osteological and specimen  processing areas to dedicated space distant to
              collection  storage areas to minimize the potential for insect-specimen 
              contact.  6) Upgrade the storage of dry specimens including  the replacement of
              wooden cases with a sufficient number of  mental cases to allow for upgrading
              storage of existing  specimens, as well as for the incorporation of newly 
              acquired collections, and for growth and expansion.  7)  Placement of specimen
              cases on metal racks for more  effective pest-control.  8) Installation of
              backlogged and  incoming material.         These changes will provide
              conditions that will serve  the interests of collection care, management,
              growth,  personnel health and safety, as well as facilitate the  museum's
              commitment to making these collections available to  researchers and for
              academic training of systematists and  museum professionals.
