Title       : SCAMP: Phase II Installation of Geophysical Survey Instrumentation for SCICEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9808031

Award Number: 9808031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $852315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale N. Chayes   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Mutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard J. Coakley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Phase two of the Seafloor Characterization and Mapping Pod (SCAMP) project
              will construct, assemble and complete the installation of the Sidescan Swath
              Bathymetric Sonar (SSBS) and the High Resolution Sub-bottom Profiler (HRSP)
              pods on the USS HAWKBILL, a US Navy 637-class submarine.  Completion of SCAMP
              will augment the existing complement of biological, physical, chemical and
              geophysical survey instrumentation currently utilized in the NSF/ONR Submarine
              program SCICEX, resulting in new data, never before collected in the deep
              Arctic: swath backscatter and bathymetry as well as sub-bottom profiler date. 
              The submarine will deploy on the unclassified SCICEX cruise to the Arctic in
              June 1998 from Honolulu, following dockside and at-sea testing of SCAMP.  The
              mobility of the submarine below the pack ice and the willingness of the US Navy
              to deploy the USS HAWKBILL with active sonars, makes this an exceptional
              opportunity to map the deep Arctic Ocean.  SCAMP will provide data sets
              necessary for:  Site selection for bottom sampling and Arctic Drilling, which
              will expose the paleo-oceanographic history of the Arctic.  Accurate digital
              terrain models required for modeling ocean circulation in the Arctic and
              understanding it's impact on global climate.  Detailed mapping of the slowest
              spreading mid-ocean ridge, the Arctic Mid-Ocean Ridge.  Mapping of peri-glacial
              features (iceberg plow marks etc.) on the shelves and high plateau in the
              basin, mass wasting features, channels and sediment waves in the deep basin,
              which will expand our knowledge of the Pleistocene history of the Arctic and
              sediment fluxes into the basin during the Holocene.  Study of the history of
              the Amerasian Basin, which is floored by oceanic crust of probable Cretaceous
              age, but has no known plate boundaries.
