Title       : Behavioral Role and Neural Control of an Endogenously Bursting Neuron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9808411

Award Number: 9808411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253630             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Koester   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9808411    The goal of this project is to study the
              spontaneously bursting neuron in a  neuroethological context. For the past 40
              years, numerous investigators  have exploited the large size of this neuron and
              have used it in studies of  the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie
              such important neuronal  functions as spontaneous burst generation, synaptic
              and hormonal modulation  of burst generation, synthesis and cellular processing
              of neuropeptides,  modulation of the strength of synaptic connections between
              neurons, and the  effects of aging of neuronal function. Neuron R 15 has thus
              become one of  the most widely studied neurons in the animal kingdom and as
              such is an  exemplar of spontaneously bursting cells. Nevertheless, there is
              nothing  known about how it is active in the intact animal. This study will 
              determine the physiological and behavioral conditions under which R15, as  well
              as the neurons that modulate its activity, are active in the intact,  freely
              behaving animal. This information will serve as a key to  interpreting the vast
              literature that has been amassed concerning R15's  cellular properties over the
              years. In addition, the data from the intact  animal concerning R15's
              physiological firing patterns will be used to  design experiments that
              determine how the synaptic input to RI5 modulates  its bursting properties. 
              These experiments will combine recording from  identified neurons in intact,
              behaving animals, with detailed analyses in  the isolated nervous system of the
              biophysical mechanisms by which bursting  of R15 is modulated. By using R15 as
              a canonical example of a bursting  neuron, we expect to add significantly to
              our fundamental understanding of  the role of spontaneous burstors in the
              function of neural circuits. An  important feature of this study will be a
              pilot project that will be part  of a NSF-sponsored undergraduate course in
              neuroethology at the Institute  of Neurobiology in Puerto-Rico. In addition to
              providing the first   comparative data for this well studied neuron, our
              project will establish a  collaborative liaison between Columbia University and
              the faculty and  trainees of the Institute in Puerto Rico that will extend into
              to the  future as an ongoing relationship. It will expose students from this 
              predominately minority institution to a broader range of neuroscience  research
              than they would otherwise experience.
