Title       : Improvement of the GCRL/USM Ichthyological Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9808875

Award Number: 9808875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Ross Stephen.Ross@bull.cc.usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart G. Poss  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bruce Comyns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                            ABSTRACT              The ichthyological research
              collection of the Institute of Marine  Sciences/Gulf Coast Research
              Laboratory/University of Southern  Mississippi (IMS/GCRL/USM) will be improved
              through the processing of  its large backlog. The material to be incorporated
              includes important  baseline collections, samples drawn from major collections
              of  ichthyoplankton taken as part of long-term fishcries research and 
              conservatively estimated at over 2,100,000 specimens, as well as  collections
              obtained from a variety of previously funded ecological  surveys. Historically,
              the GCRL larval collection was maintained  separately to meet State mandates
              concerning ~sheries management.  However, with current expansion and
              reorganization of IMS programs  across campuses, incorporation of carefully
              selected larval materials  into the main collection is seen as an important
              objective. By  strengthening existing collections, IMS will be better
              positioned to  serve research and educational needs of coastal states of the
              northern  Gulf of Mexico and the south-central US and to facet new and 
              increasingly serious resource management challenges.         The project will
              take 3 years to complete and will provide  training for two graduate students
              and summer research opportunities  for undergraduate students. Training within
              IMS programs provides  exposure to interdisciplinary research, as well as the
              activities that  integrate academic research and resource management activity
              involving  multiple local, state, regional, and federal organizations. This
              work  will greatly enhance the collection for use by both professionals and 
              students. This activity will contribute to stemming the decline of  taxonomic
              expertise, and to enhancing the teaching of Systematic  Biology among 57
              affiliate institutions, who regularly use GCRL Museum  facilities. It will also
              better position the GCRL Museum to work more  closely with state, regional, and
              federal management agencies, thereby  living  up to its mandate from the State
              of Mississippi to study and  disseminate specimens from the Guff of Mexico.
              Likewise, it will  increase the value of the USM collection, which is the
              premier  collection of Mississippi freshwater fishes in the state, to the 
              University's academic programs, to regulatory and management agencies,  and to
              scientists worldwide.              Additional shelving, cabinets, and equipment
              will facilitate use  of the  collections as part of USM's Marine and Biological
              Sciences  Biodiversity Program, thereby completing  remaining objectives of the
              second phase of a three-phase plan. When  fully cataloged, the combined ~ 
              collection will rank among the 15 most important ichthyological  collections in
              the United States and  Canada.
