Title       : RUI: Flagellar Protein Secretion in Caulobacter Crescentus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9808797

Award Number: 9808797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig M. Stephens cstephens@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9808797
Stephens

The bacterial flagellum is an important structure for
              motility in many bacterial species.  The assembly of the flagellum involves the
              selective secretion of the components across the cell envelope by a complex
              pathway that is not fully understood.  In Gram-negative bacteria, a closely
              related pathway is also used for secretion of virulence factors.  These
              pathways are collectively termed Type III pathways.  The system for secretion
              of flagellar components in Gram-negative bacteria includes a pore complex in
              the cell membrane and one or more protein factors that are necessary to target
              the secretory proteins to the pore.  The overall objective of this project is
              to study the Type III pathway for flagellar secretion in Caulobacter
              crescentus, chosen in part because assembly, which occurs at a precise time
              during the cell cycle, can be followed in synchronized cultures.  Furthermore,
              the genes encoding all the components required for secretion by this pathway
              have been identified in this species.  This project will focus on how one
              essential component, FliI protein, is involved at the cellular and molecular
              level.  The working hypothesis is that FliI, which has no extensive hydrophobic
              domains to suggest it is a membrane protein, binds selectively to flagellar
              proteins in the cytoplasm and delivers them to the pore complex composed of
              several other elements of the Type III system.  Since FliI is also an ATPase,
              this protein may also provide the energy for translocation of the flagellar
              subunits across the membrane.  The first specific aim of the study is to define
              by mutational and biochemical analyses those sites in the FliI molecule that
              are necessary for its transport function, ATPase activity, and stability.  A
              second aim is to use suppressor analysis and co-immunoprecipitation as methods
              to identify other proteins of the Type-III pathway with which FliI interacts
              and then to characterize the binding.  The third specific aim is a
              collaborative effort to study the subcellular localization of FliI by
              immunofluorescence light microscopy and immunoelectron microscopy.  The studies
              are designed to involve 2-4 undergraduates each year in the various subprojects
              as a means to introduce these students to scientific research.


