Title       : The Development and Structure of Visual Cortical Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9808364

Award Number: 9808364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey J. Goodhill geoff@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                IBN 98-08364  GOODHILL    How humans see the world is one of the oldest and
              most fascinating  questions in the whole of science. Flickering patterns of
              light  entering the eyes are somehow converted into the vivid perception  of a
              familiar face or a spectacular sunset. How our brains perform  such a
              transformation is currently an area of intensive research.  The primary goals
              of this research are to build more intelligent  machines that can do their own
              visual processing, improve the  treatment of people who have vision problems,
              and ultimately give  us a deeper insight into ourselves.  One of the most
              important  clues to how we process visual information is the structure of the 
              biological networks that our brains use to perform this task. A  key staging
              post between our eyes and our perceptions is a region  of the brain called the
              primary visual cortex. A fascinating  characteristic of this region is that
              information from the two  eyes is kept neatly segregated: half of the nerve
              cells it  contains deal with information from the left eye, and the other  half
              deal with information from the right eye. However, these two  separate systems
              are finely intermingled in a pattern of stripes.  There is a regular
              alternation between bands of cells which handle  left eye information and those
              that handle right, rather like the  regular alternation between black and white
              on a zebra skin. Like  a zebra skin, these stripes occur in curving and
              branching  patterns.  Remarkably, every single person has their own unique 
              pattern of bending and flowing in these stripes, rather like the  way each
              person has their own unique fingerprint. Like  fingerprints though, all humans
              have a roughly similar overall  structure to this pattern. This overall
              structure is quite  different in different species of monkeys.  Why is this?
              Why does  this highly distinctive pattern in the structure of the visual 
              system vary so much among species and among individuals, and what  does this
              tell us about differences in visual proce ssing in each  case?  Dr. Goodhill
              will address these questions by simulating the  formation of these stripe
              patterns in a computer. The ingredients  of the simulations are mathematical
              rules that describe how these  structures develop during early life, and
              constraints on these  rules that aim to describe what is different between
              different  species. The ways in which these rules and constraints need to be 
              adjusted to explain the stripe patterns in different species will  provide
              important information about what makes the visual systems  of humans and
              monkeys different among species. This work will  contribute to a deeper
              understanding of the fundamental principles  governing the structure of
              biological visual systems, and thus  give insight into how one might build an
              artificial visual system.
