Title       : Plastid Extensions and Connections in Vascular Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9808101

Award Number: 9808101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen R. Hanson mrh5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808101
Hanson

Plastids develop into a variety of forms in different tissues
              of the vascular plant, reflecting the variety of important functions these
              organelles perform.  Plastids replicate by division and appear in textbooks as
              discrete, autonomous bodies.  However, sporadic reports in the literature have
              described thin filamentous projections of the plastid envelope which sometimes
              connect with other plastids.  These structures, rarely observable under the
              light microscope, have received little attention, and their very existence has
              sometimes been dismissed as an artifact.  This project capitalizes on the
              observation that when green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed as a stromal
              protein in plastids, the structures are readily detected.  Preliminary
              experiments have demonstrated that GFP can move through the tubular
              interconnections between plastids.  This raises the possibility that these
              stroma-containing structures, denoted "stromules", permit exchange of other,
              functionally significant molecules.  The general aim of this project is to
              characterize the stromules further and to probe their as yet unknown role in
              plastid function and plant cell biology.  A thorough characterization of the
              stromules with regard to abundance, size, and degree of interconnections in
              different cell types during their cell cycle and development and under
              environmental stress will be carried out in the model plant Arabidopsis by
              light and electron microscopy.  Transgenic plants will be produced that encode
              either GFP or blue fluorescent protein in their plastid genomes for future
              studies that will be undertaken to monitor the degree of transfer of different
              classes of proteins between plastids in hybrid cells.  The interaction in vivo
              of stromules with other subcellular structures will also be examined.


