Title       : Dynamic Processes in Metalloprotein Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9808392

Award Number: 9808392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nenad M. Kostic nenad@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kostic
MCB 9808392

A. technical
	
The long-term goal of this research is
              to explain, at the molecular level, the mechanism of electron-transfer
              reactions between metalloproteins and the importance of protein-protein docking
              and of dynamic rearrangement processes for these reactions.  This understanding
              is important because metalloproteins and their complexes, as electron carriers
              and redox enzymes, are essential to metabolism.  The objective is to understand
              fundamental principles of biological reactivity, specifically with proteins
              that are physiological partners.  Instead of kinetics of biological (thermal)
              reactions, the focus is to use kinetics of closely related abiological
              (photoinduced) redox reactions as a tool to elucidate dynamic processes that
              modulate the overall biological reactions.  These dynamic processes, however,
              may be masked in the thermal reactions.  In the photoinduced electron transfer,
              which is much faster, the processes of interest can be decoupled from the
              masking processes and investigated quantitatively. The study is rooted in
              P.I.'s past accomplishments, but strikes in new directions.  Recent
              determinations of the three-dimensional structures of cytochrome f,
              plastocyanin, and cytochrome c6 from the green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
              and successes by collaborators at Berkeley and UCLA in molecular biology set
              the stage for these biophysical and biochemical investigations.  The plan of
              work combines applied molecular biology (site-directed mutagenesis), kinetics
              of photoinduced redox reactions (laser flash photolysis), and spectroscopy (NMR
              and optical absorption and emission) in order to answer the following
              questions. (1) What dynamic processes possibly modulate the reaction of
              cytochrome f with its physiologically- equivalent oxidants, plastocyanin and
              cytochrome c6? (2) How does the remarkable two-domain structure of cytochrome f
              control the recognition and the reaction between this protein and its
              physiological partners. (3) Does cytochrome c6 contain a residue functionally
              equivalent to Tyr 83 in plastocyanin? (4) Does cytochrome c6 use its acidic
              patch in the reaction with cytochrome f ? Recognition patches on the protein
              surfaces will be altered by structurally-noninvasive mutations.  Kinetic
              effects of these mutations and of ionic strength will reveal much about the
              protein-protein association.  If flexible diprotein complexes rearrange from
              the initial, docking configuration to a different, reactive configuration,
              quantitative analysis of the effects of solution viscosity and of temperature
              will reveal the nature of this rearrangement and its trajectory.  Some of the
              aforementioned issues are being debated, and others have barely been touched by
              previous researchers.  The questions nos. 3 and 4 arose from very recent
              theoretical analyses, and all of the answers will spur further theoretical
              work.  This project will stimulate thinking and rethinking about
              structure-function relationships for recognition and electron transfer in
              biological systems.







2. Non-technical

At the most elementary
              level, processes of life are chemical
processes. Therefore, experimental and
              theoretical methods of chemistry can reveal fundamental interactions and
              transformations involving biological molecules, such as proteins. Electrons are
              fundamental constituents of all atoms and the smallest  particles carrying
              negative electrical charge. Flow of electrons in the living cell is an
              essential process for all organisms that carry out photosynthesis. Because all
              forms of life are interdependent, electron flow in cells is an essential
              requirement for life. Electron carriers in cells are metalloproteins - proteins
              containing metal atoms.  This study deals with basic steps on the electron
              paths of three proteins: Cytochrome f, plastocyanin, and cytochrome c6, all
              from the same green alga, in their natural and mutated forms of these proteins
              and also with slightly altered forms. The speeds at which these proteins
              transfer the electrons between themselves are measured by laser methods.
              Experiments are designed to determine how the function of these proteins is
              governed by their three-dimensional structures and properties of the protein
              surfaces, and how purposeful alterations in the proteins affect the speed of
              transfer.  Existing theoretical predictions will be tested and the results used
              to spur theorists to new analyses. This interplay between chemistry and
              molecular biology and between experiment and theory is advantageous in the
              study of fundamental principles of life.


