Title       : Electronic Field Guide: An Object Oriented WWW Database to Identify Species and
               Record Ecological Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a9808462

Award Number: 9808462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Stevenson robert.stevenson@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1338,9104,9169,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The Electronic Field Guide (EFG) project will provide a web-  accessible
              distributed object oriented database for the  identification of biological
              specimens from field  observations. The data, including both taxonomic and 
              environmental or ecological data, wi  ll aid in iden-  tification by building a
              context for each observation. The  database will also support the recording of
              multiple  observations, so that larger-scale ecological studies can be  carried
              o  ut using the data. This project will complement the  traditional book format
              field guides, and extend their utility  by addressing certain problems inherent
              to the format. These  prob-lems include long time lags in preparation, expense
              of  production, and the   broad geo-graphic scope usually  necessitated by
              economic considerations. EFG exploits the  flexibility and the ease of updating
              inherent to the  electronic format.    This project will complement the
              traditional book format field  guides, and extend their utili  ty by addressing
              certain  problems inherent to the format. These problems include long  time
              lags in preparation, expense of production, and the broad  geographic scope
              usually necessitated by economic  considerations. EFG exploits the flexibility
              and the eas  e of  updating inherent to the electronic format.    EFG will use
              Object Oriented Database technology to provide  mechanisms by which biol-ogists
              can extend the description of  the data itself to include the ecological and
              taxonomic  attributes they deem appropri  ate to the particular  collection of
              species they wish in the database. The  underlying descriptions will be
              specified in the ACS Reference  Model for Biological Collections. These
              descriptions will  allow multiple EFGs to connect to one another or to other d 
              atabases, using protocols which will be developed, tested and  pub-lished.   
              The EFG software design rigorously separates the data models  from the database
              and from the user interface, thereby  supporting multiple views of the data for
              differing  research  and e  ducational purposes. Demonstration of this
              separation  is a key goal of the project. Ini-tially, EFG will be deployed  in
              Monteverde, Costa Rica, to record the 700 species of but-  terflies and 3000
              species of plants in their environment. The  utility of the r  esulting
              database will be evaluated in  relation to traditional book-based
              identification.
