Title       : Theoretical Studies of Protein-Ligand Binding Energetics and Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a9808202

Award Number: 9808202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Sharp sharpk@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808202  Sharp  This research is directed at understanding the physical and
              chemical basis of specific binding of proteins to their ligands.  The goal is
              to answer two key questions that play an important part in the biological
              function of proteins: i)  How do the structure and chemical properties of the
              protein and ligand result in favorable energetics (high affinity) for the
              correct binding complex? ii) How do the structure and chemical properties
              control the dissociation kinetics under applied forces.  The binding free
              energy will be calculated using a combination of molecular mechanics and finite
              difference Poisson-Boltzmann methods. Changes in internal translation and
              ratational entropy in the complex will be computed from fluctuations in the
              structure obtained from molecular dynamics simulations.  Brownian dynamics will
              be used to study the dissociation kinetics of protein-ligand systems in the
              presence of intrinsic and extrinsic (mechanical) forces.  Solvent screened
              forces that affect the dissociation will be included using a finite difference
              Poisson-Boltzmann approach.  Brownian dynamics simulations will be used to
              understand the relationship between structure and dissociation kinetics of
              protein-ligand interactions that do or do not mediate cell adhesion.  The
              ability to calculate and eventually predict how tightly a protein binds other
              molecules (ligand) may be termed the "binding affinity problem", and it ranks
              in importance with other major problems in modern structural biology such as
              the "protein folding problem", and the basis of catalytic activity in proteins.
              The ability to understand how the structure of a protein enables it to bind a
              specific target molecule will increase our understanding of many biological
              events at the molecular level such as antibody-antigen-affinity, antigenicity,
              specificity in signal transduction pathways, the function of inhibitors, etc. 
              Applications of research on the binding problem also include protein
              engineering.  Understanding the mechanism an d rate at which proteins become
              unbound from their ligands in the presence of forces is important in
              understanding the different adhesion behaviors shown by cells.  The ability to
              simulate dissociation kinetics will shed light on the relationship between
              molecular structure, dissociation and biologically important functions such as
              cell adhesion.
