Title       : A 400 MHz Broadband NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9808183

Award Number: 9808183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude F. Meares meares@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Kurth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip P. Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tadeusz F. Molinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities   Program
              will assist faculty in the Department of Chemistry at the   University of
              California in Davis to acquire a 400 MHz broadband Nuclear   Magnetic Resonance
              (NMR) spectrometer with probes, VT unit and computer   and will provide several
              capabilities not currently available.  Such   capabilities include higher
              dispersion NMR with high sensitivity inverse   detected 2D NMR, gradient
              enhanced (PFG) 2D proton-carbon 13 NMR   spectroscopy, CP MAS solid-state NMR,
              high signal-to-noise for direct   detected NMR of quadrupolar heteronuclei,
              Ethernet networked off-line   processing and data management and a platform for
              future upgrades and  software support.  Faculty will exploit these new features
              (i)for   biosynthesis and structure elucidation of natural products, (ii) for  
              heteronuclear NMR studies of novel molecules containing quadrupolar isotopes of
              less sensitive nuclei, (iii) to support studies involving   suspension
              polymerization and solid-phase organic synthesis, and (iv) to aid in the
              synthesis and dynamic isomerism of porphyrins.    

Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance spectroscopy is the most powerful tool   available to chemists for
              the elucidation of the structure of molecules.    It is used to identify
              unknown substances, characterize specific   arrangement of atoms within
              molecules, and to study the dynamics of   interactions between molecules in
              solution.  Access to state-of-the-art   NMR spectrometry is essential to
              chemists who are carrying out frontier research.  The results from these NMR
              studies are useful in the areas   such as polymers, catalysis, and in biology.
