Title       : Role of Extracellular Matrix and Cytoskeleton in Cyclin D1 Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9808205

Award Number: 9808205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hansen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Albrecht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore how the attachment of cells to the extracellular
              matrix controls cell division.  The project is based on preliminary
              observations that when liver cells grown in culture attach to a rigid collagen
              film, these cells spread, grow and divide.  In contrast, when the same cells
              are grown on a collagen gel, they attach to the gel but fail to spread and
              divide.  The apparent reason that these latter cells do not divide is that they
              do not express a specific control protein called cyclin D1 that is necessary
              for the cells to progress from their growth phase (designated the G1 phase of
              the cell cycle) through the rest of the cell division cycle.  What causes this
              block is unclear.  The hypothesis that will be tested is that cyclin D1
              transcription results from the activation of a signaling pathway that requires
              cell spreading on an appropriate extracellular matrix.  The hypothesis implies
              that attachment to the matrix is necessary but not sufficient for cell division
              and that rearrangement of the cytoskeleton may also be required.  The
              hypothesis will be tested with three specific experimental aims. The first aim
              is to determine whether cells that over-express cyclin D1 can overcome cell
              division arrest when they are grown on collagen gels.  The second aim is to
              measure the increase in transcription of cyclin D1 messenger RNA that is
              induced by collagen films.   The mechanism by which transcription of this gene
              is regulated will also be addressed.  The third aim is to measure and vary the
              activity of key molecules of important signaling pathways that may be activated
              when cells are grown on different collagen substrates.  Changes in cyclin D1
              activity and cell division will be correlated with rearrangements of the actin
              cytoskeleton.  The significance of the project extends to the broad impact it
              will have on our understanding of how the interactions  of cells with the
              extracellular matrix affect diverse functions from cytoskeletal dynamics to
              gene expression and cell division.
