Title       : Holocene Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9808963

Award Number: 9808963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven M. Colman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Mayewski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren D. Meeker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Iqbal Pittalwala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9808963  Mayeswki, Paul A.  University of New Hampshire  Title:
              Holocene Climate Variability    With the successful completion of deep drilling
              at Summit Greenland  there is now a well-dated, high resolution,
              multi-parameter record  of climate change for the Northern Hemisphere that
              covers the last  glacial cycle.  The GISP2 record reveals evidence of rapid and
               dramatic change in climate.  Recent examination of the Holocene  portion of
              the Greenland record has demonstrated that, while  relatively stable by
              comparison with glacial age climate, the  Holocene contains subdued versions of
              glacial age millennial scale  rapid climate change events.  The Holocene record
              is characterized  by significant annual to centennial scale variability plus 
              significant and complex forcing and response histories.   Understanding
              Holocene climate is essential to the differentiation  of natural versus
              anthropogenic climate response and forcing and to  any prediction of future
              climate.  This award supports an  investigation designed to refine and expand
              our knowledge of the  Holocene GISP2 glaciochemical record and to utilize
              several other  existing paleoclimate records (e.g., ice core, marine sediments)
               for comparison.  The primary analytical emphasis is the production  of
              ultra-high resolution major ion series (chloride, nitrate   sulfate, calcium,
              magnesium, sodium, potassium and ammonium) and  MSA.  These represent >95% of
              the soluble ions in the atmosphere  and can be used: (1) to develop
              environmental records (e.g.,  volcanic history, marine and continental biogenic
              source  productivity); (2) in the reconstruction of atmospheric circulation 
              systems and (3) to develop more precise dating of existing ice core  records. 
              This study will add a new dimension to the classic stable  isotope-temperature
              reconstruction of climate by defining, through  the examination of
              glaciochemical series, complementary measures of  variability in atmospheric
              circulation.
