Title       : RUI: Trans-Acting Factors in Large-Scale Genome Rearrangement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9808573

Award Number: 9808573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Coyne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Coyne
9806573

The focus of this proposal is on understanding the process of
              genome reorganization found in the ciliated protozoan, Tetrahymena thermophila,
              that occurs as part of the normal developmental process. To coordinate and
              carry out this genome rearrangement, a large number of trans-acting factors
              must be required, but thus far, only two, named Pdd1p and Pdd2p have been
              identified. Pdd1p, the more well characterized of the two, belongs to the
              chromo family of proteins, which are usually associated with condensed
              chromatin. It is found in close association with that fraction of genomic DNA
              that is eliminated, at the time of its processing, suggesting a direct role in
              the DNA elimination mechanism. Disruption of the parental, somatic PDD1 gene
              causes a defect in DNA elimination and chromosome breakage and a failure to
              complete successful conjugation. Exconjugants are unable to divide and
              eventually die. The activities of this protein will be studied by disrupting
              the gene encoding it in both the germline and somatic nuclei of Tetrahymena, as
              well as by generating site-directed mutations in the gene. These mutations will
              be reintroduced into the Tetrahymena genome by gene replacement technology and
              analyzed for their effects on specific DNA rearrangements, the progression of
              nuclear differentiation events, and proper nuclear targeting of
              Pdd1p.

Stability of the genome is normally a hallmark of development and
              inheritance. Some well-known exceptions include the rearrangement of vertebrate
              immunoglobulin genes and the yeast mating type loci. Intriguingly, however,
              many organisms undergo massive genome reorganization as part of their normal
              developmental program. The experiments proposed will help define the mechanisms
              involved in such DNA rearrangements. They will also clarify the connection
              between chromatin structure formation and genome rearrangement. The experiments
              are particularly suited to the training of undergraduate students in the rigor
              and excitement of experimental biological research.


