Title       : Synapse Formation and Plasticity - Synapse Elimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9808938

Award Number: 9808938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Schacher sms2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808938  SCHACHER   The formation of neural circuits during development is a
              multistep process involving axon guidance, target selection and synapse
              formation.  The late stages of synapse formation include activity-dependent
              strengthening and stabilization of "behaviorally relevant" connections and the
              elimination of others.  Neural circuits established during development continue
              to be modified in post-embryonic life by the environment and by the experience
              of an organism.  These later modifications in the efficacy of connections can
              be short- or long-lasting, and can include structural changes such as the
              formation of new connections or the elimination of pre-existing ones.  Some of
              the cellular and molecular mechanisms first utilized during development are
              likely to be used again in experience-dependent modifications of connections in
              the adult.  In this project, a model in vitro system consisting of identified
              neurons isolated from the central nervous system of the marine mollusk Aplysia
              californica will be used to examine the role of cell surface molecules and
              local macromolecular synthesis on processes involved in synaptic modification
              at two stages: in competition-dependent synapse elimination during initial
              synapse formation, and in synapse elimination induced by neuromodulatory
              chemicals, which accompanies long-term synaptic depression in mature circuits
              after particular types of external stimulation.  Isolated Aplysia neurons
              reliably form chemical connections in culture that express short- and long-term
              forms of synaptic plasticity known to accompany various form of simple learning
              in the organism.  This model cell culture system will be used in combination
              with anatomical, electrophysiological, pharmacological, and molecular
              techniques to explore how the local expression of synapse-specific genes and
              proteins contributes to synapse elimination in the development and maturation
              of synaptic connections.  Dr. Schacher and his colleagues will examine whether
              regulation of local protein s ynthesis in the presynaptic and/or postsynaptic
              cell and the expression and distribution of critical surface receptors
              contribute to synapse elimination at different stages in the life history of an
              identified and behaviorally relevant chemical synapse.
