Title       : Neural Mechanisms of Nutritional Homeostasis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9808400

Award Number: 9808400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhanor Gillette rhanor@uxl.cso.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9808400  Neural Mechanisms of Nutritional Homeostasis   
              Motivational processes, in particular hunger, are driving  influences in
              behavioral decision-making; however, it is not known  how neural networks
              mediating feeding or other motivated behaviors  are organized by the
              physiological mediators of hunger. One  critically involved neurochemical is
              the biogenic amine serotonin  (5-HT), which modulates affect and arousal in
              vertebrates and  invertebrates alike. In a simple and accessible model system,
              5-HT  stimulates readiness to feed acting in the feeding motor network  to
              enhance specific aspects of neuron excitability. Evidence  suggests that 5-HT
              stimulates production of nitric oxide (NO), a  critical modulator of neural
              activity in many animals. This  proposal outlines plans to elucidate the role
              and mechanisms of  action of 5-HT in regulating the enzyme that makes NO, and
              thereby  hunger/satiation state. These studies combine behavioral and 
              electrical measures with analysis of 5-HT and NO-related chemical  compounds in
              single cells. These studies approach the basic  organization of the feedback
              loops regulating nutritional  homeostasis in all motile animals and can lead to
              a fuller  understanding of mechanisms of hunger/satiation. They relate 
              directly to health issues of weight-control in anorexia and  obesity. Knowledge
              of these factors is likely to be significant to  the development of autonomous
              robots capable of making least-  probable-error decisions in a noisy
              environment, and to the  evolution of artificial intelligence for whose optimal
              function  motivation-based processes can provide the critical regulation of 
              goal related activity, just as they do in real intelligence  systems.
