Title       : Effects of Temperature and Ultrastructure on Solute Diffusion in Striated Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9808120

Award Number: 9808120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Moerland moerland@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9808120  Moerland  This three year project by Dr. Moerland is a
              comprehensive study of the effects of temperature on intracellular diffusion,
              which is a process of fundamental importance to all cells.  Diffusion of small
              water-borne molecules, including those with key roles in energy metabolism,
              will be examined in muscle by PFG-NMR, a technique that is closely related to
              clinical magnetic resonance imaging.  The sensitivity of diffusion to naturally
              relevant changes in temperature will be measured.  Diffusion measurements will
              be compared with the internal structure of muscle cells, as measured by
              electron microscopy, to identify those feature of the cellular architecture
              that determine patterns of intracellular diffusion.  Experiments will be
              performed on select muscles that represent a range of cell structure from fish
              and invertebrates.  This project will make a threefold contribution: First, it
              will contribute to our basic understanding of the effects of temperature on
              intracellular diffusion in all cell types.  Second, it will contribute to our
              overall understanding of the mobility of energetically important compounds in
              muscle.  Third, it will provide fundamental information about the structural
              properties of the living cytoplasm.  Further, this project will contribute to
              the training and development of scientific investigators, including
              undergraduate and graduate students.
