Title       : RUI: Molecular Genetic Analysis of Early Embryonic Patterning in Nasonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9808769

Award Number: 9808769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Anne Pultz pultz@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Leaf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genetic control of development is well understood in Drosophila, but how
              have genetic programs changed during the course of evolution?  Some regulatory
              genes are conserved over vast evolutionary distances, such as the the Hox genes
              that control cell fates along the antero-posterior axis.  Others have changed
              rapidly. The full spectrum can best be understood by studying organisms ranging
              from close relatives of the model systems, through a series of more distantly
              related species. The focus here is on embryonic patteming in the wasp Nasonia
              vitripennis. Nasonia is more closely related to Drosophila than are other
              well-studied insects such as beetles and grasshoppers. The Pultz lab has
              isolated zygotic mutations that identify Nasonia embryonic patterning genes.
              The next step is developing molecular tools to illuminate mechanisms of Nasonia
              early development and to study two interesting Nasonia patterning genes,
              headless and head only. These genes have phenotypic similarities to patterning
              genes in Drosophila, but affect larger regions of the embryo than Drosophila
              zygotic genes, suggesting that zygotic gene functions may play a larger role in
              the wasp than in the fly. The experimental approaches will be threefold. (1)
              The relationship between headless and head only will be studied through double
              mutant analysis. (2) Nasonia counterparts of Drosophila genes will be studied
              by linkage analysis and DNA sequencing, asking whether headless is Nasonia
              hunchback and whether head only may be Nasonia Kruppel, caudal, nanos or
              pumilio. (3) Expression of Nasonia hunchback and caudal RNA and protein
              products will be examined in wild type embryos, asking whether these gene
              products are provided maternally as well as zygotically. Nasonia hunchback and
              caudal expression will also be analyzed in head only and headless mutant
              embryos. This work will include construction of embryonic cDNA libraries,
              isolation of cDNA clones, in situ hybridizations and construction of fusion
              proteins for raising antibodies. Protein gradients will be examined by
              three-dimensional reconstructions of fluorescently-stained embryos. Together,
              these experiments will address hypotheses about headless and head only
              identities and functions, and will explore whether Nasonia and Drosophila
              differ in their dependence on maternally loaded developmental regulatory gene
              products.
