Title       : Molecular Control of Ovule Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9808395

Award Number: 9808395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Gasser csgasser@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ovules of higher plants play a central role in plant reproduction.  In
              addition, because ovules are the precursors to seeds, ovule development is a
              critical component of crop productivity.  Ovule development includes processes
              which typify development in all multicellular organisms and can be used as a
              model for studying fundamental mechanisms regulating morphogenesis and tissue
              differentiation in all organisms.  The PI has identified a set of genes
              regulating critical steps in ovule developmental through isolation ovule
              mutations isolated by positional cloning methods.  These include HUELLENLOS
              (HLL) and SHORT INTEGUMENTS 2 (SIN2) - both of which are essential for
              formation or expansion of the integuments (the precursors of the seed coat),
              and TSO1 - which is necessary for normal coordination of directional expansion
              of integument cells.  The isolated genes will serve as tools for analysis of
              patterns of gene expression and for formation of initial models of the
              biochemical mechanism regulating ovule development.  Completion of the proposed
              research will significantly increase understanding of genetic and molecular
              control of plant reproductive development and of morphogenesis and histogenesis
              in general.  The cloned genes will also enable further research on regulation
              and manipulation of these fundamental developmental processes.
