Title       : Synaptic Competition in a Retinotectal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9808723

Award Number: 9808723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mu-Ming Poo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808723  POO     During the early development of the nervous  system, the
              sensory inputs from the environment received by the  central nervous system
              play a critical role.  Abnormal sensory  inputs result in abnormal development
              of nerve connections in the  brain.  However, how sensory inputs affect these
              connections is  poorly understood.  In this project, Dr. Poo and a graduate 
              student and postdoctoral fellow will use an electrical recording  method that
              can detect the efficiency of nerve connections in the  intact visual system of
              the developing frog tadpole.  In  particular, they will examine how nerve
              connections from the  retina to its major target in the brain, the tectum, are
              affected  by electrical activity in the visual inputs.  In Part I of the 
              project, they will determine how repetitive activity induced by  electrical
              stimulation of retinal neurons affects the efficiency  of the synaptic
              connections between the retina and tectum, or  retino-tectal synapses.  The
              patterns of electrical activity and  the cellular mechanisms that produce
              long-term changes in  efficiency, namely long-term potentiation and/or
              depression (LTP &  LTD) will be examined.  In Part II, they will use light
              stimuli to  initiate localized retinal activity and examine whether 
              physiological visual stimuli can induce LTP or LTD of retino-  tectal synapses,
              and if so, how these light-induced synaptic  modifications relate to those
              produced by direct electrical  stimulation.  In Part III, they will carry out
              simultaneous  electrophysiological and optical recording of identified retino- 
              tectal projections in the tectum, using a newly developed high-  resolution
              microscopic technique called two-photon laser scanning  fluorescence
              microscopy.  They will determine whether and how  electrical and visual stimuli
              shape the pattern of axonal  processes of retinal ganglion neurons and
              dendritic processes of  the postsynaptic tectal cells.  This project offers
              unique  opportunities for direct examination of the effects of se nsory 
              activity on the structure and function of synaptic connections in  an intact
              visual system.  The information obtained will be  valuable to our understanding
              of the development of vertebrate  visual systems and plasticity of neuronal
              connections in general.
