Title       : The Role of Acidic Residues and the Proton Motive Force in Membrane Protein
               Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9808843

Award Number: 9808843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross E. Dalbey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The bacterial plasma membrane, consisting of a lipid bilayer with associated
              proteins, is the prime permeability barrier for the bacterial cell, separating
              the cytoplasm from the bacterium's environment.  During the life of the
              bacterial cell, new proteins must be inserted into the membrane, either
              partially (in the case of membrane proteins) or completely (in the case of
              secretory proteins that are translocated across the membrane).  It is
              recognized that different proteins utilize different mechanisms to achieve this
              insertion or translocation, and a variety of protein translocation mechanisms
              have been described.  The overall goal of Dr. Dalbey's laboratory is to
              understand how proteins insert into or across membranes and achieve their
              correct asymmetric topologies.  

The bacterial plasma membrane is in fact a
              charged (energized) capacitor, with both an electrical potential and a hydrogen
              ion (proton) concentration gradient across it.   The energy stored in this
              capacitor is termed  the proton motive force, or PMF, and serves as the energy
              source for a variety of bacterial metabolic activities that take place at the
              membrane.  This project addresses the role of the PMF in the insertion of newly
              synthesized proteins into bacterial membranes.  This role is presently poorly
              understood.  There are a number of possible roles the PMF may play:  it may
              directly affect the translocating membrane protein; it may activate a protein
              machinery to promote insertion; or some combination of the two.   Recently, it
              has been shown in bacteria that the translocation of negatively charged amino
              acids ("residues") across the membrane can be driven by the PMF, and that
              negatively charged residues within a protein or peptide can play an active role
              in the translocation process.  These results provide evidence for an
              electrophoresis-like membrane transfer mechanism.  However, it is still not
              known whether the observed requirement for a PMF is specific for the electrical
              component (externally positive electrical charge across the membrane) or the
              transmembrane pH component (externally acidic, resulting from the hydrogen ion
              concentration gradient where the concentration is higher on the outside).  The
              aims of this proposal are to: determine whether the PMF can act directly on the
              membrane protein substrate to promote the spontaneous insertion of membrane
              proteins into liposomes; determine whether the insertion of membrane proteins
              requires a protein component that may mediate the PMF effects; examine the
              general importance of negatively charged residues in protein translocation; and
              determine which components of the PMF drives translocation of negatively
              charged residues.  A combination of genetic, biochemical and biophysical
              methods will be used to achieve these aims.  These studies are important
              because they will help define a basic mechanism by which hydrophilic regions of
              membrane proteins move across the lipid bilayer of biological membranes.  This
              will expand our knowledge and understanding of a basic cellular function, which
              in turn will contribute significantly to the general foundations of
              biotechnology, particularly with regard to bioprocessing of genetically
              engineered proteins.   

