Title       : Structure, Function, and Regulation of TATA Binding Protein Dimers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9808850

Award Number: 9808850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Pugh bfp2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808850  Pugh  The goal of this project is to address the physiological
              relevance of the self-association of the TATA binding protein (TBP). Evidence
              thus far indicates that TBP and TFIID dimerize, whether in vitro or in vivo.
              Dimerization and DNA binding are competitive reactions. Therefore, the first
              and foremost priority is to mutagenize the crystallographic dimer interface so
              as to assess whether the dimer solution structure and the crystallographic
              structure are congruent. An initial set of mutations is confirming this notion.
              If dimerization prevents promoter binding by TBP and as a consequence
              transcription, then the dimer hypothesis predicts that dimer defective TBP
              mutants should support elevated levels of basal transcription relative to wild
              type TBP. If activators directly or indirectly facilitate dimer dissociation,
              then these mutants should not generate elevated levels of activated
              transcription relative to wild type TBP. Genetic selections will be used to
              isolate TBP mutants that elevate basal transcription in yeast. Results so far
              indicate a strong correlation between dimer instability and elevated basal (but
              not activated) transcription in yeast. The most compelling test for the
              relevance of TBP dimerization in controlling gene expression will be to isolate
              second-site intragenic suppressors of the primary mutation and evaluate whether
              such mutations restore dimer stability and map to the dimer interface that is
              complementary to the primary mutation.  Understanding how each of our -75,000
              genes is turned "on" or "off" in response to cellular and environmental cues,
              will lead to a greater understanding of how organisms develop and respond to
              changing environments. This project is directed at elucidating a potential
              molecular mechanism by which genes are generally in the "off" state. Whatever
              is causing the "off" state is likely to be the target of gene activators.
