Title       : Laser Microsurgery on Chromosomes During Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9808290

Award Number: 9808290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158736             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. LaFountain jrl@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This project is to study the molecular mechanics of meiosis in the
              spermatocytes of crane-flies used as a model system.  These are large,
              optically clear cells which have well formed chromosomes that make
              micromanipulations of the mitotic and meiotic structures relatively easy. This
              project focuses on meiotic events and contrasts these with the
              better-understood events of mitosis.  The common assumption is that because the
              chromosome movements are so similar in both processes, the molecular mechanisms
              that give rise to these movements must also be similar.  However, since some
              events are clearly unique to meiosis, such as the pairing of homologous
              chromosomes at the beginning of meiosis, some of the underlying molecular
              mechanisms may differ, at least in their details.  The general approach will be
              to perform laser microsurgery experiments to ablate or disconnect various
              components of the chromosomes and spindle at different times during meiosis and
              to observe how these perturbations affect chromosome movements.  Preliminary
              results suggest that chromosomes may be subjected to forces at their ends
              (telomeres) in addition to those forces generated at the sites where the
              chromosomes attach to the spindle (kinetochores).  When previously paired
              chromosomes separate during meiosis, they behave as if their telomeres are
              tethered together.  Objective 1 of this project will be to analyze this
              behavior in detail.  Objective 2 is to study the detailed movements and
              reorientations of meiotic chromosomes as they congregate and pair prior to
              separation.  The molecular mechanism of this congression is poorly understood,
              even in mitosis.  As part of this objective, studies will be undertaken to
              determine if the rates of movement are load-independent (i.e. independent of
              the size of the chromosome).  Objective 3 will expand the studies to other
              cells to determine if chromosome movements in spermatocytes are similar to
              those in other cells of the crane-fly and in cells of other species.

