Title       : The Storage of Temporal Patterns in Cerebellum-like Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9808887

Award Number: 9808887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick D. Roberts robertpa@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-08887 ROBERTS.  The ultimate goal of this project is to  understand how
              the nervous system accurately stores and processes  the temporal flow of
              sensory information.  The project focuses on  the mormyrid electric fish; a
              nocturnal fish that senses its  environment by emitting a weak electric pulse
              and then detecting  the distortions caused by external objects with
              electrosensory  receptors in its skin.  This electrosensory system requires 
              exceptional timing and precision in order for the fish to navigate  through its
              environment and identify external objects.  The site  of initial electrosensory
              information processing is the  electrosensory lateral line lobe (ELL).  Neurons
              of the ELL are  affected not only by electrosensory input, but also by signals 
              that are temporally locked to the motor command that elicits the  electric
              pulse.  The responses of these neurons in the ELL are  found to be highly
              adaptable to changing conditions that effect  the electrosensory system.  This
              adaptability leads to the ability  of these neurons to "store" an image of the
              fish's expectation of  its own electrical signal. However, due to the
              complexity of the  ELL, it is unclear whether the rules of adaptive learning
              measured  in certain experimental conditions can explain the collective  neural
              activity observed under other experimental conditions.  The  difficulty of
              experimentally exploring the roles of various  synaptic learning rules, sites
              of adaptive change, and  intracellular connections make theoretical and
              modeling work a  necessary adjunct to experimental study.  This research effort
              is  in collaboration with Dr. Curtis Bell who will provide data from 
              experiments performed in his lab.  Dr. Roberts will use  mathematical analyses
              and computer simulations to combine results  from different experiments to
              predict changes in the responses  neurons in the ELL during changing sensory
              conditions.  These  predictions will then be used to test different mechanisms
              that  may be responsible for the adaptiv e changes observed in the ELL. 
              Completion of the proposed research will clarify underlying  mechanisms of ELL
              function and illuminate the cooperative  interactions of subsystems in this and
              other cerebellum-like  structures.
