Title       : The International Plant Names Index: An Internet-Accessible Authority File of
               Scientific Names of Seed Plants Using Distributed Object Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9808220

Award Number: 9808220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Pfister dpfister@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter F. Stevens  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9178,9229,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  The Harvard University Herbaria, the Royal Botanic Gardens,  Kew, and the
              Australian National Herbarium have formed a  consortium called the Plant Names
              Project (PNP), whose goal is  to create and maintain a comprehensive authority
              file for the  names of all seed plants (flowering plants and "gymnosperms"), 
              and make this freely available on the Internet as the  International Plant
              Names Index (IPNI). The PNP is developing  the infra-structure to manage and
              edit data across continents,  to keep these IPNI authority files continuously
              available and  updated, and to provide transparent access to the large 
              audience of scientists, citizens, and institutions who rely on  these data. An
              NSF-funded pilot grant facilitated the  development of a prototype Authority
              Data Server (ADS) system,  a distributed object infrastructure implemented in
              Java, with  current ADS nodes in Canberra (Australia), London (England),  and
              Cambridge (U.S.A.). Under the current award, the  investigators will modify and
              expand the pilot ADS system to  include the approximately 1.4 million
              effectively published  scientific names of seed plants now held in three
              separate  databases at Harvard (Cambridge, Massachusetts), Kew  (England), and
              Canberra (Australia). For historical and  technological reasons, these have
              been available previously  only in limited formats and at high cost to
              international  users. Integration with other projects, such as the 
              Biodiversity and Biological Collection Data Management (OZ)  project at the
              University of Kansas, the Integrated Taxonomic  Information System (ITIS) of
              the U.S. Bio-logical Information  Infrastructure CNBII), and the TROPICOS
              database at the  Missouri Botanical Garden will increase the utility of these 
              data sources to an expanded group of users. Finally, using  subsets of data
              from the Harvard Type Specimen Database, Tree-  BASE, and other projects, the
              ADS system will be used to  explore and demonstrate the applicability of a
              distributed-  objects approach for the Internet d istribution of other types 
              of data linked to names, such as prologues, type images, GIS  data, and
              phylogenetic trees.  ***
