Title       : Integration of Wind and Sound Cues in the Bat Evasion System of Praying Mantises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9808859

Award Number: 9808859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300323             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Yager   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                LAY ABSTRACT    IBN-98-8859    Integration of wind and sound sensory cues in
              the evasion system.      For an animal under sudden attack by a predator, quick
              reaction    is crucial. Even in the fastest evasive behaviors, integration of  
               information from different sensory modalities may also be    essential for
              behavior appropriate to the specific threat, yet    this multimodal integration
              has rarely been studied behaviorally,    and has never been examined in some
              seminal neuroethological    systems. Bats use ultrasonic echolocation to home
              in on insect    prey; some insects have evolved sensory systems and evasive   
              behaviors to help them escape capture. Praying mantises have a    cyclopean
              auditory system that is sensitive to ultrasound, and    ultrasonic pulses
              trigger a complex, short-latency response that    helps flying mantises survive
              bat attacks. We have recently shown    that 1) the mantis cercal system is
              extremely sensitive to wind;    2) mantises respond to wind puffs when flying;
              and 3) strong wind    accompanies bat attacks. Because it provides direction
              and    distance information that the auditory system cannot, we    hypothesize
              that the cercal wind detection system plays an    important role in determining
              the timing, strength and nature of    the mantis' evasive response. Using
              high-speed digital video,    laser/solar cell movement detectors, and
              electromyograms, we will    study the interaction of wind and sound stimuli in
              the evasive    behavior of tethered, flying mantises in an anechoic chamber.   
              Using electrodes implanted in a mantis tethered in a large flight    room, we
              will monitor sensory CNS responses to both wind and sound    as the insect is
              attacked by a flying bat. We will assess the    efficacy of evasive behavior
              when only wind, only sound, or    wind+sound information is available to the
              mantis CNS by staging    encounters between free-flying mantises and bats in a
              large flight    room. The results will provide the first data on CNS responses
              of    an i nsect during an actual bat attack, and the first behavioral   
              assessment of CNS integration of wind and sound stimuli in insect    predator
              avoidance.
