Title       : Molecular Basis of HEL 74-96-Specific CD8-CD4 Cell Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9808841

Award Number: 9808841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Navreet K. Nanda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Prevention of auto-immune reactions and the self-limiting nature of normal
              immune responses require inactivation of mature lymphocytes.  This research
              focuses on understanding mechanisms by which suppressor T lymphocytes, that
              class of lymphocyte responsible for a wide range of immune cell regulation, are
              involved in down-regulation of antigen-specific responses of other, so-called
              helper T lymphocytes.  A notable function of helper T cells is to stimulate yet
              another class of lymphocytes to secrete antibodies.   The helper T cells are
              formally designated CD4 T cells on the basis of their surface molecules.  The
              suppressor T cells are designated CD8 T cells.  The molecular mechanism by
              which the CD8 T cells interact with CD4 T cells to inactivate them is not well
              understood and currently is an important area of immunological research.
              Preliminary evidence in support of this project suggests a novel model for this
              interaction.  In this model, antigen-specific receptors of CD8 T cells
              recognize two cell surface molecules on either CD4 cells or other cells that
              function to present these molecules.  The first is the antigenic peptide itself
              and the second is the CD4 antigen-specific receptor.  Current thinking suggests
              that each molecule is bound as a complex to a class of tissue compatibility
              molecules called class I major histocompatibility complexes (MHC).  The novelty
              of the hypothesis is that a single CD8 T cell receptor would recognize two
              distinct molecules simultaneously, something that has not been proposed before
              for this type of regulation.  To substantiate these results, the project will
              pursue two specific aims in which responses to a defined peptide antigen will
              be monitored.  Aim 1 is to isolate and characterize the antigen-specific CD8 T
              cells that are activated by the CD4 cells and peptide.  The molecular structure
              of the receptors of these CD8 T cells will be  determined.  Conversely, aim 2
              is to characterize the antigen-specific CD4 T cell receptors that activate the
              CD8 cell counterparts. The experiments as a whole have the potential of
              defining a new and generalized mechanism for the self-regulation of lymphocytes
              during the course of an immune response.
