Title       : Functional Characterization of a Novel Mammalian Homologue of eIF4E
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9808401

Award Number: 9808401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary Jagus jagus@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bhavesh Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jagus  MCB 9808401  1. Technical    The aim of this study is to characterize the
              function(s) of a novel protein that shares homology with the translational
              initiation factor eIF4E.  The goal is to establish the role(s) of the protein
              in the regulation of mRNA recruitment.  The experimental strategy is designed
              to determine whether this eIF4E-like protein (4E-LP) stimulates or inhibits the
              recruitment of mRNAs for translation and identify the proteins with which 4E-LP
              interacts to perform its function(s).  This will extend our understanding of
              the control of gene expression at this important step.  cDNA sequences have
              been established for human, mouse and zebrafish 4E-LP.  Sequence comparisons
              have shown the 4E-LP is present in a wide range of animal and plant species and
              is highly conserved.  Northern analysis has shown that the mRNA for 4E-LP is
              present in all tissues tested to date and is under regulation during early
              development.  Similarly, the protein appears to be in all tissues tested,
              although at a lower level than eIF4E.  Like eIF4E, 4E-LP can bind cap
              structures and interact with eIF4G.  Unlike eIF4E, 4E-LP does not have the
              regulatory phosphorylation site at the carboxy-terminus.  It remains to be
              determined whether the role of 4E-LP is that of an alternate initiation factor
              which facilitates the translation of specific mRNAs (or all mRNAs under
              specific physiological conditions), or whether the protein functions in a
              regulatory capacity to modulate the activity of eIF4E (by competing with eIF4E
              interacting proteins).  The developmental regulation which suggests a role for
              4E-LP in the regulation of gene expression during early development, is
              investigated in the zebrafish developmental model, from which eIF4E and eIF4G
              have been obtained. eIF4E plays a pivotal role in the regulation of gene
              expression by controlling mRNA recruitment.  eIF4E recruits RNAs by binding to
              the 5' m7Gppp cap structure.  The activity of eIF4E is highly regulated and the
              factor has been shown to be a major t arget of signals transduced from growth
              factor receptors and proto-oncogenes.  eIF4E functions in conjunction with
              eIF4G, to which it binds.  Together these factors recruit mRNAs to the
              ribosomes for translation.  The regulation of the recruitment of mRNAs by eIF4E
              and eIF4G is regulated by the MAP kinase and rapamycin-sensitive signalling
              pathways which control phosphorylation of eIF4E and the regulatory eIF4E
              binding protein 1, 4E-BP1.  Regulation of eIF4E/4G function can also occur
              through the intervention of proteins that share homology with eIF4G.  These
              proteins either encroach upon the interaction of eIF4E with eIF4G (eIF4E
              binding proteins or 4E-BPs) or sequester other initiation factors required for
              the recruitment of mRNA (NAT1, DAP-5, or p97).  The discovery of 4E-LP adds yet
              another facet to the regulation of mRNA recruitment and has implications for
              the regulation of diverse cellular functions.              Jagus      2.
              Non-technical    The production of cellular proteins begins with the template
              genetic code that is copied in the form of mRNA.  The information encoded by
              mRNA is translated on the ribosomes into proteins.  Control of the recruitment
              of mRNA by ribosomes is an important form of regulation of gene expression in
              animal cells.  Loss of control of this step can lead to developmental
              abnormalities and the loss of growth control.  Several protein factors are
              required for the recruitment of mRNA by the ribosome, the most important of
              which is the translation factor eIF4E.  eIF4E recognizes and binds to the cap
              structure at the 5' end of mRNA.  eIF4E is under heavy regulation by reversible
              modification (phosphorylation) and by interaction with other proteins.  The aim
              of this study is to characterize a novel protein, 4E-LP, that shares homology
              with eIF4E.  The mRNA encoding 4E-LP is present in all tissues tested and is
              under regulation during early development.  Like eIF4E, 4E-LP can bind to cap
              structures and interact with other components 
of translation.  The big
              question is whether it function as an eIF4E look-alike or as a competitive
              inhibitor of eIF4E function.  The developmental significance of 4E-LP will be
              investigated in zebrafish
developmepmental
              systems.














of translation.  The big questio n is
              whether it functions as an eIF4E look-alike or as a competive inhibitor of
              eIF4E function.  The developmental significance of 4E-LP will be investigated
              in the zebrafish developmental system.          Jagus, R., Ph.D.  A. PROJECT
              SUMMARY            4      Jagus, R.  C. PROJECT DESCRIPTION      NSF FORM 1360
              (1/94)    5
