Title       : Enhancing Research and Training in Chemistry Through Hands- On MALDI-TOF Mass
               Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9808255

Award Number: 9808255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse M. Nicholson jnicholson@fac.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is aimed at increasing and sustaining students'   participation in
              chemistry at Howard University by enhancing the training   facility through
              acquisition of the PerSeptive MALDI-TOF-MS/MS system.   Laboratory experiments
              that incorporate the use of this state-of-the-art   mass spectrometer into the
              biochemistry, polymer science, and technique   of organic laboratories have
              been designed. At least 60 undergraduate   students per semester and 50
              graduate students will have hands-on access   to the mass spectrometer as part
              of the routine training and research   regimen. This system is capable of
              protein sequencing and mass   spectrometric characterization of peptides,
              proteins, DNA, RNA,   oligosaccharides, glycoproteins, synthetic polymers,
              triglyceride   molecules and vegetable oils. In addition, the instrument will
              enhance   the research activities in the newly established polymer science
              program,   which primarily focused on the syntheses and characterization of  
              biodegradable and biocompatible polymer systems.  Mass spectrometry (MS) is a
              technique used to probe intimate structural   details and to obtain the
              molecular compositions of a vast array of   organic, bioorganic, and
              organometallic molecules. The addition of the   technique of electrospray
              extends the range of MS to protein and nucleic   acid molecular weights far
              beyond any other technique. The use of   electrospray ionization in combination
              with high resolution provides the   latest technique available in mass
              spectrometry. It affords the chemist   one of the most powerful tools available
              for the characterization of   compounds. The acquisition of this capability in
              mass spectrometry is   essential for the prosecution of frontier research in
              many fields of   chemistry.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
