Title       : Genetic and Cellular Interactions of the Arabidopsis Type IIPhytochromes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9808801

Award Number: 9808801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Sharrock sharrock@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9808801  Sharrock  This proposal addresses the general question of how
              plants sense the environmental light cues that control their physiological and
              developmental processes.  Specifically, the proposal explores the organization
              and function of a plant regulatory photoreceptor system, the red/far-red (R/FR)
              light-sensing phytochrome family.  The phytochromes are soluble receptor
              proteins, which exhibit R/FR-reversible conformational changes and biological
              activities.  The small weed Arabidopsis, a plant commonly used as a model
              species in molecular genetic studies, contains five different phytochromes,
              phyA through phyE.  Among these, phyA is abundant in dark-grown plant tissue,
              is strongly down-regulated by light, and is referred to as type I phytochrome. 
              The phyB through phyE phytochromes are lower in abundance, less light-labile,
              and are collectively referred to as type II forms of the receptor.  The overall
              goals of this proposal are to define the specific functions of these type II
              phytochromes and their distributions in the plant and within plant cells, and
              to test models for genetic and/or physical interactions among these
              photoreceptors.  The R/FR light environment plays a large role in regulating
              plant architecture and development in response to shading and crowding.  In
              addition, the contribution of R/FR-controlled plant responses to important
              agronomic traits such as seed germination, yield, and flowering time make the
              phytochrome receptors significant targets for modification in crop plants via
              biotechnology.  An understanding of the physiological functions and the
              molecular mechanisms of the type II phytochromes will aid in the development of
              agricultural applications of plant photosensory systems.
