Title       : OZ: Deploying a Community Software Application for Biocollections Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9808806

Award Number: 9808806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421667             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Beach beach@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Krishtalka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                              ABSTRACT                                        
                 This project will meet fundamental challenge for the biocollections   
              community: enabling the capture, management, integration and    dissemination
              of specimen data for research, education, resource    management and public
              policy.  The project will deploy, develop and    support a community-based
              applications suite for biocollections data    that will provide the foundation
              for a stable, secure and scalable    informatics infrastructure.  Version 1.0
              of this application, called    OZ, has been developed    funding and will be
              released and distributed at no charge to the  biocollections community.      OZ
              has been designed as a community database schema and application    suite for
              Microsoft's Win95 and NT operating systems for the capture,    maintenance,
              integration and dissemination of computerized biological    collections data.
              OZ is a multi-taxonomic database management system    supporting data from
              plant, fish, amphibian, reptile, bird, mammal,    insect, general invertebrate,
              and paleontological collections.  OZ    functions/features include: fully
              customizable user interface    screens; all standard collections transactions;
              local, direct SQL and    on-line web query access to the data--all protected by
              a security    system; custom reports, invoices and labels; and a user manual.  
                   Most importantly, the biocollections community is actively    informing
              and guiding the development of    OZ, which is overseen by the PI, co-PI, a
              Project Manager and an    Advisory Board at the University of    Kansas Natural
              History Museum (KLINHM). Community partners and    collaborators in OZ's   
              development include the US Organization for Biodiversity Information   
              CUSOBI), many MUSE    installations, the San Diego Supercomputer Center and the
              National    Museum of Natural History,    Leiden,  The Netherlands. Development
                 of OZ is part of a larger USOBI informatics initiative to build and   
              support software  tools for integrating biocollections data with other   
              biotic, geospatial and climatic data, sets. KUNHM's commitment to    this
              project includes creation of new positions for the PI and    Project Manager.
