Title       : Biosynthesis of Heme and Chlorophyll Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9808578

Award Number: 9808578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel I. Beale sib@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Beale
Tetrapyrrole pigments comprise a family of biomolecules including hemes,
              chlorophylls, bilins, and vitamin B12- These pigments function as essential
              components in the processes of respiration and photosynthesis, and also exist
              as cofactors in other important enzyme reactions. All tetrapyrroles arise from
              a branched biosynthetic pathway that has (-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) as its
              first universal committed intermediate. The long-term goals of this project are
              to determine the structures, mechanisms of action, and regulation of the
              enzymes that catalyze ALA formation and metabolism in plants and algae, and to
              understand how ALA formation controls the photosynthetic pigment content of
              these organisms. Recent progress has exploited the unique genetic and
              biochemical potentials of the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii toward
              achieving these goals. Three Chlamydomonas genes, gtr, gsa, and alad, that
              encode enzymes which catalyze the first three steps of tetrapyrrole
              biosynthesis (glutamyl-tRNA reductase, glutamate 1-semialdehyde
              aminotransferase, and ALA dehydratase, respectively) have been cloned from
              Chlamydomonas. It is planned to express the cloned gtr gene which catalyzes the
              key, initial step of ALA formation, to obtain sufficient quantities of its
              product to be used for characterization of its physical and kinetic properties,
              cofactor content and requirements, reaction mechanism, possible interactions
              with other enzymes, and regulation of activity by allosteric effectors.

The
              importance of understanding the biosynthesis of ALA lies in its position as the
              initial universal metabolite in the diversion of cellular metabolites toward
              tetrapyrrole end products, and therefore the likely exercise of metabolic
              control over cellular pigment content by regulation of ALA formation. Moreover,
              the fact that ALA biosynthesis in all plants and most bacteria differs from
              that in animals suggests that it may be possible to develop herbicides and
              antibiotics that specifically target steps in the ALA biosynthetic pathway, and
              which are nontoxic to animals. Rational progress in this area will require a
              thorough knowledge of the five-carbon ALA biosynthetic pathway. Although
              herbicide and antibiotic development are not objectives of the proposed
              research, they serve to illustrate aspects of the potential longer-term
              significance of this research for human welfare.


