Title       : Aromatic Compound Degradation by Acinetobacter sp. Strain ADP1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9808784

Award Number: 9808784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Neidle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              These studies of the soil bacterium Acinetobacter sp. strain ADP1 focus on
              transcriptional regulation of the beta-ketoadipate pathway for aromatic
              compound degradation. The importance of this pathway is emphasized not only by
              the abundance of naturally occurring aromatic compounds but also by a wide
              variety of structurally similar aromatic pollutants that persist in the
              environment. Rational strategies for engineering bacteria to degrade toxic
              compounds rely on a thorough understanding of carbon source utilization, and
              studies of ADP1 will strengthen that foundation. Furthermore, these
              investigations will provide insights into transcriptional and metabolic
              regulation in a naturally transformable bacterium ideally suited for genetic
              engineering.  The first objective of this project is to determine how two
              homologous LysR-type transcriptional activators, BenM and CatM, control the
              expression of several operons involved in benzoate degradation. BenM and CatM
              are 57% identical at the amino acid level, and both respond to the co-inducer
              cis,cis-muconate, a metabolite of benzoate degradation. Despite this
              similarity, BenM and CatM carry out distinct functions in activating ben and
              cat gene transcription. Since the endogenous level of cis cis-muconate is
              controlled by differential ben and cat gene expression, the inducer regulates
              its own synthesis and degradation. It also regulates the degradation of an
              alternative carbon source, 4-hydroxybenzoate (4HB). Specific hypotheses
              concerning BenM- and CatM-mediated regulation of the benABCDE, catA and
              catBCIJFD genes will be tested. The small differences that distinguish CatM
              from BenM will be determined, including those that differentiate DNA-protein
              binding and protein-inducer binding. Unusual aspects of this system include:
              the ability of BenM to substitute for CatM (albeit poorly) but not CatM for
              BenM; the ability of BenM, but not CatM, to respond to multiple co-inducers;
              the ability of benzoate and cis,cis-muconate to increase BenM-mediated ben gene
              expression to a much greater extent than either alone; and, the ability of both
              BenM and CatM to control catA expression.  The second objective of the project
              is to determine how 4HB degradation is inhibited during growth with preferred
              carbon sources. A better understanding is needed of bacterial catabolism in
              multi-substrate environments, a topic of critical importance for improving
              bioremediation techniques to treat pollution. Previous studies showed that ADP1
              consumes different aromatic compounds in a preferred order. During benzoate
              consumption, 4HB degradation is inhibited at the transcriptional level, and the
              pobA gene, needed for the initial step in 4HB oxidation, is not expressed.
              Although the endogenous generation of cis, cis-muconate is required for this
              inhibition, the mechanisms by which it occurs are not currently known. The
              possible involvement of BenM. Pcak and PobR in regulating carbon-source
              dependent pobA expression will be tested. PobR is the transcriptional activator
              of pobA, and PcaK is a permease involved in 4HB uptake. Novel mechanisms for
              controlling carbon source utilization in ADP1 will be investigated by selecting
              and characterizing mutants that express pobA during growth with normally
              repressive carbon sources such as benzoate, protocatechuate, shikimate and
              anthranilate.
To meet these objectives, molecular biological approaches will
              be used, including transcript analyses, DNA footprinting and in vitro
              transcription assays. Genetic and mutational analyses will exploit the natural
              transformability of the laboratory strains. Metabolites will be monitored to
              determine the significance of transcriptional controls. These studies will
              determine important transcriptional mechanisms involved in multiple carbon
              source utilization that coordinate the expression of distinct operons involved
              in common physiological functions.  Moreover, they will facilitate the
              development of Acinetobacter sp. strain ADP1 for biotechnology applications
              such as biotransformations and bioremediation.

