Title       : Analysis of Floral Homeotic Regulatory Gene Function in the Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9808118

Award Number: 9808118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian F. Irish vivian.irish@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Based on the similarities in sequence and function of a number of floral
              homeotic genes, it has been proposed that the molecular mechanisms controlling
              floral development are similar across dicots, and perhaps across all angiosperm
              species. Nonetheless, flowers display remarkable morphological diversity, and
              it is thought that particular floral organ types may have evolved more than
              once.  In particular, petals are thought to have arisen numerous times in the
              angiosperms. These independent origins of petals imply that the molecular
              mechanisms specifying petal identity may be different in different species.
              This proposal seeks to explicitly test the hypothesis that the expression and
              function of the APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) genes which are known to
              control petal identity in higher eudicot species may have different roles in
              other angiosperm clades. Three sets of experiments are proposed to begin to
              understand how the functions of AP3 and PI orthologous genes may have been
              modulated over evolutionary time. First, expression analyses of AP3 and PI
              orthologs will be carried out in selected angiosperm species to see if changes
              in their expression correlate with the independent origins of petals. Second,
              recent work has identified another gene, TM6, which appears to be an AP3
              paralog and may also function in petal development. Loss-of-function phenotypes
              in TM6 orthologs in Petunia and Nicotiana will be generated and characterized
              to determine the role of TMd-like genes. Third, recent phylogenetic analyses
              have identified conserved A.P3 and PI carboxy-terminal motifs; deletion and
              swapping experiments will be carried out in transgenic Arabidopsis to determine
              the role(s) of these conserved sequences.
