Title       : Dissertation Research: Trade and Settlement Patterns in Morocco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9808443

Award Number: 9808443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Redman charles.redman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Redman, Mr. Said Ennahid will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will combine textual and field research to
              reconstruct settlement patterns in Northern Morocco, during the medieval period
              (9th - 14th centuries AD).He will focus on a trade route which ran from Tangier
              to Fes, the southern extension of which extended through the Sahara Desert into
              West Africa. Using both Landstat and topographic maps he will survey selected
              areas, locate all sites, plot their positions and then make surface collections
              of ceramics and other cultural materials. These latter permit the assemblage to
              be assigned to specific time period and also provide information about site
              function. The sites themselves will be analyzed in both an immediate
              environmental and larger regional context. Because extensive written
              information is available for this region and time period, archival research
              will supplement the field survey.  The goal of this work is to determine how
              settlement pattern changed over time. During the medieval period the region was
              governed by successive dynasties and the economy underwent major
              reorganization. Originally it was `staple based` - wealth was generated through
              taxation on local agricultural production - and it is hypothesized that both
              major and minor towns and administrative centers were located to facilitate
              this goal. This system however shifted with the development of the
              trans-Saharan trade. Gold, ivory and other goods which originated in West
              Africa were carried North through Morocco in caravans and then sent onwards,
              often to Europe. Wealth, under this system, was generated not through control
              of staples but rather control of this lucrative trade. Archaeologists have
              postulated that this economic reorganization also resulted in a major change in
              settlement pattern. Through his field and archival research, Mr. Ennahid will
              attempt to determine whether this is correct.  To understand how states and
              empires function, archaeologists make extensive use of settlement pattern data.
              For early time periods no option is available because written records are
              absent. Such information, although often plentiful, is often very difficult to
              interpret. Medieval Morocco offers an excellent controlled situation for the
              refinement of archaeological methodology. Given the lack of ground cover sites
              are easy to locate and map. A well developed ceramic chronology allows easy
              dating. Because insight into the economic system can be gained independently
              through written documents, it is then possible to determine how settlement and
              economics relate. Thus the project will make a methodological as well as
              substantive contribution. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
