Title       : Microscopic Origin of the Viscoelasticity of the Cytoskeletal Rim and the Impact
               on Shape and Mechanical Resistance of Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9808849

Award Number: 9808849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Josef Kas kas@chaos.ph.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808849  Kas     Eukaryotic cells reversibly assemble actin subunits into
              filaments which in the cortex of cells are often arrayed in an extensive
              three-dimensional network.  Cortical actin confers elasticity to the cell,
              although how molecular and intermolecular interactions among individual actin
              filaments influence this is not fully understood.  Previous research on
              solutions of reconstituted actin filaments in solution and in gels has led to
              conflicting results since molecular arrangements and interactions were not well
              defined.  The proposed research attempts to overcome these problems with two
              novel approaches.  For the first approach, measurements of the elasticity of
              actin networks in vitro will be correlated with the microscopic organization of
              individual actin filaments in these networks.  These properties will be
              investigated for actin networks that differ in the length of the actin
              filaments and in the degree to which they are cross-linked by various accessory
              proteins normally found as part of these networks in living cells.  In
              addition, the role of myosin as a dynamic cross-linker that could influence
              elasticity of these networks will be examined.  For the second approach,
              measurements of the elasticity of the cortical actin cytoskeleton of living
              cells will be correlated with whole cell elasticity.  These measurements will
              be made on various cells grown in culture that differ with respect to the
              extent of their cortical actin cytoskeleton.  Two novel instruments have been
              developed to achieve the aims of this project.  For the in vitro studies, a
              rheometer to measure macroscopic elasticity has been integrated with a
              fluorescence microscope to visualize single filaments.  For the experiments on
              living cells, a new optical tool has been designed and built which uses a
              dual-beam laser to stretch individual cells without harming them in order to
              measure their elastic forces.  Experimental measurements from both approaches
              will be used to test and refine recent theoretical models of a ctin filament
              dynamics.  The studies are expected to have wide applicability for our
              understanding of actin cytoskeletons under a wide variety of conditions in many
              cells.
