Title       : Characterization of the Narrow Sheath Duplicate Factor Pair: Pattern Forming
               Loci Involved in Maize Leaf Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9808112

Award Number: 9808112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Scanlon mjscanlo@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genetic and molecular-biological investigations are proposed in order to
              determine whether a developmental compartment exists in the maize leaf. 
              Previously, cell-lineage analyses and KNOX (markers of leaf/nonleaf identity)
              immunolocalizations of maize meristems indicated that a margin domain is not
              utilized in the leaf founder-cells of narrow sheath mutant plants.  At
              maturity, narrow sheath mutant leaves are extremely narrow and devoid of
              specific cell and tissue types normally found at the edges of maize leaves. 
              Together, these data indicate that a margin domain exists in the maize leaf and
              that this plant compartment may be established at the meristematic founder-cell
              stage via the activity of the duplicate genes narrow sheath1 and narrow
              sheath2.  Three projects are proposed to test whether leaf margin development
              proceeds via the subdivision of founder-cells into distinct developmental
              domains or if the leaf margin is patterned much later in a
              non-compartmentalized manner.

1) Clonal mosaic analysis will be used to
              infer the developmental timing and tissue-layer specificity of Ns2 gene
              function.  This analysis will also determine if NS2 activity is confined to the
              margin domain of the leaf or is required in other leaf regions.

2) Complete
              genomic and cDNA clones corresponding to each of the narrow sheath genes will
              be isolated and sequenced.  Sequence analyses will reveal the degree of
              structural homology among nsl and ns2, and may suggest their molecular
              function.

3) Northern analyses, RNA in situ hybridizations and
              immunohistolocalization assays of Ns gene expression throughout leaf
              development will test the hypothesis that the margins of maize leaves are
              patterned during the founder-cell stage of development by the domain-specific
              expression of the Ns genes.
