Title       : Upgrade of Data Acquisition and Processing Systems for two High Resolution and
               One ESI Mass Spectrometers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9808549

Award Number: 9808549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emile A. Schweikert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd W. Sumner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              will assist faculty in the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&M University to
              upgrade the Data Acquisition and Processing Systems for two High Resolution and
              one ESI Mass Spectrometers.  The mass spectrometers will support research
              projects focused on the generation of synthetic peptides, screening of
              combinatorial peptide libraries, characterization of synthetic mimics for beta
              sheet initiation, synthesis of organometallics to mimic enzyme containing metal
              active sites, selective alkylation of cysteine containing proteins and peptides
              by alkylphenols, synthesis of complex natural products, characterization of
              bioremediation proteins, metal-ligand complexation, and genetically engineered
              synthesis of vitamin B12.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to
              probe intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a
              vast array of organic, bioorganic, and organometallic molecules. The addition
              of the technique of electrospray extends the range of MS to protein and nucleic
              acid molecular weights far beyond any other technique. The use of electrospray
              ionization in combination with high resolution provides the latest technique
              available in mass spectrometry. It affords the chemist one of the most powerful
              tools available for the characterization of compounds. The acquisition of this
              capability in mass spectrometry is essential for the prosecution of frontier
              research in many fields of chemistry.
