Title       : Costs and Benefits of Female Choice in Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9808377

Award Number: 9808377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf L. Ingermann rolfi@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Byers  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT  Proposal Number:  9808377      Principal Investigator: 
              John A. Byers        Many studies conducted in the past decade have confirmed
              the  once-controversial prediction that female animals in nature  should choose
              their  mates carefully.  That females in many  animal species actively choose
              mates is now established  fact.  The larger questions that remain concern how
              and why  females choose.  "How" questions involve study of the  behavioral
              strategies and sensory systems that females use  in mate choice.  "Why"
              questions concern the value to  females in exercising choice. The goal of this
              one-year  project is to develop a genetic paternity analysis for  pronghorn, a
              large mammal native to the North American  plains and deserts.  This species is
              particularly useful in  the study of these "how" and "why" questions in female 
              choice behavior.  At the National Bison Range in  northwestern Montana, small
              tissue samples will be obtained  by hand capture of young animals or by remote
              biopsy darts  from adults.  These samples will be used to develop the 
              methodology for using DNA microsatellites as genetic markers  for this
              population.  The paternity analysis developed by  this work will allow study of
              these questions in future  years, and in particular study of whether females
              are able  to choose genetically superior mates.      This research addresses
              central issues relevant to choice  behavior in nature that is widely applicable
              to many  species.  In addition, this basic knowledge on the  reproductive
              biology of a large ungulate has conservation  applications.
