Title       : Improvement of Collection of Fossil Vertebrates, Department of Geology and
               Geophysics, The University of Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9808626

Award Number: 9808626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason A. Lillegraven   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Cassiliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                       The Collection of Fossil Vertebrates is integral to
              teaching and  research at the University of Wyoming.  The collection also is a 
              widely used, nationally important scientific resource for study  of the
              Mesozoic and Cenozoic fossil record of the Rockies and  High Plains.  Most of
              the collection grew through focused  research, resulting in an unusually large
              proportion of unique  samples.  In 1996, the department expanded into a newly 
              constructed, 65,500 ft2 research building that includes the  vertebrate
              collection, associated preparatory and curatorial  facilities, research
              laboratories, reprint library, and relevant  faculty/staff offices.  Associated
              with that move, the current  project focuses on correction of curatorial
              problems that have  accumulated since 1946.  The project's goal is enhancement
              of the  collection as a national resource for paleontological research.    The
              following advances relevant to that goal have been made over  the past two
              decades:  (1) thorough revision of curatorial  procedures, with development of
              an inclusive policy statement;  (2) maintenance of most cataloging (the backlog
              was virtually  total in 1976, and the collection has more than doubled in size 
              since then), with all data linked to locality- and topographic  map-files; (3)
              purchase of secure steel cabinetry to meet  collection growth; (4) generation
              of an electronic curatorial  system, with initiation of efficient means to
              on-line access; (5)  construction and occupation of a fully equipped, climate 
              controlled research building; (6) provision of a new (i. e.,  additional)
              full-time staff position as Collections Manager; (7)  completion of thorough
              internal and external reviews that led to  university-wide high priority for
              long term health of the  collection; (8) full revision of loan records and
              recall of  overdue loans; (9) development of a taxonomically diverse 
              vertebrate paleontological comp arative collection (via original  specimens,
              locally made plaster and epoxy casts, and  international specimen and cast
              exchanges); and (10) electronic  cataloging of over 30,000 reference articles
              and books  functionally relevant to the collection.  This project will allow 
              temporary hiring of two qualified workers to help the permanent  staff achieve
              more reliable and efficient access to specimens and  associated data. The
              combined team will: (1) perform systematic,  cross-checked verifications for
              completeness and accuracy of all  data associated with the collection; (2)
              re-order, re-house,  stabilize, and re-label specimens as needed; (3) eliminate
              a  cataloging backlog of c. 8,000 specimens; (4) bring the entire  database
              (excluding geographic coordinates from locality files)  on-line for use by the
              national research community; and (5)  develop a user guide for the collection.
              With exception of a  computer CPU and curatorial supplies, all physical
              facilities are  available for tasks at hand.  This project will enhance:  (1)
              use  of the collection's space; (2) protection and usability of  cataloged
              specimens? (3) completeness, reliability, and usability  of the collection's
              databases; (4) value and usability of the  collection as a federal repository;
              (5) use of the collection and  associated databases in public education; and
              (6) national  paleontological research.
