Title       : Linkage of Nonsense Codons and RNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9808936

Award Number: 9808936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles Wilkinson mwilkins@mdanderson.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shulin Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808936  Wilkinson     Post-transcriptional events in eukaryotic cells are
              compartmentalized.  Transcripts are spliced in the nucleus, and then
              translocated to the cytoplasm, where translation occurs.  A surprising
              observation has been that premature termination codons (PTCs) affect not only
              cytoplasmic events but also nuclear-associated events.  Some PTCs upregulate
              alternatively spliced (alt) mRNAs that have excised the PTC, a process called
              PTC-mediated upregulation (PMU).  That the nucleus may be involved in PMU is
              further suggested by experiments demonstrating the importance of RNA splicing. 
              The goal of this study is to understand how nonsense codons, which are only
              known to be read by the cytoplasmic translational machinery, regulate nuclear
              events.  The T-cell receptor-beta (TCRBeta) gene will be used for this
              investigation because it commonly acquires PTCs during normal T-cell
              development and therefore mechanisms that monitor the acquisition of PTCs in
              this gene may be critical for normal immune cell function.  In this project,
              the mechanism responsible for PMU will be studied.  The objectives of the study
              are: (1) to elucidate the specific post-transcriptional mechanism involved
              (e.g., alternative splice-site selection vs. regulation of RNA stability) and
              (2) to experimentally evaluate cis and trans models that explain PMU.  To
              address these issues, genetically engineered  TCR constructs will be
              transfected into mammalian cells and the transcribed mRNAs analyzed by
              ribonuclease (Rnase) protection, northern blot, and reverse transcriptase
              (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses.  A tetracycline (tet)-regulated
              promoter will be used for RNA half-life studies.     Proteins are synthesized
              within the cytosol of the cell using information copied from DNA into RNA. 
              Cellular surveillance mechanisms exist to insure that defective RNAs, which
              would result in the synthesis of mutant proteins, do not accumulate.  This
              project will investigate the process by which RNAs containing mistakes (
              nonsense codons) do not accumulate, while alternative forms of the mRNA, in
              which the mistake has been eliminated by an alternative processing event,
              accumulate to a higher than normal level.  This investigation is important for
              several reasons: (1) the mechanism responsible for skipping deleterious
              nonsense codons by alternative processing may be physiologically important
              because it can permit the expression of functional proteins from otherwise
              defective genes, (2) this process may be a component of a general-surveillance
              mechanism that recognizes and destroys aberrant transcripts containing nonsense
              codons, and (3) an understanding of how nonsense codons affect nuclear events
              may alter the prevailing view of gene expression.
