Title       : Genetic of Sperm Migration and Gamete Recognition in Caenorhabditis Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9808847

Award Number: 9808847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. L'Hernault bioslh@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fertilization is an attractive model in which to study phenomena of cell-cell
              recognition, adhesion and fusion during development. Most prior work in this
              area has relied on biochemical and immunological approaches and a genetic
              approach has been lacking. Sperm-egg interactions in the nematode
              Caenorhabditis elegans is an attractive model system in which to study the
              genetic control of cell-cell interaction that occur during fertilization.
              Several mutants (including spe-9 and fer-14) produce cytologically normal sperm
              that are motile, but they cannot fertilize when they collide with an oocyte.
              The spe-9 gene encodes an epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain containing
              integral membrane protein, and such EGF cell surface proteins are known from
              much prior work to play critical roles in cell-cell interactions. Therefore, it
              is likely that spe-9 mutants are defective in either sperm-oocyte recognition,
              adhesion or fusion. Equivalent mutants affecting gamete interactions have not
              been described in any other metazoan. The proposed experiments within this
              project are guided by four Specific Aims, which are:

Specific Aim 1:
              Immunofluorescence will be use to localize SPE-9 on the spermatozoon surface to
              reveal the region important for gamete interaction.

Specific Aim 2:
              Extragenic suppressors of spe-9 will be selected to identify additional genes
              involved in sperm-oocyte interactions and begin construction of the genetic
              hierarchy in which spe-9 functions.

Specific Aim 3: Other mutants that
              appear to have a phenotype similar to that caused by spe-9 will be further
              investigated. Those that fulfill a set of criteria developed based on the spe-9
              phenotype, such as fer-14, will be subjected to detailed cell biological,
              genetic, and molecular analyses.

Specific Aim 4: Movements and gamete
              interactions in spe-9, fer-14 and other mutants will be followed in vivo by
              newly developed nontoxic methods that fluorescently label sperm and allow real
              time observations.

These studies should reveal novel information about
              gamete recognition and cell surface phenomena that are important prior to and
              during fertilization.
