Title       : A New Ice Core from the Devon Ice Cap Canadian Arctic: Continued Development of
               High-resolution Proxy Records to Evaluate the Regionalization of Climate in the
               Circum-Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9808960

Award Number: 9808960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Zielinski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cameron P. Wake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: OPP-9808960
Principal Investigator: Zielinski,
              Gregory


The Principal Investigators will analyze and interpret time series
              of major ions, insoluble microparticles, and methanesulfonic acid (MSA) from a
              new 300-foot long ice core from the Devon Ice Cap, Devon Island, Canada.  This
              is a collaborative project with the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC) and
              Nagaoka Institute of Snow and Ice Studies.  Oxygen isotope analyses,
              direct-current solid electric conductivity (ECM)  and the percentage of annual
              melt layers will be analyzed by scientists at GSC.  The results will be a
              continuous, high-resolution (subannual to decadal) multivariate record of
              Holocene change of the high Arctic.  The results will also complement those
              from the Penny Ice Cap core (Baffin Island).  Snowpit studies that were done
              while coring the first Devon ice core will provide critical information on the
              modern characteristics of both the glaciochemical species and insoluble
              microparticles.  This new core is necessary to validate or refute those
              incongruous findings found in the previously drilled Devon Island ice core with
              other cores drilled around the Canadian High Arctic.

Analyses of all the
              major soluble and insoluble components of the atmosphere as preserved in the
              Devon ice core will enable the Principal Investigators to determine the
              composition of the paleoatmosphere in the eastern Canadian Arctic.  The results
              should provide important information on the timing and cause of climatic change
              during the Holocene and the regionalization of that change.  The results will
              also allow the Principal Investigators to establish a positive relationship
              between sea salt species and recent sea-ice extent to provide important data
              needed to reconstruct relative sea ice extent and the rapidity of changes in
              that extent over the last 10,000 years.  These data may be used to gain a
              better understanding of how human populations were impacted by sea ice extent. 
              This high-resolution core is critical as major episodic events such as volcanic
              eruptions and large biomass burning events, which are evident in ice cores, are
              factored into the analyses.  These findings should contribute to the evaluation
              of spatial variability of anthropogenic emission deposition in the Arctic.  The
              compilation of all the data sets from circum-arctic ice cores will make a major
              contribution in understanding the impact that the Arctic may have on global
              change. 


