Title       : Compactorization and Relocation of the Marine Vertebrates Collection of Scripps
               Institution of Oceanography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1998  
File        : a9808854

Award Number: 9808854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Rosenblatt rrosenblatt@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                            ABSTRACT         This project will support
              improvements for the Marine  Vertebrates Collection of Scripps Institution of
              Oceanography,  University of California, San Diego. This collection has
              geographic  and bathymetric strengths unequaled elsewhere in the world. The 
              collection regularly supports extramural  research projects from a variety of
              investigators in the U.S. and  abroad. The  collection includes over 110,000
              lots and 1.5 million specimens of  fishes from most  regions of the world
              ocean, with extensive and intensive geographic  coverage of the  Pacific.  The
              holdings of this collection became searchable on the  Internet in early  1996. 
                     The Marine Vertebrates Collection, for the most part, is  currently in a
              building which has been declared seismically unfit.  In addition over 50,000
              specimens are housed in a severely  inadequate, remote storage area exposed to
              temperatures as high as  34 C and extensive daily temperature variations. Open
              space in the  main area for new accessions and other purposes is almost non- 
              existent. In some cases, boxes of specimen jars are stacked on other  specimen
              jars on the shelves. Adding new, valuable material  frequently results in more
              specimens being transferred to the remote  storage area. Relocation of the
              Collection to a new facility is  essential.         Funds to construct a new
              building to replace existing Ritter  Hall have been provided to the University
              of California by the  State. After construction of the new building, Ritter
              Hall will be  demolished. Relocation of the collection provides an opportunity
              to  greatly enhance available storage space by utilization of compact  mobile
              shelvlng. This would allow all specimen to be housed in an  appropriate secure
              are and will provide for future growth.         The present project will
              support installation of compact mobile  and fixed shelving in this new
              building. Space-efficient means of  storage are necessary to house the
              collection in this building.
