Title       : Global Optimization Approaches for Molecular and Protein Conformation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9808210

Award Number: 9808210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagote M. Pardalos Pardalos@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Systematic conformational search based on global optimization algorithms and
              heuristics is a powerful tool in modeling of biomolecules. Global optimization
              provides efficient mechanisms for finding global energy minima as well as new
              approaches for solving distance geometry problems arising in molecular
              conformation and molecular similarity and dissimilarity.
This project will
              focus on the design, analysis, and implementation of efficient algorithms for
              computing the global optima for a class of multi-external optimization problems
              in molecular and protein conformation, specifically:

Global optimization of
              nonconvex energy functions given the many degrees of freedom available to
              protein structures.

 Global optimization algorithms and heuristics for the
              distance geometry problem in molecular conformation.

Global optimization
              approaches for solving molecular similarity and dissimilarity
              problems.

Hierarchical optimization in computational biology
              problems.

The "global approach" to treating these optimization problems is
              in contrast to other traditional "local approaches", for example algorithms
              based on gradient descent. The solutions obtained by the latter approaches are
              at most locally optimal. However it is well established that the above problems
              have an exponential number of local solutions different from the global.

