Title       : Spatial Network of Bioaccumulation in Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9808363

Award Number: 9808363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen H. Watanabe watanabe@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry L. Bart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronaldo Luna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Spatial Network of Bioaccumulation in Food Webs

PI:	Dr. Karen H. Watanabe,
              Tulane University (watanabe@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu)
Co-PI:	Dr. Ronaldo Luna,
              University of Missouri-Rolla (rluna@umr.edu)
Co-PI:	Dr. Henry L. Bart, Jr.,
              Tulane University (hank@plato.museum.tulane.edu

Traditional formulations of
              food-web bioaccumulation models assume steady-state conditions and use average
              environmental input parameters.  Yet, there is known variability in
              environmental conditions such as "hot spots" of pollution and poorly mixed
              water environments that are not accounted for in the current paradigm of
              bioaccumulation modeling.  Averaging of known spatial variability in
              environmental conditions is a source of error in model predictions that can be
              reduced by using site-specific data.  While a top predator may traverse a large
              region for food and be exposed to a variety of contaminant concentrations, the
              organisms at the lowest trophic levels may be relatively stationary and exposed
              to the local contaminant concentration.  A modeling methodology is needed to
              incorporate spatial variability in the study of bioaccumulation of contaminants
              in a food web.

This project integrates an aquatic food web bioaccumulation
              model for hydrophobic organic contaminants with an efficient spatial
              representation of the environment.  In particular, it targets geographic study
              regions (e.g., rivers and bayous) that can be represented as linear features in
              a spatial network model using tools available in a geographic information
              system (GIS).  Data stored as different events on the dynamically segmented
              linear feature will be used in combination with rules to allow the movement of
              different species within their natural home range.  The bioaccumulation model
              will directly access the spatially referenced environmental data to predict the
              biological fate of contaminants at different locations in the study region. 
              Food web organisms, sediment and water samples will be collected from a network
              of bayous in the LaBranche Wetlands in Louisiana to demonstrate the modeling
              methodology and validate the food web bioaccumulation model.  These samples
              will be analyzed for semi-volatile organic chemicals and the results stored in
              a spatial database.  The project spans three years for the integration of
              modeling techniques and collection of validation data.  The result will be a
              portable computational tool driven by a GIS engine that improves upon current
              bioaccumulation modeling methodology.



