Title       : Ultra-High Resolution DNA Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9808298

Award Number: 9808298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wang  9808298  Ultra-high resolution DNA structures  This study is aimed at
              producing ultra-high resolution (< 0.8  ) DNA structures using advanced
              cryo-crystallography. It is designed to provide reliable geometric (bond length
              and bond angle) and motional information about DNA molecules in different
              conformational contexts. These highly reliable new structures will be the basis
              for constructing better DNA force-field parameters which will benefit the
              structural refinement of DNA, protein-DNA complexes, and ligand-DNA complexes.
              Until recently, the structure determination of biological macromolecules was
              usually carried out at medium, e.g., 2  , resolution. Such an analysis would
              involve restrained least square refinement which depends on a reliable set of
              target geometric values of the building blocks (amino acids and nucleotides).
              An improvement on the reliability of the geometric (bond length and bond angle)
              information of DNA molecules in different conformational contexts is desired. 
              Crystals to be studied in this study thus include: 1. B-DNA: The DNA decamer of
              CCAGGCCTGG and its variants, 2.  A-DNA: The DNA decamer of AGGGGCCCCT and its
              variants, and RNA.DNA chimera r (GC)d(GTATACGC), 3.  Z-DNA: The Z-DNA
              structures of CGCGCG, m5CGTAm5CG and CGCGTG, and 4. Intercalator-DNA complexes:
              the formaldehyde-crosslinked daunorubicin/doxorubicin-CGCGCG adducts. They
              diffract x-rays to atomic resolution (better than 1  ) on a R-Axis II system
              under cryo conditions. Higher resolution data will be collected on a R-AxisIIc
              image plate system or a Siemens CCD system using MoKa radiation (wavelength
              0.7107  ). Ultra-high resolution data (better than 0.7  ) will be collected on
              synchrotron sources, and structures refined by individual atomic anisotropic
              refinement using SHELX97. The electronic properties will be analyzed by the
              program suite of XD. All results will be made available to the public with the
              deposition of coordinates, structure factors and calculated force-fields to
              both Nucleic Acid Databa se and Brookhaven Protein Databank at the time of
              publication for immediate release.     2. Non-technical     DNA plays a central
              role in life. Understanding the structures of DNA is important for
              understanding its functions. The interactions between DNA and various
              biologically-relevant molecules can be analyzed by x-ray crystallography. This
              research project is aimed at producing DNA structures at ultra-high resolution
              using advanced crystallographic methods, including the collection of x-ray
              diffraction data at-150 degrees C and the use of powerful synchrotron x-ray
              sources. This work will provide highly reliable geometric and motional
              information about DNA molecules. This new information will form the basis for
              structural refinement of DNA, protein-DNA complexes, and ligand-DNA complexes.
