Title       : The Metabolic/Biochemical Basis of Life History Variation and Trade-Offs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9808249

Award Number: 9808249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Zera azera@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zera  9808249    One of the most important differences among species is 
              variation in life history traits, such as longevity, the age  at which
              reproduction begins and dispersal capability.  Almost nothing is known about
              the biochemical-genetic basis  of life history variation within species, which
              provides the  raw material for the evolution of these traits.  This study 
              constitutes the first detailed investigation of this issue  and will use wing
              polymorphism as a model.  The polymorphism  is common in insects and consists
              of a long-winged (LW) form  which is capable of flight but which delays
              reproduction,  and a short-winged (SW), flightless form which reproduces  early
              in adulthood.  The LW form produces large quantities  of lipid flight fuel
              which reduces egg production relative  to levels found in SW females.  This
              study will identify the  features of lipid metabolism which differ between the
              wing  morphs and which account for both the greater amounts of  lipid and the
              reduced egg production in LW females.  Rates  of lipid biosynthesis and
              catabolism and the enzymes  involved in these processes will be compared
              between  genetically determined LW vs. SW individuals.  In addition,  the
              biochemical and hormonal mechanisms by which increased  lipid accumulation
              causes decreased egg production in the LW  form will also be investigated. 
              This study will contribute  importantly to our understanding of the biochemical
              genetic  mechanisms responsible for the evolution of life history  traits.
