Title       : Biogeography, Climate and the Role of Direct Positive Interactions in Rocky
               Shoreline Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9808027

Award Number: 9808027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Bertness mark bertness@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                In comparison to competitive and consumer processes, the role played by direct
              positive interactions in marine communities has been overlooked. While direct
              positive interactions are widely recognized to occur, they have received little
              experimental attention by community ecologists and have been largely ignored as
              general community organizing forces. This study explicitly examines the role of
              habitat ameliorating positive interactions as organizing forces in rocky
              intertidal communities and specifically will explore the role of biogeography
              and climate in dictating the importance of these interactions. Specifically,
              this project (1) tests the hypothesis that the importance of habitat
              ameliorating, intraspecific group benefits in setting the upper intertidal
              limits of primary spaceholders increases with decreasing latitude and is more
              important in bays and estuaries than in open coast habitats due to predictable
              variation in the intensity of solar radiation. And (2) tests the hypothesis
              that, by limiting physical stresses on associated organisms, high intertidal
              algal canopies play a keystone role in structuring high intertidal communities,
              and that, like intraspecific group benefits, the importance of these effects
              are also strongly mediated by biogeography and climate. By focusing on the
              predictability and consequences of positive interactions in the otherwise well 
              studied New England rocky intertidal system, this work will begin to
              incorporate positive interactions into our understanding of rocky shorelines
              and other marine and terrestrial systems. Studies suxh as this one that
              directly quantify how climate can influence process and pattern in natural
              assemblages may also be one of the best tools available for exploring the
              potential consequences of global climate change on communities.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
