Title       : Cytoplasmic Gelation and Cell Movement in Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9808748

Award Number: 9808748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus Fechheimer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth Furukawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808748  Fechheimer    Actin microfilaments represent one of the three major
              classes of cytoskeletal elements known to exist in eukaryotic cells, and one of
              two such classes known to serve as the structural framework not only for
              cellular morphology but also, in conjunction with specific motor proteins
              (e.g., myosins in the case of actin-based motility), serve as the mechanistic
              basis for  cellular movements.   Such cell movements, including not only
              whole-cell locomotion  but also movements within cells, such as phagocytosis
              and cytokinesis, require precise control of the assembly of actin
              microfilaments into either gelled networks or highly polarized bundles of
              filaments.  This precisely-controlled actin filament assembly is mediated by
              actin cross-linking proteins.  These cross-linking proteins are highly
              conserved across eukaryotic species.      This project will exploit the
              advantages of the cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum, to study actin
              cross-linking proteins. Eleven different cross-linking proteins have been
              identified in this organism.  The ameboid stage cells of Dictyostelium undergo
              directed whole-cell locomotion (chemotaxis), phagocytosis, and cytokinesis,
              which can be readily observed and assessed under laboratory conditions.  In
              addition to microscopical approaches, both biochemical and genetic approaches
              can be used in an integrated approach to elucidate the structure and function
              of cytoskeletal proteins in this organism.      One of the eleven cross-linking
              proteins in Dictyostelium is a calcium-regulated 34,000 Dalton actin bundling
              protein (34 kD protein) found in filopodia, pseudopodia, phagocytic cup,
              cleavage furrow, and cell-to-cell contact sites.  Cells lacking the 34 kD
              protein grow, locomote, and develop, but exhibit detectable phenotypes in the
              morphology of filopodia and persistence of motility.  Similarly, single mutants
              in other actin cross-linking proteins have phenotypes that are not debilitating
              to locomotion, division, or development.  The first aim of this project is to
              utilize gene replacement to determine the functions of the actin cross-linking
              proteins from the synthetic phenotypes exhibited by double and triple mutants. 
              The second specific aim is to evaluate whether the multiple actin binding sites
              and the calcium binding site are required for actin binding/bundling in vitro
              and for function in vivo.  Molecules containing only one or two of the three
              actin binding sites and/or lacking the ability to bind calcium will be produced
              in Escherischia coli, and the molecular interactions required for actin
              filament cross-linking and bundling will be dissected by studies of the
              interactions of these altered molecules with actin in vitro.  These 34 kD
              proteins bearing defined structural/biochemical lesions will also be expressed
              in D. discoideum cells lacking two or more of the actin cross-linking proteins
              to determine whether the altered 34 kD molecules can substitute for the intact
              protein to restore function in vitro.  The third specific aim is to investigate
              the molecular mechanisms by which the 34 kD protein is recruited to sites of
              phagocytosis, the cleavage furrow, and sites of cell-to-cell contact.  The
              experiments are designed to test three hypothesized mechanisms that may
              function separately or collectively to control the correct spatial and temporal
              localization of actin cross-linking proteins in vivo:  1, binding to actin
              filaments is sufficient to direct proper subcellular localization; 2, calcium
              regulation is required for correct localization; and 3, an unknown binding
              partner of the 34 kD protein directs its localization.    The experimental
              advantages of Dictyostelium and the background information already available in
              this organism present a unique opportunity for this project to make fundamental
              contributions to new knowledge about the structure of actin cross-linking
              proteins and their interactions with actin, mechanisms of regulation, and
              functions in living cells.  This information will be of general significance
              for c ell structure and organization across all eukaryotic species.
