Title       : Functional Characterization of German Cockroach Sodium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9808156

Award Number: 9808156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ke Dong dongk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-08156  DONG      The goals of this research are 1) to study the molecular
              basis  of  interactions between the German cockroach sodium channel (the 
              protein molecule that forms pores in cell membranes which  selectively allow
              sodium ions to enter and leave the cell) and  pyrethroid insecticides, and 2)
              to examine the functional  properties and developmental and tissue-specific
              expression (that  is, which tissues have these) of alternatively spliced
              isoforms of  the German cockroach para gene (alternatively spliced isoforms are
               different versions of a protein, just the way a car manufacturer  may have
              different models within a particular line of cars).  Pyrethroid insecticides
              affect the properties of voltage-dependent  sodium channels in the nervous
              system (that is the sodium channels  that are responsible for sustaining the
              nerve impulses through  which nerve cells communicate).  A class of so-called
              kdr  (knockdown resistance) mutations has been identified in several  insects. 
              kdr insects are resistant to knockdown (rapid paralysis)  and kill by
              pyrethroids and some sodium-channel site-2  neurotoxins. Recently para genes
              from kdr and genetically related  pyrethroid-susceptible German cockroach
              strains have been cloned  and sequenced (that is, their genetic code has been
              deciphered).  Sequence comparison reveals specific amino acid differences 
              between the Para proteins from kdr and those from susceptible  cockroach
              strains.  The first objective of this research is to  compare the sensitivities
              of wild-type (susceptible) and mutant  Para sodium channels to pyrethroids and
              site-2 neurotoxins to  confirm that the putative kdr mutations are indeed
              responsible for  cockroach knockdown resistance to pyrethroids. "Alternative 
              splicing" (in which certain parts of a molecule can be selected  from various
              options, much as parts of a car such as the engine or  the radio might be taken
              from a set of possible options) is a  common feature of sodium channel genes of
              both vertebrates and  invertebra tes.   The functional significance of
              alternatively  spliced variants, however, remains largely unknown.  Seven 
              alternatively spliced portions of the cockroach para gene have  been
              identified, three of which are unique among insects.  The  second objective of
              this research is to examine the functional  properties of unique para splice
              variants and to analyze their  developmental and tissue-specific expression
              patterns.  Results from this project will enable us to understand why insects 
              become resistant to insecticides as well as the biological  significance of
              alternatively spliced Para channel variants in  governing sodium channel
              properties.
