Title       : A Novel System to Study Photosynthetic Biochemical Autonomy of Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9808904

Award Number: 9808904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Rumpho   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Manhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rumpho  9808904    Photosynthesis is the only biological phenomenon that
              transfers light energy from the sun into molecules that  provide an energy
              sources for developing and mature plant  life forms and, in the process,
              produces oxygen.  This process is typically limited to the plant kingdom, some
              bacteria, and the algae.  However, a photosynthetic marine slug, Elysia
              chlorotica, has evolved as a result of forming  an intracellular symbiosis with
              chloroplasts from the  chromophytic marine alga, Vaucheria litorea.  Once the 
              symbiosis is established, Elysia can subsist in culture for  at least nine
              months exclusively by carrying out  photoautotrophic CO2 fixation as long as a
              source of light  and CO2 is provided.  This unusual, naturally occurring
              photosynthetic animal will be exploited for long-term  studies of the
              mechanisms regulating the symbiotic association and the continued functioning
              of the  chloroplasts in the absence of the usual sorts of regulation by the
              plant nucleo-cytoplasm.  Several interrelated lines  of investigation are
              proposed to address the question of the  genetic and biochemical autonomy of
              the plastids as well as  the potential for regulatory communication between the
               animal nucleo-cytosol and the algal chloroplast  genome  contributing to the
              success of the symbiotic association.  The specific objectives include:
              identifying the carbon  product exported from the symbiotic plastids to the
              seaslug, characterizing the ability of the seaslug and chloroplasts  to
              maintain the composition and activity of the photosynthetic electron transport
              machinery over the life-time of the association; determining if the slug
              nuclear genome codes for and targets any proteins to the symbiotic 
              chloroplasts; and elucidating the genetic autonomy of the symbiotic
              chloroplasts by mapping and partially sequencing  the chloroplast genome of V.
              litorea.  Findings from these studies will increase the general understanding
              of the intracellular regulation between chloroplasts and the nucleo cytosol in
              a natural and foreign environment, the autonomy of  chloroplasts, and the
              evolution of organellar symbiotic associations.
