Title       : Site-Specific DNA Deletion in Tetrahymena thermophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9808381

Award Number: 9808381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Cox cox@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cox
98038381
Genome rearrangements accompany the developmental process in many
              organisms, but nowhere is genome reorganization more extensive than during
              macronuclear development in ciliated protozoans. During that process, the old
              macronuclei are destroyed and new ones are developed from the micronuclei,
              accompanied by the fragmentation of the micronuclear chromosomes and the
              amplification of the fragments. A substantial fraction of the micronuclear
              genome is also jettisoned in the form of thousands of site-specific deletions
              (internal eliminated sequences, or IES elements).
The development of an in
              vitro system for two of the developmentally programmed DNA deletion reactions
              in Tetrahymena thermophila will be continued. A mechanistic explanation for the
              deletion pathway will be investigated. The focus is on two of the IES elements.
              Evidence from several laboratories have suggested a transposition-like
              mechanism for this excision. A double-strand cleavage at one end of the IES
              element would be followed by strand transfer via a one-step
              trans-esterification mechanism to generate the deletion junction on one DNA
              strand. Additional steps are required to process the DNA branch left in the
              other DNA strand. An in vitro system for the strand transfer step of this
              reaction has been achieved. The purification of the enzymes responsible for the
              observed reaction will be continued while searching for complementary enzymatic
              activities and exploring in vitro reaction mechanisms. A completely
              reconstituted in vitro system would likely open the way for biochemical
              analysis not only of the deletion reactions, but also of many other processes
              in the unusual DNA metabolism of ciliated protozoans. The ultimate goal of the
              proposed research is a complete molecular description of the deletion pathway,
              derived from studies of an in vitro system reconstituted form purified enzymes
              and substrates. 

Although the described work is focused on mechanism, it
              should also contribute to a better understanding of the evolutionary origin of
              the IES elements as well as their function during macronuclear development. It
              will also contribute to a more complete appreciation of recombination
              mechanisms in general which is relevant and important because recombination
              processes are the molecular means by which gene therapy is being or will be
              achieved.

