Title       : Topics in Algebraic Topology Based on Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9808955

Award Number: 9808955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki przytyck@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

9808955
Przytycki
     This project concerns the 11-year-old program of
              building an
algebraic topology based on knots (or more generally on the
              position of
embedded objects).  That is, the basic building blocks are
              considered
up to ambient isotopy (not homotopy or homology).  For example,
              one
starts from knots in 3-manifolds, surfaces in 4-manifolds, etc.  This
is
              a far-reaching program.  Until now, one has been limited to 3-manifolds,
with
              only a glance towards 4-manifolds.  The principal objects of the
theory are
              skein modules.  One of the simplest skein modules is a
quantization of the
              first homology group of a manifold.  In general,
skein modules of 3-manifolds
              are quotients of free modules over ambient
isotopy classes of links by
              properly chosen local (skein) relations.
The situation is somewhat reminiscent
              of that of ``classical'' algebraic
topology 100 years ago (before Poincare's
              fundamental paper ``Analysis
Situs,'' in 1895.  Even three years ago one was
              able to compute only a
few isolated examples, with the hope that the theory
              would rise in the
future to a beautiful and powerful theory (the only
              exception was the
Turaev-Przytycki construction of the Hopf algebra on the
              third skein
module of the product of a surface and the interval).  The
              situation
has started to change in the last three years, and most of the
              progress
concerns the Kauffman bracket skein module and its relation to
              character
varieties of the fundamental group of a 3-manifold and the
              hyperbolic
structure on a manifold.
     Topology, as foreseen by Leibniz in
              1679, is the art of analyzing
geometrical figures taking into account their
              position only; it does not
take magnitudes into consideration (Leibniz called
              this art ``geometry
situs'').  In more modern language, topology describes
              spaces up to
stretching and bending (but cutting and pasting is not allowed). 
              Because
of their flexibility, topological spaces are hard to analyze.  In
              his
fundamental paper of 1895, Analysis Situs, Henri Poincare
              associated
topological spaces with algebraic objects that are invariant under
              space
deformation (he called his objects homology and homotopy groups). 
              The
field of algebraic topology arose from the work of Poincare.  Knot
              theory
is the oldest branch of topology, first considered by A. Vandermonde
              in
1771.  It studies the position of a circle (say a piece of rope with
              ends
glued together) in space.  Knot theory also has its roots in physics.
W.
              Thomson (Lord Kelvin) proposed, in 1867, a theory of vortex atoms:
that atoms
              were knotted tubes of ether.  It was an aim of his friend P.G.
Tait to
              describe the physical and chemical properties of particles in
terms of the
              properties of related knots.  Although the vortex theory
was soon rejected,
              knot theory quickly developed to become an independent
branch of topology.  By
              the 1970's, some thought knot theory was out ot
steam.  Thus it came as a
              surprise when in 1984 Vaughan Jones discovered
new algebraic invariants of
              knots (i.e., Jones polynomials).  Jones'
work was a breakthrough, providing
              solutions to old conjectures.  In the
same spirit as Leibniz, one would call
              the branch of mathematics that has
its roots in Jones' construction, and
              Drinfeld's work on quantum groups,
``algebra situs.''  It encompasses the
              theory of quantum invariants of
knots and 3-manifolds, algebraic topology
              based on knots, q-deformations,
quantum groups, and overlaps with algebraic
              geometry, non-commutative
geometry, and statistical mechanics.
***


