Title       : Thermodynamics of Protein-Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a9808073

Award Number: 9808073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Murphy k-murphy@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop the ability to predict molecular
              recognition between proteins.  Molecular recognition is determined by the
              thermodynamics of protein-protein interactions.  These thermodynamics, in turn,
              are determined by the structures of the proteins, and can be modulated by
              environmental variables such as pH and the presence of other small ligands. 
              The thermodynamics of interaction of serine proteases with proteinaceous
              inhibitors will be studied by isothermal titration calorimetry and compared to
              the energetics calculated from the crystallographic or modeled structures using
              empirically based methods which have proven successful in predicting protein
              stability.  Additionally, the basis of pH effects on the binding will be
              studied by making site-directed mutations aimed at perturbing the proton
              affinity of the active site histidine, located in the protein-protein
              interface.  Finally, the binding of phosphate to the complex will be studied as
              a function of temperature and pH.

The goal of the work is to provide a
              better understanding of the relationship between protein structure and binding
              energetics.  It will also improve our understanding of how the protein
              environment can modulate the pKa of an ionizable group.  Such knowledge is
              critical to the ability to design proteins with specific molecular recognition
              and pH sensitive binding properties.

