Title       : Dendritic Retraction Induced by Cytokines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9808565

Award Number: 9808565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome A. Roth jaroth@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Higgins  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9808565  HIGGINS     Dendrites are the primary site of synapse formation in the
              nervous system, and so it is important to learn how the growth of these
              processes are regulated.  During the previous period of support, Dr. Higgins
              found that bone morphogenetic proteins induce dendritic growth in several
              classes of neurons, including embryonic rat sympathetic, hippocampal and spinal
              motor neurons.  The current project explores the possibility that leukemia
              inhibitory factor (LIF), ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), and related
              neuropoietic cytokines have an opposing activity, and that they function as
              negative regulators of dendritic growth.  The study of such inhibitory factors
              is important because dendritic regression is widespread in the nervous system,
              having been seen in many regions of the developing brain and also in
              neurodegenerative disorders and after acute neural injury.  CNTF promotes the
              survival of postnatal sympathetic neurons; yet, in the same population, it
              causes dendritic regression.  If CNTF exerts a similar dendrite-retracting
              influence on motor and striatal neurons in vivo, this would be expected to
              interfere with synaptic function and compete with the influence of
              dendrite-promoting molecules such as bone morphogenetic proteins.  CNTF appears
              to have a dominant negative influence on dendritic growth; i.e., it induces
              dendritic regression even in the presence of optimal concentrations of other
              dendrite-promoting factors.  We need to know more about how a
              survival-promoting molecule can simultaneously adversely affect neural
              function.  To further characterize the effects of neuropoietic cytokines, the
              planned studies will: a) characterize the receptors and signal transduction
              system mediating dendritic retraction; and b) determine whether CNTF and other
              neuropoietic cytokines also promote dendritic retraction in neurons from the
              central nervous system.


