Title       : Molecular Genetics of the Drosophila Triplo-lethal Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9808209

Award Number: 9808209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306884             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Christensen acc@biocomp.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Christensen
9808209
Alterations in gene dosage often have profound effects on
              the development and/or viability of organisms, yet little is known about the
              molecular basis of gene dosage effects.  The Triplo-lethal locus of Drosophila
              (Tpl) is a unique and interesting model for understanding gene dosage effects. 
              Tpl is the only genetic locus known that is lethal when present in anything
              other than two copies.  Diploid animals with either zero, one, three or four
              copies of Tpl die as late embryos or early first-instar larvae.  Tpl may also
              have an unusual genetic structure.  While duplications and deficiencies of Tpl
              are readily isolated, point mutations that eliminate Tpl's function have never
              been found, suggesting that Tpl may consist of redundant information or it may
              code for a non-translated RNA molecule.  Recent data suggest that the DNA that
              is necessary for Tpl function has been cloned.  This region will be analyzed by
              standard molecular techniques, including cDNA cloning and sequencing to
              identify transcription units.  Candidate genes will be used in Drosophila
              transformation experiments to identify Tpl.  This region of the genome will be
              sequenced in the near future by the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project, which
              will greatly aid the analysis of this novel genetic locus.  Cloning and
              sequencing the Suppressor-of Tpl locus, Su(Tpl), will also be done. Su(Tpl)
              mutant embryos survive in spite of having three doses of Tpl, which shows an
              interaction of these two genes.  Genomic clones of Su(Tpl) have already been
              obtained and cDNA clones will be isolated and analyzed.  Understanding Su(Tpl)
              will lead to greater understanding of why Tpl is so dosage sensitive and the
              basis for the lethality.

Tpl has two features that make it novel.  One is
              its extreme dosage sensitivity.  The other is its resistance to mutagenesis,
              suggesting an unusual structure.  Both make its study especially challenging,
              but such genes may not be rare in the cell. It may only be that they are not
              easily discovered.  Non-protein-coding genes will also not easily be identified
              via DNA sequence analysis.  Understanding Tpl may lead to the discovery of many
              more genes of this type, and a further understanding of the importance of gene
              dosage.

