Title       : Molecular Basis of Hydra Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9808828

Award Number: 9808828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Steele resteele@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A key innovation during the evolution of multicellular animals was the ability
              to form and maintain a body axis.  Cnidarians are the earliest diverging
              animals in which a clearly defined axial pattern exists. This pattern could be
              established by molecular mechanisms evolutionarily related to those responsible
              for patterning of the anterior/posterior axis in the embryos of protostomes and
              deuterostomes. If this was the case, the investigator would conclude that axial
              patterning evolved only once during the evolution of extant metazoans.
              Alternatively, the molecular mechanisms of axial patterning in the Hydra polyp
              could be largely or even completely distinct from those used in more recently
              diverged animals. Such a finding would indicate that axial patterning evolved
              more than once during the evolution of metazoans. Either of these possible
              outcomes will have a major impact on understanding the evolution of
              multicellular animals.

A number of genes have been identified which are
              attractive candidates for involvement in axial patterning in the freshwater
              cnidarian Hydra.  Functional tests of these roles of theses genes in axial
              patterning have, however, not been possible due to the lack of methods for
              introduction and expression of cloned genes in adult Hydra polyps.  The goal of
              this project is the development of a method for obtaining expression of
              exogenous gene products in Hydra.  Several avenues will be pursued.  These
              include:  (1) use of a pantropic retrovirus as a vector for stable introduction
              of cloned genes into Hydra embryos or into the spermatogonial cells of the
              adult polyp; (2) microinjection of DNA into embryos; (3) introduction of DNA
              into embryos and adult polyps via particle bombardment; and (4) introduction of
              proteins into the cells of adult polyps using the TAT-mediated protein uptake
              system.
