Title       : Studies in Intergroup Conflict: A University Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9808686

Award Number: 9808686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85025              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Sidanius sidanius@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Sears  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shana l. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent increases in ethnic diversity on college campuses have led to increases
              in intergroup tensions and concomitant shifts toward forms of education that
              positively embrace multiethnic and multicultural perspectives. Although it is
              assumed that such multicultural education will foster harmonious relations
              among different ethnic groups at the university and in the broader society at
              large, this assumption has yet to be empirically tested in any rigorous manner.
              This project aims to achieve a process-oriented understanding of the ways in
              which a multicultural educational environment influences the development of
              intergroup attitudes and behaviors over the college years. Gaining a
              satisfactory understanding of the process by which the educational experience
              influences intergroup attitudes and behaviors would help answer the more
              general question of whether or not a multicultural educational experience
              actually increases or decreases intergroup tension. Several university
              experiences will be explored, including: a) the formal contents of course
              curricula; b) the informal and university sponsored extra-curricular
              activities; c) membership in various types of student organizations (e.g.,
              fraternities, sororities, minority student organizations, and support groups);
              d) experience with conflict resolution programs; and e) dormitory living
              arrangements. Specific questions to be addressed include whether or not "ethnic
              studies" courses (e.g., African-American history) and membership in "ethnic"
              student organizations (e.g., African-American, Chinese-American student clubs)
              actually exacerbate or attenuate ethnic conflict and students' willingness to
              interact with people from other ethnic and racial groups.

These issues will
              be addressed by use of a longitudinal study of the freshman class admitted to
              UCLA in the fall of 1996 (approximately 2,000 students). The students have been
              interviewed once a year since their time of entry, and interviews will continue
              once a year until the students graduate (most of the students are expected to
              graduate in the spring of 2001). Measures were taken of students' baseline
              intergroup attitudes, behaviors, and expectations of the university environment
              before their entry into college (Summer 1996), and three additional waves of
              data concerning these attitudes, behaviors, and university activities have been
              collected.

Because of its high degree of ethnic diversity, the UCLA campus
              offers a unique opportunity to study the institutional factors that both
              facilitate and undermine the degree to which students engage in positive
              interactions with members of different ethnic groups. The knowledge gained from
              this unique panel study is hoped to facilitate the development of programs and
              structures that will enable our highly multiethnic society to continue to
              function in a constructive and productive manner in the future.

