Title       : ESH: RUI: A 9,000 Year Diatom Record of Climate Fluctuations From Lake Victoria,
               East Africa, With Decade-Scale Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9808972

Award Number: 9808972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay C. Stager stagerj@paulsmiths.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paul Smith's College
	      
	      Paul Smiths, NY  12970    518/327-6223

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9808972
Stager

Paleoclimatic research in tropical Africa relies heavily upon
              analysis of microfossils in lake sediment cores, and with these tools it has
              provided abundant evidence of dramatic fluctuations in equatorial temperatures,
              hydrology, and climatic seasonality since the Pleistocene.  However, much of
              this work has suffered from several important limitations, among them (1)
              relatively coarse temporal resolution of microfossil series, (2) incomplete
              records due to erosion and/or discontinuous sedimentation, (3) difficulty in
              teasing out the relative contributions of past rainfall, winds, and other
              climatic factors to observed changes in the fossil record, and (4) difficulties
              in radiocarbon dating of cores, including ancient carbon reservoir effects and
              insufficient number of dates.  These limitations have not only reduced the
              clarity of many paleoclimatic reconstructions; they often hinder comparisons
              between sites.

For this RUI proposal, the PI has subsampled a 9.9 m long
              sediment core from Lake Victoria, East Africa, at 2 cm intervals, and proposes
              to conduct a high-resolution analysis of the diatoms (single-celled algae with
              glass shells) preserved in those subsamples that will avoid the aforementioned
              limitations.  The results of this project are likely to represent a significant
              contribution to our understanding of the history of, and forcing mechanisms
              behind, equatorial climates of the Holocene.  The temporal detail will be
              unprecedented among tropical records of this length, yielding 16-18 year
              resolution over a span of roughly 9,000 14C years.  Holocene sedimentation
              regimes in Lake Victoria have been remarkably uniform, so date interpolation
              for this record should be quite reliable.  Because this core comes from an
              inshore site, it contains evidence of past lake level fluctuations (due to
              climatic changes) as represented by changes in the relative abundances of
              littoral diatoms.  In addition, other fossil diatom taxa indicative of water
              column mixing regimes will yield a record of past fluctuations in monsoonal
              wind activity.  From these unusually detailed diatom records, it should be
              possible to reconstruct a long and exceptionally detailed record of East
              African droughts, to gain insights into the role of short-term periodic climate
              oscillations in the tropics, to seek evidence of cyclic solar forcing of
              African climates, and to confirm the timing and nature of the abrupt climatic
              transition to greater tropical rainfall seasonality ca. 7200 years ago, as well
              as of the "Medieval Warm Period" and "Little Ice Age" interval which are still
              poorly documented in East Africa.  The results of this study will be compared
              to other paleoclimatic datasets as well, including equatorial multi-proxy
              records and high-resolution polar ice core records, putting the climatic
              history of Lake Victoria into a global context.

