Title       : Studies in Khoisan Syntax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9808256

Award Number: 9808256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103165             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher T. Collins cc42@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research will address several interrelated issues in the syntax of
              Khoisan languages, with special attention being given to Hoa.  Khoisan is a
              family of languages spoken in southern Africa.  Many of the languages are in
              danger of dying out in the near future.  For example, there are now only around
              200 speakers of Hoa and most of these speakers are over 60.  There are no
              children who speak Hoa.  This study will attempt to deepen our knowledge of
              this unique language family by studying several syntactic issues.  Since the
              Khoisan languages have had very little syntactic work done on them (either
              theoretical or descriptive), the proposed work must of necessity be very
              descriptive and exploratory.  It is to be expected that the results of this
              research would be of value to researchers in any syntactic framework.  The
              objectives of the research are as follows.  First using data that the PI has
              already collected from Hoa, the PI will do fieldwork with Ju/'hoan in order to
              give a detailed comparison between the two languages with respect to several
              syntactic constructions.  The syntactic aspects to be compared are the syntax
              of complements and adjuncts and the syntax of verbal compounds.  Second, the PI
              will extend his syntactic work on Hoa by comparing it to the mutually
              intelligible dialect called Sasi, and collecting oral texts from Sasi and Hoa. 
              Third, the PI will investigate the interaction of tone and syntax in Hoa, using
              pitch tracking software.  The project is part of a larger project by the PI to
              write an accurate grammar of Hoa and to explore the syntactic relations between
              the various Khoisan languages.  On a more theoretical level, the results of the
              project should eventually inform studies of the syntactic position of objects,
              the classification of languages into symmetrical versus asymmetrical object
              languages, complex predicates, the relation of compounding to verb
              serialization, and tone/syntax interactions.  The PI is also interested in
              incorporating his research on African languages into graduate and undergraduate
              courses on a continuing basis.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
