Title       : Studies on Cytoskeletal Function in the Generation and 
Maintenance of Cell
               Shape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9808368

Award Number: 9808368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184742             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Cohen cohen@genectr.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the case of mature mammalian erythrocytes (red blood cells), the cells have
              lost their nuclei during differentiation, and their candy-like discoid shape is
              maintained by a complex cytoskeletal network on the cytoplasmic face of the
              plasma membrane.  In other animals, including vertebrates such as birds, fish
              and amphibians, and also certain mollusks that possess hemoglobin-bearing blood
              cells (Vesicomyid clams, or "blood clams"), the mature erythrocytes maintain
              their nuclei, and the shapes of these cells (usually flattened ellipsoids) are
              maintained by a submembranous band of microtubules termed the marginal band. 
              This work examines how cells maintain or change their shape, using nucleated
              erythrocytes of Xenopus, axolotls, and "blood clams" as a model system because
              of their constancy of shape and relative simplicity of cytoskeletal
              organization.  Major questions addressed are: (1) how is the characteristic
              flattened ellipsoidal shape of these cells generated? and  (2) how is this
              morphology maintained?  With respect to the first, Dr. Cohen's laboratory has
              previously found that immature singly- and doubly-pointed erythroid cells
              containing correspondingly pointed, incomplete marginal bands of microtubules
              occur in many species.  Experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that
              these represent true cytoskeletal intermediates and to establish the
              morphogenetic sequence, using bromodeoxyuridine labeling of differentiating
              erythroblasts (immature red cells) in the larval amphibian spleen (axolotl), in
              circulating blood of anemic adults (Xenopus), and in erythroid cell cultures
              from both sources.  With respect to the second question, in recent work, Dr.
              Cohen's laboratory has discovered that the hemoglobin-bearing erythrocytes of
              "blood clams" undergo a drastic transformation of cell shape from flattened
              ellipsoids to wrinkled spheroids that is induced by a natural factor in the
              "blood" (hemolymph) and is remarkably reversible.  These cells are particularly
              interesting because they not only contain marginal bands, but also have
              marginal band-associated centrosomes (microtubule organizing centers;
              centrioles).  A variety of experiments will examine cytoskeletal function and
              its control in this natural reversible change of cell shape, and additional
              data on cytoskeletal organization will be obtained by fluorescence localization
              of selected cytoskeletal proteins, both in this system and in the two amphibian
              systems.  Of particular interest are proteins characteristic of microtubule
              organizing centers, centrin and gamma tubulin, the localization of which will
              shed light on centrosome function in cell shape maintenance.  

The work is
              expected to provide basic new information on the function of ubiquitous
              cytoskeletal elements.  This information will be of importance not only in
              understanding how nucleated red blood cells maintain their shape and volume,
              but also for its potential to contribute important new insights to the
              knowledge base of how microtubules influence cell shape in eukaryotic cells in
              general. 

Dr. Cohen routinely involves both undergraduate and graduate
              students in his research, both in his laboratory at Hunter College and during
              the summer months at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole,
              Massachusetts.  Thus, this project is expected to contribute significantly to
              the integration of research and education.
 


