Title       : The Political Economy of Environment-Development Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a9808696

Award Number: 9808696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Deacon deacon@econ.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to better understand the relationship
              between economic growth, democracy, and environmental quality. This is now a
              prominent policy question. Decision makers in domestic and international
              agencies need to know how political reform and accelerating growth in some of
              the world's poorest nations will affect the global environment. Theoretical
              models show that the relationship between growth in income and pollution could
              be positive or negative. Increasing production causes more pollution to be
              generated, but higher income can intensify demands for environmental
              protection. Empirical research on this subject indicates that several forms of
              pollution seem to decline with economic growth once a country's income reaches
              a certain level.  Research on this topic has largely ignored the fact that
              pollution control is a public good, provided by government. One consequence of
              this is that results from prior research on the growth environmental quality
              relationship may be flawed because they confound the environmental effects of
              economic growth with the effects of political reform. That is, some of the
              environmental effects attributed to growth may actually be due to cross country
              variations in political institutions. A second consequence is that the
              profession is uninformed about the environmental effects of political change,
              and thus can offer no credible insights on the environmental implications of
              the recent trend toward democratization or on kinds of political reforms that
              are likely to foster environmental protection. These are serious shortcomings
              in light the fact that political institutions in some of the world's poorest
              nations have changed profoundly during the last decade and some are now growing
              vigorously.  This project will develop a theoretical model of public goods
              provision under non-democratic government, and estimate it empirically. The
              public good of primary concern here is environmental protection. Preliminary
              inquiry, and the received literature on public choice, gives some indication
              that non democratic regimes are likely to under provide public goods relative
              to democracies because they fail to represent the interests of some segments of
              the population, and accordingly ignore benefits accruing to these non
              represented groups in making policy. This will serve as the starting point for
              a thorough theoretical investigation of public goods provision in
              non-democratic government. The resulting model will then be incorporated in a
              general equilibrium framework that (i) relates a country's environmental policy
              to its income and form of government, (ii) relates pollution levels to
              environmental policy, economy wide output, and the composition of output, and
              (iii) relates the composition of output to income and environmental policy. 
              The main objective is to estimate all components of this model empirically. The
              form of government in a given country and year will be characterized with
              information on its method of selecting the chief executive (elective vs. non
              elective,) the type of chief executive (president, premier, monarch, military
              ruler, etc.), the degree of party competition, the effectiveness of the
              legislature (effective, ineffective, non existent,) and similar variables.
              Levels of environmental pollution will be represented with data from monitoring
              sites in a wide range of countries and years on levels of sulfur dioxide,
              smoke, and heavy particulates. Cross country differences in levels of several
              of water pollutants and provision of such environmentally related public goods
              as access to sanitation facilities, safe drinking water, and public health will
              be examined in the same fashion. The analysis of output composition will be
              structured to incorporate those industries most responsible for generating
              specific pollutants. For example, the primary man made SO2sources are fossil
              fuel combustion (for electricity production, home heating, and transportation,)
              metal refining, and certain industrial processes, so these industries must be
              represented individually.  With empirical estimates of the relevant
              relationships, it will be possible to more accurately assess the separate
              effects of political reform and economic growth on the environment.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
