Title       : Control of RNA Processing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9808150

Award Number: 9808150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillie L. Searles lsearles@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Searles
9808150

This proposal is a study of pre-mRNA processing control in
              Drosophila melanogaster.  The nuclear protein encoded by the suppressor of
              sable gene (su(s)) is the focus of this work.  Su(s) protein binds to RNA and
              regulates the processing of mutant transcripts of several genes, including the
              vermilion (v) gene.  The mutant v transcripts are degraded in wild-type flies
              and stabilized in su(s) mutants.  Although the instability of these transcripts
              is related to their being poor substrates for splicing, it has not been
              established whether Su(s) functions directly in splicing, RNA degradation or
              another process.  Evidence has been obtained that Su(s) regulates processing of
              normal transcripts and must be present at a particular level for normal
              viability of Drosophila.  There are two main objectives of this proposal.  (1)
              Two functional domains of the protein will be characterized by in vitro
              mutagenesis of su(s) coding sequences, and analysis of the function of the
              altered protein derivatives after germline transformation.  One domain that
              will be studied is the RNA binding domain, and the other is a zinc-finger motif
              of unknown function.  (2) The mechanism by which su(s) regulates RNA processing
              will be further examined.  Potential candidates of regulation by su(s) have
              been identified, and RNAs produced by these genes will be examined in su(s)
              wild type and mutant flies.  In addition, nine new in vitro mutagenized
              derivatives of a v allele that is known to be regulated by su(s) have been made
              and transformed into flies for RNA analysis.

This work will contribute to
              the understanding of how the fidelity of pre-mRNA processing is maintained and
              how aberrant RNAs are targeted for degradation.  Furthermore, the analysis of
              functional domains of Su(s) will provide information of value to scientists
              studying proteins that regulate growth and development and that have similar
              structural features.

