Title       : Exceptions to the Canonical Genetic Code in a Methanogenic archaeon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9808914

Award Number: 9808914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Krzycki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Methane production was the original impetus for research into methanogenic
              bacteria.  The innate vulnerability of current energy supplies underlies the
              need for their continued study.  Methanogens also occupy a crucial ecological
              niche, preventing carbon accumulation in their anoxic environments.  Prosaic
              but pragmatic processes such as sewage digestion rely heavily on methanogens,
              and many toxic chemicals are degraded under methanogenic conditions. 
              Methylamines are preferred substrates of methanogens. Methyl-CoM is the
              penultimate intermediate to methane. This laboratory has biochemically
              reconstituted the pathways of CoM methylation from trimethylamine (TMA) and
              monomethylamine (MMA) in the methylotrophic methanogen Methanosarcina barkeri.
              These pathways share an identical CoM methylase protein, which interacts with
              two different, but homologous, corrinoid binding proteins specific for either
              TMA or MMA. The key enzymes of each pathway initiate metabolism by specifically
              methylating the corrinoid proteins with MMA or TMA. The TMA specific
              methyltransferase (TMAMT) is encoded by mttB. The MMA specific
              methyltransferase (MMAMT) is encoded by mtmB. These functionally analogous
              enzymes share little sequence similarity, except that both genes contain
              in-frame UAG codons. If used as a stop codon, the in-frame UAG would result in
              much shorter proteins than observed for the isolated methyltransferases. The
              UAG codons are the single interruptions of otherwise open reading frames of
              proper size for both proteins. For mtmB, the sequence, reading frame, and gene
              assignment have been exhaustively confirmed. The ability of UAG to direct
              transcriptional termination is clearly circumvented during synthesis of the
              methyltransferases. Both transcripts are predicted to have conserved structure
              and sequence elements around the UAG codon. UAG is used at unusually low
              frequency as a stop codon in M. barkeri. It appears that during the acquisition
              of the ability to convert methylamines to methane Methanosarcina also acquired
              a violation of the canonical genetic code. A number of hypothetical means of
              preventing termination at UAG are possible and will be tested. Peptide maps of
              MMAMT will be generated and the protein sequence of peptides encoded by the
              UAG-containing regions will be determined by mass spectroscopy and Edman
              degradation. Any amino acid encoded by UAG will be characterized. Preliminary
              data indicates UAG readthrough is a translational event, but transcripts will
              be further examined for evidence of processing or editing. The efficiency of
              UAG readthrough will be tested under different growth conditions using antibody
              to the full-length protein. Divergent mtmB and mttB genes from related genera
              will be compared to ascertain conservation of the UAG codon, its position, and
              surrounding sequence/structure context. Reporter fusions with 5' UAG containing
              regions will be introduced into the chromosome in order to determine effects of
              sequence context and growth conditions on UAG readthrough. An in vitro
              translation system will also be used to test the effect of sequence context and
              growth conditions on UAG readthrough in constructs ranging from short messages
              with single in-frame stops to full length mtmB containing transcripts. Even if
              the current model for how suppression of UAG directed termination occurs is
              misleading, there will remain evidence for the first example of an intron in
              protein coding genes in the Archaea, an entity very seldom seen among any
              prokaryote.  The potential to learn something new here is high.  No matter what
              the mechanism for circumventing UAG-directed termination may turn out to be,
              this system offers rare insight into how organisms evolve new metabolic
              capabilities, even to the extent of modifying their genetic codes.
