Title       : Chemical Evolution of Archean Mantle and Crust: Constraints From Hafnium,
               Neodymium, and Lead Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9814885

Award Number: 9814885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Vervoort   (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Jonathan Patchett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814885
Vervoort
The aim of this proposal is to constrain the isotopic
              evolution of the crust-mantle system during the Archean, along two subparallel
              paths:  1) definition of the Hf and Nd isotopic record of the Archean depleted
              mantle; and 2) integration of Hf and Nd isotopic records of silicate rocks with
              the Pb isotopes from Archean sulfides.  Integrating Hf, Nd, and Pb isotopic
              systems will allow better constraints to be placed on the isotopic evolution of
              the depleted mantle, the growth and development of continental crust, and the
              interactions between crust and mantle during the first two billion years of
              Earth's history. The first aspect of the work will focus on determining the Hf
              isotopic composition in a range of well-dated and geologically constrained
              samples from the depleted mantle, 4.0 to 2.7 Ga.  This will define the Hf
              isotopic record of depleted mantle evolution in the Archean, and by comparison,
              evaluate whether the current heterogeneity in the Nd isotopic record is a real
              feature of the Archean mantle or is an artifact caused by disturbances in the
              Sm-Nd isotopic system. U-Pb dating of zircons will provide better age
              constraints where they are lacking. To achieve the second goal, integrated Hf,
              Nd and Pb isotopic studies will be conducted on well-constrained volcanogenic
              massive sulfide (VMS) deposits, such as in the 2.7 Ga Abitibi greenstone belt.
              These deposits show evidence for retention of mantle heterogeneity from
              differentiation events in the 4.3 to 4.5 interval of early Earth history.  It
              is not clear if this was related to U-Pb fractionation during core formation or
              during crust-mantle differentiation.  Pb isotopes on VMS deposits, coupled with
              Hf and Nd isotopes on cogenetic volcanic rocks, will show whether early
              differentiation events were core-related, or caused by silicate
              melting/differentiation processes connected with magma and primitive crust
              formation.

