Title       : Collaborative Research: UV Effects on Marine Production by Bacteria and
               Phytoplankton Assessing the Impact of UVB
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9814178

Award Number: 9814178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wade H. Jeffrey wjeffrey@uwf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of West Florida
	      11000 University Parkway
	      Pensacola, FL  325145750    850/474-2825

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1318,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                U.V. Effects on Marine Production by Bacteria and Phytoplankton:  Assessing 
              the Impact of UVB.  Ultraviolet radiation (UVR, 290-400 nm) from the sun
              penetrates to  significant depths in many marine environments and a variety of
              studies  have indicated its ecological importance. Stratospheric ozone
              depletion is  changing the spectral composition of solar LTVR to varying
              degrees in  different locations by increasing levels of biologically harmful,
              short  wavelength UVB (290-320 nm). Previous work has shown that both UVB and
              the  longer wavelength UVA (320-400 nm) affect marine carbon cycling, primarily
               through effects on phytoplankton and bacterioplankton which comprise the  base
              of oceanic food webs. While phytoplankton are responsible for carbon  fixation,
              bacterioplankton play a vital role in the mineralization of  nutrients and
              provide a trophic link to higher organisms. Assessing the  impact of UV on
              these processes during variations in ozone and water  transparency requires
              accurate knowledge of spectral dependence. This  dependence is described by a
              biological weighting function (BWF).  Significant effort has been devoted in
              the last two decades to resolving  BWFs for biological processes controlling
              rates of primary production in  aquatic environments (i.e. photoinhibition).
              Compared to reports of UV  effects on phytoplankton, however, studies of the
              impact and effects of UVR  on bacterioplankton are in their relative infancy.
              Previous work with  bacterioplankton has been limited to broad spectrum
              analysis (i.e. UVA vs.  UVB). Unfortunately, such limited spectral resolution
              precludes prediction,  particularly of the effects of increased UVB due to
              ozone depletion. The  principal goal of this project is to develop biological
              weighting functions  for inhibition of bacterioplankton production using DNA,
              RNA, and protein  synthesis as representative biological processes. Biological
              weighting  functions for inhibition of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis will be 
              determined for diverse marine environments (Chesapeake Bay and Gulf of  Mexico)
              using polychromatic light regimes and compared to similar functions  measured
              for phytoplankton. Models will be developed and compared to in  situ
              measurements of production and examined for significant disparities. 
              Experiments with pre- and post- fractionated samples will indicate how 
              bacterioplankton coupling influences UV responses. Time series assays will 
              define how response is related to exposure and whether damage is  counteracted
              by photoreactivation. This study will increase our  understanding of the
              spectral sensitivity of natural assemblages of  bacterioplankton in diverse
              environments and of the role of UVR in  controlling marine ecosystems with
              particular reference to increased UVB  associated with stratospheric ozone
              depletion.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
