Title       : Molecular Relaxation and Radiative Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a9814061

Award Number: 9814061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaul Mukamel mukamel@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shaul Mukamel is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in molecular relaxation and
              radiative processes.  He will continue his development of theoretical methods
              for investigating exciton dynamics and vibrational motions in molecular
              aggregates and their signatures in femtosecond nonlinear spectroscopies.  This
              research will provide a unified technique for interpreting experimental data
              from a broad range of time resolved laser experiments including pump-probe
              dynamics, fluorescence up-conversion, photon echo, transient grating,
              birefringence, dichroism, time-resolved Raman, and four-wave mixing.  The
              theoretical approach is based on Liouville-space Green's function techniques.  
              Mukamel will apply this methodology to light harvesting antennae complexes of
              photosynthetic bacteria, J-aggregates and semiconductor nanoparticles, hole
              transfer in polypeptides, photoisomerization in Bacteriorhodopsin, and photon
              echo spectroscopy of the hydrated electron.

The advent of pulsed laser
              technology combined with the use of non-linear optical techniques has led to a
              large number of new methods to probe gas phase and condensed phase molecular
              systems.  Mukamel is developing theoretical techniques that are central to the
              interpretation of the data obtained from these experiments.  These
              interpretations lead to many important chemical dynamical insights regarding
              chemical reactions and the effects of solvation in condensed phase systems.

