Title       : Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Onset of Ice Stream Flow: A Ground
               Geophysical Field Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9814816

Award Number: 9814816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Blankenship blank@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814816
Blankenship

This award supports a four year project to develop of
              better understanding the ice streams of the Ross Sea Embayment (A--F) which
              drain the interior West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) by rapidly moving vast
              quantities of ice to the calving front of the Ross Ice Shelf.   The project
              will examine the role of these ice streams as buffers between the interior ice
              and the floating ice shelves.   The reasons for their fast flow, the factors
              controlling their current grounding-line-, margin-, and head-positions are
              crucial to any attempt at modeling the WAIS system and predicting the future of
              the ice sheet.  For the Antarctic ice streams of the Siple Coast, the
              transition from no-sliding (or all internal deformation) to motion dominated by
              sliding is defined as the "onset-region".  To fully understand (and adequately
              model) the WAIS, this onset region must be better understood.  The lateral
              margins of the ice streams are also a transition that need better explanation. 
              Hypotheses on controls of the location of the onset region range from the
              "purely-glaciologic" to the "purely-geologic.  Thus, to model the ice sheet
              accurately, the basal boundary conditions (roughness, wetness, till properties)
              and a good subglacial geologic map, showing the distribution, thickness, and
              properties of the sedimentary basins, are required.  These parameters can be
              estimated from seismic, radar, and other geophysical methods.  The transition
              region of ice stream D will be studied in detail with this coupled geophysical
              experiment.  In addition, selected other locations on ice streams C & D will be
              made, to compare and contrast conditions with the main site on ice stream D.  
              Site-selection for the main camp will be based on existing radar, GPS, and
              satellite data as well as input from the modeling community.
