Title       : An Archive and Data Distribution System for Glaciological and Cryospheric System
               Data from the U.S. Antarctic Program: The Antarctic Glaciological Data Center
               (AGDC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9814550

Award Number: 9814550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Scharfen scharfen@kryos.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore A. Scambos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the establishment of an archive and data distribution system
              for glaciological and cryospheric data from the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP). 
              The archive would create a permanent record for upcoming and past field data
              and would ensure the availability of older data as programs from previous years
              come to an end or as P.I.s retire.  The Antarctic Glaciological Data Center
              (AGDC) would be modeled on the current Arctic System Science (ARCSS) data
              management program at NSIDC, which has been a demonstrated success over the
              last eight years, and would be a logical extension of NSIDC's role as the U.S.
              Antarctic Data Coordination Center (ADCC), which provides data set information
              on the spectrum of USAP research activities.  The presence of a data center
              removes the burden of archiving and distributing data from P.I.s- a burden they
              retain under the currently-funded ADCC.  A data protocol would be developed in
              concert with key USAP inititatives like the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS)
              program and the U.S. component of the International Trans-Antarctic Scientific
              Expedition (US ITASE) to ensure eventual broad access to their data, while
              including an appropriate period during which P.I.s would have exclusive use of
              the data.  Examples of the types of data that would be collected and archived
              include physical and geochemical data from ice cores and snow pits, ice surface
              elevations, internal layer records, ice thickness and bedrock topography from
              radar profiles, snow accumulation, grain-size, ablbedo, surface and 10-meter
              snow temperatures, ice velocity measurements from remote sensing imagery, field
              survey data and well-characterized digital seismic and radar profile data.  The
              fundamental purpose of the proposed effort is to provide a simple, coordinated,
              and appropriate means of facilitating the broadest possible utilization of
              glaciological and related data collected by the USAP.



