Title       : Snow and Firn Microstructure and Transport Properties: U. S. ITASE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9814676

Award Number: 9814676
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Albert malbert@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to measure snow and firn bulk properties and
              microstructure along the route of the U.S. International Trans-Antarctic
              Scientific Expedition (US ITASE) traverses in West Antarctica.  These
              parameters are important because they control the air-snow-firn transport
              processes and thus the manner in which heat, vapor, and chemical species in air
              are incorporated into snow and polar firn.  The objectives of the project are
              to obtain field measurements of near-surface (down to 2 meters) snow and firn
              properties, which include surface roughness, permeability, density, grain size,
              surface-to-volume ratio, and tortuosity.  In addition microstructural
              measurements and measurements of the above properties will be measured in firn
              cores down to 20 meters back in the laboratory.  These measurements will be
              used in a transport model to elucidate the nature of the air-snow-firn exchange
              and firnification process at the various sites along the U.S. ITASE traverse. 
              Since many of the snow and firn properties also affect the interaction of
              radiation in different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, these
              measurements will provide valuable ground truth to those efforts using remote
              sensing to map the spatial variations of snow, firn and ice properties.
