Title       : SGER: Enrichment-Induced Plasticity in Neonatal Whisker Somatosensory Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9814387

Award Number: 9814387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22107              (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina M. Sullivan rsullivan@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9814387  SGER: Enrichment-induced Plasticity in Neonatal
              Whisker Somatosensory  Cortex    The  importance  of  enrichment during early
              development  on  brain  and  behavioral  experience-dependent plasticity  is 
              clearly  documented.  A  theme, which appears to be emerging from studies of
              early development is  that  the  emotional context of the stimuli, has an
              enormous  impact  on  behavioral and brain changes, especially during early
              development. Thus,  these  emotional  events  can guide behavioral and  neural 
              development,  which result in permanent alterations in these systems. The
              objective of  the  proposed  experiment  is  to do assess  whether  the 
              relevance  or  significance  of  stimuli can also have a strong  impact  on 
              experience  dependent behavioral and neural changes.    The  whisker  system in
              rats offers an excellent system  for  studying  information processing because
              the somatosensory cortex is a  relatively  well  understood network of neurons
              and the neural pathway  between  the  whiskers and the cortex has been
              thoroughly described. Furthermore, each  whisker  is  represented by a cortical
              neural network called a  "barrel"  which  is  easily  identifiable with
              histological staining.  During  the  neonatal period, when a whisker is
              removed, its cortical barrel does not  develop.  Due to the limited sensory
              capabilities of neonatal  rats  (no  visual or auditory systems) the
              somatosensory system represents an ideal  partner to the existing literature in
              the olfactory system in which  the  circuitry  is  not as well understood.
              Using 1-8 day old rat  pups,  the  basic  experimental  method is to train
              neonatal  rats  in  a  classical  conditioning  procedure  using  the 
              somatosensory  system   and   later  assessing  the  somatosensory cortex for
              neural changes associated  with  the training.    The  potential  impact  of
              this proposal is  that  it  applies  a  new  approach  to  an "established"
              research area. The learning  paradigm  is  considered  an   enrichment paradigm
              and it has not been integrated  into  the  neonatal  whisker system plasticity
              research. The inclusion  of  an  enrichment paradigm into this area of study
              will add a dimension  to  an  existing cortical model of plasticity in which a
              deprivation paradigm is  currently   used.   Although  deprivation  is  very  
              helpful   in   our  understanding  of  systems, it becomes particularly useful 
              when  it  is  complimented with an enrichment paradigm.    This  proposal will
              enable the development of a strong foundation  for  a  model  in  the  whisker 
              system which will capitalize  on  a  growing  interest  in  the 
              characteristics of stimuli (emotional,  significance)  which  appear  to  be 
              important in promoting early experience-dependent  behavioral and neural
              changes.    Given   the   recent   progress   in   my   lab   on   defining   
              the  behavioral/functional  development of  the  vibrissal  system,  and  the 
              recent  explosion  of  interest  in  the  role  of  emotional/behavioral 
              significance of early experience on brain development, now is  an  ideal  time 
              to  bring  together  these two lines of research.  To  do  so,  my  proposal 
              capitalizes  on  the  wealth of  knowledge  concerning  normal  anatomical
              development of the rat vibrissal system.                                       
                                        I
