Title       : AMS Radiocarbon Chronology of Glacier Fluctuations in the South Shetland Islands
               During the Last Glacial/Interglacial Hemicycle:Implications for Global Climate
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2002   
File        : a9814349

Award Number: 9814349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97393              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda L. Hall Brendah@Maine.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a two year program to produce a new reconstruction of ice
              extent, elevation and thickness at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) for the South
              Shetland Islands in the Antarctic Peninsula.  One field season on Livingston
              Island will involve mapping the areal extent and geomorphology of glacial drift
              and determining the elevation and distribution of trimlines.  In addition, ice
              flow direction will be determined by mapping and measuring the elevation of
              erosional features and the position of erratic boulders.  One of the main goals
              of this work will be to demonstrate whether or not organic material suitable
              for radiocarbon dating exists in the South Shetland Islands.  If so, the age of
              the deposits will be determined by measuring the carbon-14 age of plant, algal,
              and fungal remains preserved at the base of the deposits, as well as
              incorporated marine shells, seal skin and other organic material that may be
              found in raised beach deposits.  Another goal will be to concentrate on the
              development of relative sea-level curves from 2-3 key areas to show whether or
              not construction of such curves for the South Shetland Islands is possible. 
              The new reconstruction of ice extent, elevation and thickness at the Last
              Glacial Maximum for the South Shetland Islands which will be produced by this
              work will be useful in studies of ocean circulation and ice dynamics in the
              vicinity of the Drake Passage.  It will also contribute to the production of a
              deglacial chronology which will afford important clues about the mechanisms
              controlling ice retreat in this region of the southern hemisphere.


