Title       : Quantifying the Link Between the Mechanical Controls on Fracture Formation and
               Network Permeability Using a Physically-Based, Three Dimensional Model of
               Fracture Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9814121

Award Number: 9814121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Renshaw Carl.E.Renshaw@Dartmouth.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814121
Renshaw

Although it is well known that fractures play an important
              role in petroleum exploration and production, waste isolation, aquifer
              remediation, and water resource management, our quantitative understanding of
              the impact of fracture networks on fluid flow remains limited.  For example,
              existing fracture permeability models yield inconsistent results, even for
              simple network geometries.  We hypothesize that the physical parameters
              controlling fracture growth can be used to better constrain the permeability of
              fractured rock.  Accordingly, we seek to gain insight into flow through
              fractured rock via detailed numerical experiments designed to characterize the
              fundamental mechanical controls on three dimensional fracture formation.  To
              accomplish these experiments, we propose to extend an existing, experimentally
              verified two-dimensional model of fracture growth to three dimensions.  Once
              complete, the model will be used to address three fundamental questions:  1)
              What is the impact of mechanical layer thickness on network permeability?  2)
              How is fracture geometry and network permeability affected by strain rate? and
              3) Do fracture mechanics parameters exert as strong an effect on the geometry
              and permeability of three dimensional fracure network as they do in two
              dimensions?  In answering these questions the parameter space for which
              existing fracture permeability models are valid will be defined and criteria
              for selecting an appropriate permeability model established.  Our results will
              provide the basis for more accurate analyses of the effects of fractures on
              fluid flow and establish the foundation for quantitative links between the
              physical properties of fractured rock and the engineering parameters required
              for reservoir simulation.  The proposed work will also provide insight into the
              three dimensional geometric characteristics of fracture systems  which may aid
              in development of improved fracture permeability models.  Ultimately, we seek
              identify a limited set of physical parameters that can be both measured, either
              in the laboratory or the field, and used to contrain the three dimensional
              distribution of fracture permeability.  Although mostly theoretical, our
              previous work demonstrates that our approach provides the framework for the
              enhanced interpretation of field data.  In addition, our work will increase our
              general understanding of the failure of brittle materials.  Consequently,
              results from this work will have broad application both within the earth
              sciences (e.g., earthquake mechanics) and beyond e.g., materials science and
              structural engineering). 

