Title       : Paleohistory of the Larsen Ice Shelf: Evidence from the Marine Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2001   
File        : a9814383

Award Number: 9814383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Domack edomack@hamilton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick D. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamilton College
	      198 College Hill Rd
	      Clinton, NY  13323    315/859-4011

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9229,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to study the region recently
              occupied by the Larsen Ice Shelf in the Antarctic Peninsula. Over the last 10
              years, scientists have observed a dramatic decay and disintegration of floating
              ice shelves along the northern end of the Antarctic Peninsula. Meteorological
              records and satellite observations indicate that this catastrophic decay is
              related to regional warming of nearly 3 degrees C in the last 50 years. While
              such retreat of floating ice shelves is unprecedented in historic records,
              current understanding of the natural variability of ice shelf systems over the
              last few thousand years is not understood well. This award supports a program
              of marine geologic research directed at filling this knowledge gap by
              developing an understanding of the dynamics of the northern Larsen Ice Shelf
              during the Holocene epoch (the last 10,000 years).

The Larsen Ice Shelf is
              located in the NW Weddell Sea along the eastern side of the Antarctic Peninsula
              and is currently undergoing a rapid, catastrophic retreat as documented by
              satellite imagery over the past five years. While the region of the northern
              Antarctic Peninsula has experienced a pronounced warming trend over the last 40
              years, the links between this warming and global change (i.e. greenhouse
              warming) are not obvious. Yet the ice shelf is clearly receding at a rate
              unprecedented in historic time, leaving vast areas of the seafloor uncovered
              and in an open marine setting. This project will collect a series of short
              sediment cores within the Larsen Inlet and in areas that were at one time
              covered by the Larsen Ice Shelf. By applying established sediment and fossil
              criteria to the cores we hope to demonstrate whether the Larsen Ice Shelf has
              experienced similar periods of retreat and subsequent advance within the last
              10,000 years. Past work in various regions of the Antarctic has focused on
              depositional models for ice shelves that allow one to discern the timing of ice
              shelf retreat/advance in areas of the Ross Sea, Antarctic Peninsula, and Prydz
              Bay. This research will lead to a much improved understanding of the dynamics
              of ice shelf systems and their role in past and future climate
              oscillations.


