Title       : Olfactory Foraging by Procellariiform Seabirds at South Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9814326

Award Number: 9814326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle A. Nevitt ganevitt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many procellariiforms or "tube-nosed" seabirds (i.e., the petrels, albatrosses
              and shearwaters) forage over vast expanses of featureless ocean waters in
              search of a patchily-distributed food resource, Antarctic krill (Euphausia
              superba). These birds have highly developed olfactory systems and are attracted
              to fishy-smelling odors.  Recent work has also shown that several Antarctic
              species are attracted to dimethyl sulfide, an odor associated with high primary
              productivity.  It has been proposed that DMS and other natural aromatics make
              up an olfactory landscape over the ocean that seabirds use to forage.  The
              peaks and valleys of this landscape provide birds with detailed, instantaneous
              information about whether they are in areas where they are likely to find food.
               Although there has been intensive work investigating one component of this
              landscape (DMS), detailed studies about other potential olfactory cues more
              closely associated with krill are lacking.  It is not known, for example,
              whether Antarctic procellariiform seabirds can smell krill directly, but this
              information is necessary to develop models of olfactory foraging on a broader
              scale.This framework will be critical in exploring how changes in krill
              distribution and density might affect the foraging success of seabirds over
              multi-year studies  -  questions pertinent to long-term management.  The
              objective of this study is to  investigate species-specific differences in
              olfactory responses by Antarctic procellariiform seabirds to krill-related
              odors. This work will be conducted in collaboration with the British Antarctic
              Survey (BAS) Peleagic Exosystems Core Program.  This is a multi-year ecological
              study being carried out near South Georgia where procellariiform seabirds have
              been closely monitored.  Olfactory data will thus be linked to real time diet
              sampling being done locally at Bird Island near South Georgia, and will be used
              to assist in developing strategies for the management and exploitation of
              marine resources in the area.



