Title       : On Design Optimization in Optical Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9814014

Award Number: 9814014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43473              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jadranka Skorin-Kapov jskorin@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Reflecting the increased complexity and globalization of today's world, the
              importance of communication networks is apparent and growing in many aspects of
               everyday life.  New networking architectures (e.g. optical networks, ATM
              Virtual Path networking) and the requirements of nimbleness have created a
              large number of network design/configuration optimization problems, many of
              which fall in the category of NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems. 
              Optimizing some design and usage characteristics of communication networks
              leads to considerable cost savings.  The main objective of the proposed
              research is to improve the design and usage of optical networks.  This will be
              achieved via identifying possible design problems and/or opportunities,
              proposing mathematical models, and developing efficient algorithms to optimally
              (or suboptimally) solve these models.  Specific objectives and applications
              include (but are not limited to):

(1) dynamic reconfiguration of
              multiwavelength multihop broadcast lightwave networks with variable number of
              transmitters/receivers per node, in order to minimize maximal congestion on its
              links; (also applicable to distributed memory architectures in order to
              decrease the time spent in communication); 
(2) reallocating capacity among
              links in a network to maximize the network utilization and minimize the total
              capacity required (applicable to rearrangeable T1/T3 telecommunication networks
              with digital cross-connect nodes, ATM networks);
(3) sequencing the
              arrangement of links and/or reallocation of capacity to minimally disrupt
              network operations (applicable to networks mentioned in (1) and (2));
(4)
              design optimization of non-broadcast networks with optical cross-connect
              equipment to allow wavelength routing and re-usage (applicable to Wide Area
              Networks);
(5) Designing minimum cost hub and spoke network by optimally (or
              suboptimally) locating hubs and allocating non-hub nodes subject to given
              restrictions (applicable to telephone networks, airline services and parcel
              delivery networks, distributed database systems, VLSI design).
(6) Controlling
              user's access to common communication medium by assigning time slots for
              variable bandwidth switching systems (applicable to satellite-switched time
              division multiple access system with different rates).

The primary direction
              of research includes the development, enhancement, and efficient implementation
              of heuristic search algorithms for some NP-hard combinatorial optimization
              problems arising in the design of optical networks.  The work on heuristic
              methods includes development of improved criterions for measuring the quality
              of the proposed heuristic solution.  This leads to research on development of
              efficient algorithms for obtaining tight lower bounds (for minimization
              problems).  Having a certain measure of the quality of a solution, it is
              interesting to investigate under which conditions the quality deteriorates (or
              improves).  The secondary direction of research is concerned with the
              identification of special cases of NP-hard problems arising in communication
              networks design that (due to restricting assumptions) could be efficiently
              solved to optimality.  The related work includes the design of algorithms for
              more general classes of problems that make use of efficient subroutines to
              solve subproblems.

Increasing the solvability of networking optimization
              problems and placing them in the dynamic environment by studying the impact of
              data changes on the proposed solution, adds to the applicability of such
              mathematical models to an even broader number of problems arising in
              applications of modern technology.  This will, in turn, advance our knowledge
              regarding solvability of relevant optimization problems facing contemporary
              engineering.

