Title       : SGER: Information Seeking Behavior and Job Performance of Young Information
               Systems Professionals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9814071

Award Number: 9814071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis M. Lee dlee@suffolk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Suffolk University
	      Beacon Hill
	      Boston, MA  021082770    617/723-4700

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A projected shortage of information technology workers may impede the successful
              integration of new information technologies as the captial investment in
              information technology proceeds at its current growing rates.  A key and
              neglected area of research is the professional development of young Information
              Systems (IS) professionals who will provide critical knowledge and technology
              transfer, and will form the core of tomorrow's human infrastructure for
              information technology industries.  This study is a contribution to
              understanding how best to develop these human resources in information systems
              and services, which will be critical to effectively implement and apply new
              information technologies. The project longitudinally investigates the
              communication patterns and work activities patterns of young (IS) professionals
              to determine how they seek information---new technical knowledge, user
              requirements---as well as  how they coordinate that information with the tasks
              they are trying to accomplish and how their job performance is affected. The
              study will identify the role of supervisors and mentors as well as the effect
              of social ties in influencing information seeking and job performance.  It
              breaks exploratory new ground by examining these patterns for young (less than
              five years' experience) IS professionals, and by using an empirical approach
              focused on daily work activities of its subjects and on there their information
              seeking behaviors.  Without an effective strategic approach that integrates
              both technology develpment, the dissemination and practical integration of
              cutting edge IT knowledge, and human infrastructure development, the full
              promise and impact of IT research cannot be reached.  This proposal addresses
              fundamental concerns of the latter two areas.
