Title       : Bioavailibility of Toxicants as Reflected in the In Situ Microbial Community
               Ecology and Relationship to Defensible End-Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1998 
File        : a9814813

Award Number: 9814813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485926             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. White dwhite1@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Stephen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Burkhalter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Macnaughton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9814813
White
	Contamination of soil and water by polluting organic compounds
              or metals has been shown to alter the composition of native communities of
              microbes in the environment. Recovery by the microbial community from
              contaminant effects and possible remediation of the environment are dependent
              upon a host of factors, biotic and abiotic, operating over varying time frames
              and spatial scales. A critical determinant of the recovery and remediation
              process is the composition of the initial, affected microbial community, in
              terms of taxonomic representation, abundance of individual populations, and
              metabolic status. The ability to assess, characterize, and track all the
              microbial species comprising a local community has been greatly enhanced by
              modern molecular methods of analysis for two major classes of bacterial
              compounds: bacterial cell wall lipids, and the DNA sequence of various
              ribosomal genes (usually the 16S rRNA gene). Obviating the need to grow or
              culture the bacteria in the laboratory, these molecular methods can provide
              rapid, accurate identification of microbial populations within soil or water
              samples, and preliminary indications of their relative abundances and metabolic
              states. As a pioneer in the development of the "signature lipid biomarker"
              methodology, Dr. White and his colleagues are now expanding the technology to
              include DNA sequence analyses, and to apply these methods to the study of
              contrasting contaminated and uncontaminated sites at two major field locations,
              at Wurtsmith AFB in Michigan and at Cocodrie marsh in Louisiana, both subject
              to persistent hydrocarbon contaminations. One overall goal is to test the
              hypothesis that microbial community composition will change in a directional
              and predictable manner as contaminants are attenuated either in space (over a
              gradient of contaminant concentration) or through time (over several seasons of
              microbial growth and metabolism). An auxiliary hypothesis under test is whether
              there are "sentinel" species of microbes that signal particular states of
              remediation.
	The development of effective bioremediation strategies for
              contaminated soils or waters has been moving away from the "silver bullet"
              approach that relies upon a single agent (adding one particular bacterial
              species) to a more ecological approach that emphasizes metabolic dynamics among
              microbial community members in the environment. Rapid, accurate identification
              of the full range of microbes present in local communities increasingly is
              possible with the use of modern molecular methods of cell wall lipid analysis
              and DNA sequencing of diagnostic gene regions. In turn, the characterization of
              microbial community composition may reveal distinctive assemblages of
              "sentinel" species that correlate with various states of environmental
              remediation.

