Title       : LT: Development of an Integrated Systems Model to Explore Environmentally
               Beneficial Alternatives for Product Manufacturing and Waste Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9814483

Award Number: 9814483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ranji Ranjithan ranji@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Morton A. Barlaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814483 Ranjithan As industries move towards more environmentally responsible
              manufacturing practices, they are shifting from an emphasis on reduction of
              emissions in the manufacturing stage to a broader consideration of alternative
              products, product designs and product delivery systems to reduce material
              consumption as well as environmental impacts.  Another significant phase in the
              life cycle of a product is its fate when it enters the waste stream at the end
              of its useful life.  Established life cycle-based methods are available to
              estimate environmental burdens of both production and waste management phases;
              however, the two life-cycle phases are rarely combined and tools and
              methodologies to conduct an integrated analysis are lacking.  The primary focus
              of this research is to develop a systems approach that will facilitate
              integrated analysis of production and waste management processes and their
              combined environmental implications.  Specific objectives are to (1) develop a
              model, integrating a product life-cycle inventory (LCI) with a newly developed
              life-cycle model of waste management alternatives to examine how the combined
              LCIs are important and can be influential in product decision making, (2)
              demonstrate the applicability of the model for analyzing the net environmental
              benefits/burdens in the life-cycle of several products, including packaging
              products that constitute about 35 percent of the municipal waste stream in the
              U.S., (3) evaluate the combined environmental implications of alternative waste
              management policies and practices as they influence shifts in product design
              and production processes, and (4) incorporate the systems modeling approach and
              analytical framework in the education of future environmental practitioners in
              an integrated manner.  It is anticipated that this approach will be useful to
              both government policy makers and the product designers in industry charged
              with the development of strategies for the manufacture of products that
              minimize environmental impacts.  This grant is made pursuant to the joint
              NSF/Lucent Technologies Industrial Ecology Research Fellowships Program 1998.
