Title       : Population and Community-Level Consequences of Early-Summer Frosts, A Phenomenon
               That May Decrease as the Global ClimateChanges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a9814509

Award Number: 9814509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Inouye   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Inouye  9814509         There is growing evidence that the global climate is
              changing, and a  matching concern for the consequences this will have for
              natural  ecosystems.  Predicted changes in temperature and precipitation are
              likely  to influence the frequency of frost damage to plants, and frost kills
              of  plants or plant parts such as flower buds and leaves may become either more
               or less common.  Frost damage can impact both the plants and animals such  as
              herbivores, seed predators and pollinators that depend on them.  For  example,
              there have been local extinctions of butterflies as a consequence  of frost
              killing plants the caterpillars eat.  If the plant recover quickly  from this
              damage by replacement from a seed bank, regrowth of damaged  leaves, or simply
              flowering again the next year the long-term consequence  of frost damage can be
              beneficial for the plants if it results in the less  of associated herbivores
              or seed predators.       This grant will support research on the consequences
              of frost for a  long-lived perennial sunflower.  Since 1974 frost has killed
              some or all  sunflower buds every 2-6 years.  The seed predators (tephritid
              flies) that  lay eggs in the buds are greatly affected by the loss of flower
              heads, and  when their populations are reduced after a frost, the plants are
              able to  produce many more seeds and seedlings until the fly populations build
              back  up.  Thus, a decrease in the frequency of frost might actually be 
              detrimental to the plants because seed predator populations would never be 
              reduced.
