Title       : US-Japan Joint Seminar: Controlled Synthesis and Performance of New Functional
               Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9814334

Award Number: 9814334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. J. Frechet frechet@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan
              seminar on Controlled Synthesis and Performance of New Functional
              Macromolecules, to be held in Berkeley, California from December 12-15, l999. 
              The co-organizers are Professors Jean M. J. Frechet at the University of
              California, Berkeley and Shiro Kobayashi at Kyoto University in Japan.  The
              seminar will focus on precision polymer synthesis, a topic of very significant
              interest both in the U.S. and in Japan.  This topic covers the new area of
              controlled synthesis of well-defined macromolecules and related materials. The
              seminar will have a very significant influence on the development of novel
              approaches to the synthesis of functional macromolecules that are not readily
              obtained by the current conventional methods.  This is in part because the
              strategies for the controlled synthesis of macromolecules will be explored from
              a variety of points of view including: the precise control of propagating
              centers in vinyl or ring-opening polymerizations; the use of repetitive
              stepwise approaches; and the in vitro use of bio-systems.  Though the meeting
              will focus on the synthetic side of polymer science, its impact on polymer and
              material science in general will be widely felt.

This research area has
              drawn much interest both in industrial and academic circles.  In addition,
              macromolecules with highly controlled architecture are finding increasing
              applications in advanced technologies, targeted delivery systems, media for
              advance separations or molecular recognition, biological mimics, supramolecular
              assemblies, sensors, molecular devices, etc.  Novel macromolecules,
              macromolecular assemblies, nanoscale entities and devices are used, developed
              and studied by a great variety of chemists, physicists, biologists, health
              scientists, engineers, materials scientists, etc., all of whom will benefit
              from the availability of novel highly controlled engineered functional
              polymeric materials.  Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve
              younger researchers as both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas
              and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to
              advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
              projects.  Following the seminar, it is anticipated that the presentations will
              be published in a special issue of the Journal of Macromolecular Science, Pure
              and Applied Chemistry.
***





