Title       : Civil and Mechanical Systems Workshop on Integration of Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9814609

Award Number: 9814609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Schmid steven.r.schmid.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award is to support a workshop in the autumn of 1998 which is designed as a
              forum to share, disseminate and review engineering education innovations and
              integration with research.  Invited participants will be approximately 100
              career awardees from the Civil and Mechanical Systems Division and related
              disciplines.  The workshop goals are to (1) foster technical and intellectual
              exchange about education amount career investigators; (2) bring innovative
              teaching methods to the fore, especially as applied to the incorporation of
              research in engineering education by providing a forum for dissemination of
              education plans implement by CAREER awardees; and, (3) foster and document
              discussions of how the successful integration of engineering education and
              research can be facilitated by academic institutions, federal funding agencies,
              and industry.  The workshop organizers include five awardees from CAREER
              competitions in the CMS Division.  They will plan the workshop agenda, invite
              speakers and develop interactive sessions, and prepare proceedings from the
              workshop.  The proceedings will (1) summarize the recommendations from working
              session discussions; (2) provide a workshop outcomes assessment and
              recommendations statement; and (3) include a two-page abstract from each
              participant that described key aspects of their research and education
              activities and innovations.  Finally, the document will include an assessment
              of the state-of-the-practice in engineering education, and the role of the
              CAREER program as a catalyst of change.  The workshop participants and other
              engineering educators will continue their dialogue on integration of research
              and education though a web-based discussion group.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
