Title       : A Framework for Robust Measurement-Based Admission Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9814567

Award Number: 9814567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194290             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Tse dtse@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Integrated-services networks are expected to carry a class of traffic that has
              variable bit-rates and requires Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees.  One of
              the main challenges is the provisioning of QoS to users while efficiently
              sharing network resources through statistical multiplexing.  Admission control
              plays the essential role of limiting the number of flows admitted into the
              network such that each individual flow obtains the desired QoS.
              Measurement-based admission control (MBAC) is a practical way of achieving this
              objective through measuring the current and past variable traffic load in
              deciding how many flows can be admitted into the network.

Many issues have
              to be understood in the design of robust MBAC schemes. They include:

-
              impact of estimation errors on performance;
- effect  of flow dynamics such as
              flow arrivals and departures;
- choice of measurement window size.

The goal
              of the proposed project is to establish a unified framework to study these and
              other issues in MBAC. We wish to obtain a set of guidelines for designing MBACs
              that are robust over a wide range of system parameters. Our methodology is to
              obtain insights from the analysis of a set of basic  models, which are in turn
              validated with simulation experiments on real and synthetic traffic
              sources.

The preliminary investigation on a simple bufferless model yields
              simple expressions for the relevant performance measures as a function of key
              parameters such as system size, measurement window size, and
flow arrival and
              departure rates. The analysis provides basic insights for answering the
              questions asked above.  One particularly interesting result is the
              identification of an important parameter ~T_h
which we call the critical
              time-scale for the MBAC problem.  This parameter quantifies the amount of time
              a MBAC scheme has to predict into the future to provide good performance, and
              determine to a large extent the appropriate measurement window size.

The
              research proposes to build on this foundation and extend the framework to study
              the following issues:

- MBAC using aggregate versus individual flow
              measurements;
- MBAC for buffered links;
- impact of long-range dependency,
              multiple time-scale traffic dynamics, and non-stationarities;
- MBAC using
              direct QoS monitoring versus measurements of statistical parameters.


