Title       : Aging Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9814955

Award Number: 9814955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1546377            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice Crocker jcrocker@mos.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9814955
Crocker


	The Museum of Science, Boston will develop an exhibit
              about Aging.  It will be a 6000 sq. ft. traveling exhibit that will open in
              Boston during April, 2000 coinciding with the United Nations' International
              Year of Older Persons.  The exhibit will provide visitors with an engaging and
              interactive environment in which to explore scientific, personal, and social
              aspects of aging.  This exhibit will put a spotlight on the remarkable change
              that has been occurring as a result of in the increased survival rates for
              people of all ages contributing, among other things, to an increase in the
              number of older adults.  This exhibit will be organized around four themes that
              will engage visitors in the exploration of the basic scientific research and
              impact of this change in demographics.  The themes are: 1) the biological
              research that is seeking to understand how and why all living things age, 2)
              the impact of the physiological and psychological effects of the aging process
              of humans, 3) the influence of personal, social, and cultural factors on an
              individual's aging process and 4) the demographic, economic and public policy
              aspects of aging.  There will be a number of complementary programs developed
              which will be packaged in a tool kit format that will permit museums borrowing
              the exhibit to develop those components that are allowed by their resources. 
              These programs include a museum theater production that will invite visitors to
              think about aging in the context of their own society/culture; a world-wide-web
              resource to assist teachers and other community educators; and a series of
              multigenerational one-day programs to encourage interactions between different
              generations within a family or participating group.  The exhibit will provide
              an opportunity for linkage with the needs of the formal education community. 
              Its content addresses important parts of the formal science education
              curriculum as identified in the National Science Education Standards, Science
              for All Americans, and Benchmarks for Science Literacy.

