Title       : LT: GMIP - Green Machining Incremental Planner, A Distributed Environmental
               Advisor for Mechanical Components and Machining Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9814319

Award Number: 9814319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Sheng psheng@euler.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814319 Sheng The objective of this research is to develop an interactive
              environmental-based design advisor for machined parts.  While there is much
              work underway on developing standards for life-cycle assessment, there is still
              a significant need to bridge the domains of environmental assessment and the
              detailed design decisions made during product development in an interactive
              way. The nature of data collection in life-cycle assessment methods limits
              their role as a real-time advisor during product design.  In particular, a
              real-time design advisor is needed to perform "what if" scenarios for product
              development, as well as to serve as an easily accessible training tool for
              design engineers.  One area in which the trade-off between environmental and
              production factors are of major concern is metalworking, where regulations
              concerning emissions and occupational health and safety factors affect the
              selection of cutting fluids, tooling and processes.  However, product design
              has been largely decoupled from the facility-level decisions of production,
              even though design of components is a main driver for process selection.  This
              research will develop a planning tool for machine shop operation that combines
              three aspects of environmentally-conscious manufacturing and design: (1) a
              design advisor for evaluating the energy and multi-dimensional hazard potential
              of a component design, (2) a cutting fluid planning module that models dynamic
              performance degradation and multi-dimensional deterioration in different
              classes of cutting fluids based on components, and (3) a facility-level planner
              to simulate the flow of multiple product types through a facility to evaluate
              maintenance strategies.  A proof-of-concept design-for-environment tool will be
              developed that links energy and mass balance models for machining processes
              with a health hazard assessment method within a feature-based computer-aided
              design environment.  Case studies for several machined automotive components
              will be analyzed and compared with shop data.  This grant is made pursuant to
              the joint NSF/Lucent Technologies Industrial Ecology Research Fellowships
              Program 1998.
***

