Title       : The Young Marginal Basin as a Key to Understanding the Rift-Drift Transition and
               Andean Orogenesis: OBS Refraction Profiling for Crustal Structure in Bransfield
               Strait
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9814041

Award Number: 9814041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639484             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Austin, Jr. jamie@utig.ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Dalziel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yosio Nakamura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail L. Christeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to study the deep crustal structure
              of the Bransfield Strait region. Bransfield Strait, in the northern Antarctic
              Peninsula, is one of a small number of modern basins that may be critical for
              understanding ancient mountain-building processes. The Strait is an
              actively-extending marginal basin in the far southeast Pacific, between the
              Antarctic Peninsula and the South Shetland Islands, an inactive volcanic arc.
              Widespread crustal extension, accompanied by volcanism along the Strait's axis,
              may be associated with slow underthrusting of oceanic crust at the South
              Shetland Trench; similar "back-arc" extension occurred along the entire Pacific
              margin (now western South America/West Antarctica) of the supercontinent known
              as Gondwanaland during the Jurassic-Early Cretaceous. Mid-Cretaceous
              deformation of these basins some 100 million years ago initiated uplift of the
              Andes. By understanding the deep structure and evolution of Bransfield rift, it
              should be possible to evaluate the crustal precursor to the Andes, and thereby
              understand more fully the early evolution of this globally important mountain
              chain.

Years of international earth sciences research in Bransfield Strait
              has produced consensus on important aspects of its geologic environment: (1) It
              is probably a young (probably ~4 million years old) rift in preexisting
              Antarctic Peninsula crust; continued stretching of this crust results in
              complex fault patterns and associated volcanism. The volcanism, high heat flow,
              and mapped crustal trends are all consistent with the basin's continuing
              evolution as a rift; (2) The volcanism, which is recent and continuing, occurs
              along a  "neovolcanic" zone centralized along the basin's axis. Multichannel
              seismic data collected aboard R/V Maurice Ewing in 1991 illustrate the
              following basin-wide characteristics of Bransfield Strait - a) widespread
              extension and faulting, b) the rise of crustal diapirs or domes associated with
              flower-shaped normal-fault structures, and c) a complicated system of
              fault-bounded segments across strike. The geophysical evidence also suggests
              NE-to-SW propagation of the rift, with initial crustal inflation/doming
              followed by deflation/subsidence, volcanism, and extension along normal
              faults.

Although Bransfield Strait exhibits geophysical and geologic
              evidence for extension and volcanism, continental crust fragmentation does not
              appear to have gone to completion in this "back-arc" basin and ocean crust is
              not yet being generated. Instead, Bransfield rift lies near the critical
              transition from intracontinental rifting to seafloor-spreading.  The basin's
              asymmetry, and seismic evidence for shallow intracrustal detachment faulting,
              suggest that it may be near one end-member of the spectrum of models proposed
              for continental break-up. Therefore, this basin is a "natural lab" for studying
              diverse processes involved in forming continental margins.

Understanding
              Bransfield rift's deep crustal structure is the key to resolving its stage of
              evolution, and should also provide a starting point for models of Andean
              mountain-building. This work will define the deep structure by collecting and
              analyzing high-quality, high-density ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) profiles
              both along and across the Strait's strike. Scientific objectives are as
              follows:  (1) to develop a detailed seismic velocity model for this rift; (2)
              to calibrate velocity structure and crustal thickness changes associated with
              presumed NE-to-SW rift propagation, as deduced from the multichannel seismic
              interpretations; (3) to document the degree to which deep velocity structure
              corresponds to along- and  across-strike crustal segmentation; and (4) to
              assess structural relationships between the South Shetland Islands "arc" and
              Bransfield rift.

The proposed OBS data, integrated with interpretations of
              both Ewing profiles and those from other high-quality geophysical coverage in
              Bransfield Strait, will complement ongoing deep seismic analysis of Antarctic
              Peninsula crust to the southwest and additional OBS monitoring for deep
              earthquakes, in order to understand the complex plate tectonic evolution of
              this region.

