Title       : SCORE: A Scalable Architecture for Implementing Resource Management Algorithms
               in High Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9814929

Award Number: 9814929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hui Zhang hzhang@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ability to support per-flow management -- that is, to maintain state, manage
              buffers, perform packet classification and/or scheduling on a per flow basis --
              provides a powerful tool to address many of the challenging resource management
              problems in today's Internet, such as congestion control and
end-to-end
              quality of service. However, given that the number of flows in a backbone
              routers can be on the order of hundred of thousands, the complexity incurred by
              per-flow management mechanisms may prevent them from being effectively
              implemented and widely deployed.

To address these problems, the principal
              investigator (PI) proposes an architecture, called Scalable Core (SCORE for
              short) in which the network is partitioned in continuous regions, called
              islands.  Within each island the PI distinguishes between edge and core nodes.
              While the edge nodes perform per flow management, the core nodes do not. Since
              edge nodes manage fewer flows and at the limit an edge node can be a host, this
              architecture is highly scalable.  The main goal is then to use the SCORE
              architecture to approximate a reference island in which all nodes perform per
              flow management. In this way it is possible to provide
efficient support for a
              wide variety of resource management policies.

To approximate the reference
              network the PI introduces two schemes. In the first scheme, each ingress node
              labels every packet as it enters the network with the state of the flow (e.g.,
              rate) to which it belongs. Further, each core node processes the packet based
              on its label and the node state (e.g., utilization).  In the second scheme, the
              states of all nodes on the flow's path are aggregated and sent to the edge
              nodes. Based on this information and the flow state, the edge routers decide
              how to process an incoming packet (e.g., forward or drop it).

The PI plans
              to develop an integrated set of algorithms within the SCORE framework to
              support congestion control for best-effort service, end-to-end QoS guarantee,
              and differential services.  He will conduct the study via a combination of
              analysis, simulation, and implementation. In addition, he plans to conduct
              scaled experiments over the CAIRN high speed testbed network and work with
              industrial partners (Cisco, Ascend, 3Com, Intel, MCI) to speed-up the
              transition of the developed technologies to the industry.  The results of this
              work are expected to have significant impacts on the design of resource
              management algorithms for the Internet.


