Title       : Strategies for Teacher Excellence Promoting Student Success (STEPSS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9814102

Award Number: 9814102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3939991            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyn Lambert clambert@visalia.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Francis  (Principal Investigator former)
              John Stockton  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carol Fry Bohlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Visalia Unified Sch Dist
	      315 E Acequia
	      Visalia, CA  93277    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9814102  Francis    The Strategies for Teacher Excellence Promoting Student
              Success (STEPSS) Local Systemic Change project involves the Visalia Unified
              School District (CA), California State University - Fresno, and Fresno Pacific
              University.  The project focuses on the implementation of mathematics education
              reform initiatives at the K-6 levels.  Approximately 900 teachers and
              administrators are involved in this project.     The design and implementation
              model for this project includes successful components from the California
              Department of Education's NSF-funded Math Matters project, the San Joaquin
              Valley Mathematics Project, and Visalia Unified's own staff development
              initiatives.  Project teachers will be supported as they implement Creative
              Publication's MathLand mathematics program.  The project is dedicated to
              strengthening the mathematics content background of the K-6 project teachers.  
                   The project serves a very needy student population.  This includes 24,000
              K-12 students and covers 200 square miles in the San Joaquin Valley of central
              California.  Approximately fifty percent of the district's students live in
              poverty.          A promising and unique aspect of this project is the
              involvement of pre- and inservice teachers.  The project will create at least
              two pre-service mathematics laboratory sites (linked to Fresno Pacific
              University and California State University - Fresno, respectively).  The labs
              will be organized to provide pre- and inservice teachers with awareness and
              knowledge of all of the NSF-funded elementary and middle school curriculum
              projects.  Project pre- and inservice teachers will have access to the NSF
              curriculum materials and have experiences with them involving and related to
              mathematics content and pedagogy.
