Title       : Studies of the not so Simple Alkali Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a9814260

Award Number: 9814260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerd Bergmann bergmann@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9814260
Bergmann
This Condensed Matter Physics project investigates the
              magneto-resistance and normal electrical transport in what is generally
              considered the simplest examples of a nearly free electron system, the alkali
              metals, lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium and cesium. However, recent
              experiments on thin alkali films show very unusual behavior, which can not be
              explained within the nearly free electron model. The research will investigate
              origins of this behavior in films with impurity coverages of 1/100th of a
              monolayer, where dramatic increases of resistances and negative Hall constants
              are observed. The anomalous magneto-resistance of films of potassium below 20 K
              will also be investigated. Low coverage of these films with lead also leads to
              behavior not readily understood with conventional theory of weak localization.
              Additional anomalies are also identified and targeted for study. The research
              is particularly well suited for graduate and undergraduate education in that it
              provides training if both fundamental and applied physics. 
%%% 
The alkali
              metals lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium and cesium are generally considered
              as the simplest metals in the periodic table. However, a theory developed by A.
              W. Overhauser some 30 years ago predicts a very complex structure for the
              alkali metals. This Condensed Matter Physics project will investigate recent
              experiments in the principal investigator's laboratory that also point to
              anomalous properties for the alkali metals. The work focuses on thin films of
              the metals. The transport properties of these films, with and without a
              magnetic field display a range of behavior that does not agree with the
              conventional theory and may require a different treatment such as that proposed
              by Overhauser. It is interesting that the metals in the first row of the
              periodic table represent in many ways an unexplored territory. The research is
              very well suited to graduate and undergraduate education in that it provides
              training in both fundamental and applied physics. The students receive training
              in sophisticated experimental methods and also learn the even the "well known"
              first row elements have novel properties that challenge conventional
              understanding.

