Title       : LT: Environmental and Human Health Assessment Software for the Chemicals
               Manufacturing Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9814504

Award Number: 9814504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59913              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Shonnard drshonna@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814504 Shonnard The chemical process industries have employed various pollution
              prevention methodologies in recent years emphasizing in-process reduction of
              waste generation via environmentally benign chemistry, material substitution
              and recovery/recycle of waste components.  Most of these efforts have focused
              only on specific pollution reduction goals with emphasis on minimizing
              equipment and operating costs while attaining these goals.  Unfortunately,
              focusing on single environmental endpoints neglects the reality that there are
              multiple environmental and human health impacts which are affected by process
              design optimization.  The objective of this research, in an attempt to address
              these limitations, is to incorporate multiple environmental and human health
              considerations into chemical process designs using a methodology and software
              tool developed by the PI.  The goal will be to illustrate how chemical process
              designs can change in response to different optimization targets.  Targets will
              include traditional economic metrics of process performance, individual
              environmental impact indexes and cumulative weighted multiple environmental
              indexes.  Specific research objectives are: (1) Incorporate an existing
              chemical process environmental assessment methodology and software tool to
              pinch analysis for VOC recovery from gaseous waste streams, (2) Demonstrate use
              of life-cycle assessment for substitute chemicals by applying to substitute
              refrigerants in the above case study, (3) Model the effects of property
              uncertainties on the pinch analysis study as they affect pollutants'
              environmental fate and transport characteristics, and (4) Create a
              computer-based hands-on demonstration for the Michigan Technological University
              Summer Youth Program.  This grant is made pursuant to the joint NSF/Lucent
              Technologies Industrial Ecology Research Fellowships Program 1998.
***

