Title       : Participatory Simulations Network-based Design for Systems Learning in
               Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9814682

Award Number: 9814682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1749115            (Estimated)
Investigator: Uri Wilensky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter M. Stroup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This project brings together two lines of research in systems modeling - the
              study of complex dynamic systems and the use of participatory simulations.  The
              proposer plans to perform dynamic systems modeling that will be used in
              classrooms with hand held computers. Systems modeling can be designed to show
              how different interacting elements change and evolve over time, and how global
              phenomena can arise from local interaction of these elements, e.g. order vs.
              chaos, randomness vs. determinacy.  In other words, the theoretical and
              computer-based tools from this study show the changing phenomena of science and
              the everyday world. 

The PI and co-PI will implement the system, HubNet, in
              classrooms at middle and high schools in Roxbury, Massachusetts and Austin,
              Texas.  A prototype of the system has been developed with the help of Texas
              Instruments (TI), and has already been piloted tested.  It has flexibility in
              being able to be uploaded as well as downloaded, can run modeling programs in
              both aggregate and object based programming languages. The PI's will be working
              with teachers who have the experience already, or will be given release time to
              gain the training in classroom networking as well as hand held computers.  The
              researchers and their graduate students will be collecting data on how the
              students are working and learning with the set of programs.

The proposal
              named a number of major deliverables.  Among them were such items
              as:

Package that can support and analyze results of learning in HubNet 
              Field-tested simulation packages and networked connections to traditional
              tools

 Fundamental research using participatory simulations as means into
              systems learning, and
 Set of tools for programming HubNet that would allow
              expansion as well as further dissemination.

