Title       : Workshop: Furture database requirements for Aradopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9814194

Award Number: 9814194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Somerville crs@andrew2.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              SUMMARY    Support is provided for a two-part public workshop to consider the
              future  database needs of biologists studying Arabidopsis and other higher
              plants.  The emphasis will be on defining the needs of those who utilize high 
              density genetic maps, physical maps, YAC and BAC contigs and genomic or  cDNA
              sequence information to clone or characterize genes from intensively  studied
              organisms such as Arabidopsis. In addition, rapidly expanding  interest in the
              use of high density gene chips or gene microarrays will  create novel data
              management problems that if not addressed will limit the  utility of this
              emerging technology. The first session of the proposed  workshop will be
              focused on identifying the perceived future needs of the  Arabidopsis
              community. A group of sixteen to twenty people representing  various sectors of
              the community will discuss the various kinds of  information that is or will be
              available. This session will be held as an  adjunct workshop to the American
              Society of Plant Physiologists Meeting in  Madison, Wisconsin, USA on June 28.
              Written comments from the community at  large will be solicited via the
              Arabidopsis newsgroup, and all other plant-  related newsgroups, and made
              available to the participants in the workshop.  A written summary of the
              session will be prepared and submitted to the  participants and the community
              at large for comment. The second session of  the workshop will take place
              approximately two months later and will be  focused on the technical issues
              associated with addressing the needs  identified in the first session, and with
              reconsideration of any issues  raised during the public discussion of the
              proceedings of the first  workshop session. Approximately ten participants
              representing people with  extensive biological database experience and a
              subcommittee representing  the user community will discuss possible options for
              implementing an  information resource that will best meet the needs of the
              community as  described in the report of the first  session and the associated
              commentary  from the community. A subcommittee of invited participants
              representing the  two sessions will draft a consensus document representing a
              best effort  attempt to describe the current and future needs of various
              sectors of the  plant biology community, and to propose a realistic plan of
              action for the  next five to seven years.
