Title       : Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory: Gas Emissions and Seismic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9814921

Award Number: 9814921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Kyle kyle@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Aster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to study the volcanism at Mount
              Erebus (on Ross Island), Antarctica's most active volcano. Mount Erebus is
              unique in hosting in its summit crater a persistent convecting lake of molten
              silica and alkali-rich phonolitic magma. Erebus is one of only a handful of
              volcanoes worldwide that exhibit nearly continuous small explosive activity and
              internal earthquake (seismic) activity. It is an ideal natural laboratory to
              study how gas is given off by magma and the earthquakes associated with a
              convecting magma conduit. The principal objective of this project is to better
              understand the nature and dynamics of the magmatic plumbing system, and 
              eruptions and degassing from the lava lake using a combination of seismic
              studies and gas emission rate measurements.

The gas studies are designed: 1)
              to examine the role of Erebus as a source of gas and aerosols to the Antarctic
              environment; 2) to understand the role of volcanism as a source of carbon
              dioxide emissions to the atmosphere, especially for a highly alkalic magma; 3)
              to understand the evolution of the main volatiles (water vapor, carbon dioxide,
              total sulfur, fluorine and chlorine) in the Erebus magmatic system and their
              role in the eruptive behavior of Erebus; and 4) to correlate the nature of the
              gas emissions with the observed seismic activity. A high priority will be to
              measure carbon dioxide emission rates in the plume and to determine soil gas
              carbon dioxide fluxes. The measurements of carbon dioxide emissions will
              provide some of the first available data on carbon dioxide degassing from a
              highly alkalic magma system. A special effort to measure lead emission rates
              will be made to evaluate the contribution of lead from Mount Erebus, relative
              to contributions from marine aerosols, to snow on the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
              and to evaluate these sources relative to hypotheses of anthropogenic origins
              of lead.

An existing network of ten short-period seismic stations on Erebus
              provides daily, triggered and continuous digital data which are the backbone of
              routine observatory operations and are providing an important and accumulating
              base of events with which to investigate various aspects of the volcanic
              system. This project will undertake three specific avenues of seismic
              investigation of the volcano: 1) add a permanent broadband seismic station to
              the array and update the present data acquisition system; 2) deploy a temporary
              network of broadband stations to augment the results of a previous pilot study;
              and 3) expand development of current software to allow automatic and precise
              timing of earthquake occurrences and thus allow precise locations to be
              determined. This will permit refined collection of earthquakes for use in a
              computer model of the interior of the volcano. It will also provide a tool for
              the general volcanological community to use for volcano surveillance and for
              monitoring subtle changes in the internal behavior of a volcano and assist with
              eruption hazard monitoring. Using broadband data, this project plans to a)
              undertake a detailed study of the explosion mechanism and further investigate
              the very-long-period signals associated with explosions, and b) look for
              temporal and spatial variability in earthquake mechanisms and better understand
              seismic activity with respect to variations in gas emissions.


