Title       : ORIGINS: A Four-Part Documentary Series and Outreach Project on Cosmological and
               Biological Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9814643

Award Number: 9814643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2133410            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Klein pgiupi@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Levenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Unicorn Projects Inc
	      2121 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/471-5496

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9814643
LEVENSON

Unicorn Projects, Inc.  is producing and distributing a
              project on the origins of life and its connections to the origin of the
              universe.  The project will present the challenges facing scientists working to
              unlock universal mysteries and the often painstaking but ultimately rewarding
              process of the scientific endeavor.  It will be designed to reach the lay
              audience by linking what seem to be abstract and complicated ideas -- like how
              the universe was born, or how stars evolve -- to issues at the heart of
              everyday life raised by such simple questions as "Where did we come from?"  
              

	The components of the project will include:

* Four, one-hour television
              programs for prime time broadcast
* An informal science outreach component
              targeted to middle school-age children and families
* Activity kits and
              training guides adaptable for both informal and formal education
* A World
              Wide WEB site

	The Co-Executive Producers for the series will be Thomas
              Levenson and Larry Klein.  Levenson has been on the staff of NOVA at WGBH and
              was producer for the NOVA program on Einstein.  Klein has been the producer for
              numerous science films including "Matters of Life and Death" in the Science
              Odyssey series.  The co-producer for the series and science editor for the
              project will be Alan Dressler, an astronomer and cosmologist whose principal
              area of research is the formation and evolution of galaxies.  Advisors to the
              series include:   Colleen Cavanaugh, Professor of Organismic and Evolutionary
              Biology at Harvard University; George V. Coyne, Director of the Vatican
              Observatory; Douglas Erwin, Research Paleobiologist and Curator at the National
              Museum of Natural History; Sandra Faber, Professor of Astronomy and University
              Professor at the UCO/Lick Observatory, UC, Santa Cruz; John P. Grotzinger,
              Professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Matt Mountain, Director of
              the Gemini 8M Telescopes project; and Ethan J. Schreier, Astronomer and
              Associate Director for Operations at the Space Telescope Science Institute. 
              Outreach material will be developed by staff at the Pacific Science Center and
              implementation will be handled by the AAAS.

