Title       : Sixth Small Genomes Conference, September 20-24, 1998, Lake Arrowhead, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9814443

Award Number: 9814443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There is great excitement over the prospect of comparing the sequences and
              contents of as many as 15-25 microorganism genomes over the next year or two,
              and of learning how these sequences operate to control specific genomes on a
              global basis.  Using both genetics and functional genomic studies of different
              types to understand how whole genome sequences operate will be the focus of
              many laboratories.  Considerable integration of different aspects of
              microbiology will undoubtedly take place, including new perspectives on
              evolution and the requirements for life.  Lessons learned regarding biology,
              analysis techniques and data management should have application in other genome
              projects, including those of humans and other eukaryotes.  Escherichia coli,
              whose genome was completed last year, will continue to provide precedent and
              paradigm for both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems, since the extensive
              physiologic, biochemical, and genetic analysis of E. coli over the last four
              decades make this the best studied microorganism, and one of the model systems
              to which all others are compared.
The goal of this conference is to provide a
              regular forum for these interactions to occur.  To this end the conference will
              include active genome researchers, such as sequencing experts and informatics
              specialists working in database design, sequence analysis, or simulation;
              geneticists developing new methods to take advantage of genomic information,
              e.g. for functional analysis; and cell biologists and biochemists who have
              specialized in areas now ripe for genomics such as metabolism, chromosome
              structure, protein structure, or gene regulation.  While there have been a
              number of recent genome conferences, continuing completion and release of new
              genome sequences and developing momentum for analysis of this huge amount of
              information means the community has continued need of such meetings.  This
              meeting has become established as a major regular annual bacterial genomics
              conference during the last seven years and has assured status and quality.  

