Title       : Wetland Plants' Roles in Uptake and Transport of Heavy Metals and Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9814812

Award Number: 9814812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith S. Weis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peddrick Weis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9814812
Weis
	Much attention has been focused on the use of bacterial species
              or consortia of species in efforts to remediate contaminated soils or waters
              from the effects of organic and metal toxicants. Less attention has been paid
              to plants' ability to sequester and detoxify pollutants, although there is
              increasing interest in the array of actions that generally are called
              "phytoremediation." Plants often support associated herbivores that may in fact
              take up the contaminating compounds directly or chemically modified, and plants
              also typically are associated with soil fungi that may exert chemical effects
              on pollutants in the local rhizosphere environment. This project begins to
              explore these interconnected processes, in a comparative ecological study of
              saltmarsh cordgrass Spartina alterniflora and the common reed Phragmites
              australis at field sites in the Hackensack Meadowlands of New Jersey. One major
              focus is on levels of mercury compounds in soil, water, plant parts,
              rhizosphere zone, and in associated fiddler crabs and grass shrimp, in an
              effort to track the fate of mercury compounds present in the area through
              various potential trophic transfers. In addition, copper, lead, and chromium
              are also being analyzed, as well as selenium which may affect mercury uptake
              under some conditions. One main hypothesis under test is whether Spartina takes
              up more mercury than does Phragmites but more readily releases it through plant
              detritus or direct excretion on leaf and stem surfaces.
	Increasing interest
              in remediation strategies that employ native or introduced plants reinforces
              the need for basic understanding of the physiological and ecological processes
              operating among plants. An ecological perspective introduces two classes of
              process that may affect the availability of metal contaminants to remediation.
              Direct herbivory may transfer metal toxicants to associated animals in the
              environment, whether chemicaly modified or not; secondly, fungi and bacteria
              associated with plant roots in the rhizosphere zone may exert effects on uptake
              and chemistry of metal compounds into plants. Understanding the
              interconnections among these processes will benefit future management
              strategies for remediation of polluted environments.
	

