Title       : ZOOM! -- Seasons II and III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9814956

Award Number: 9814956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3900000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigid Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kate Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9814956
SULLIVAN

WGBH is producing Seasons II and III of ZOOM, a television
              series featuring kids that gives viewers in the 8- to 11-year-old range a
              chance to explore, experiment, and share their creativity with the world.  Each
              season would consist of 40, daily, half-hour shows -- each including a number
              of science and/or mathematics segments.   A unique aspect of ZOOM is that every
              idea and activity on the show comes from a child who writes or e-mails the show
              and who is credited on-air for his or her contribution.  Production staff and a
              working group of advisors with expertise in science and math education take
              these raw ideas and develop them into program segments and outreach projects
              designed to encourage "habits of mind" -- a set of problem-solving skills and
              dispositions toward science and math that has been developed in concert with
              the advisors.  Three over-arching science and math-based themes also guide the
              way science and math are presented over the course of a season.  

Outreach
              for Seasons II and III will build on the solid base of outreach developed for
              Season I, and will consist of:

 ZOOMerang:  Every child who communicates
              with ZOOM will get something back such as a compilation of science and math
              activities, jokes, poems, recipes and a series update.

 ClubZOOM:  A set of
              standards-based science and math activities will be developed along with
              guidance for how to create after-school clubs.  This effort will be pilot
              tested at 20 sites.

 ZOOMzones:  These are areas in science-technology
              centers and museums that are devoted to ZOOM and include opportunities for
              youth and families to interact with science and math content featured on ZOOM. 
              Ten pilot ZOOMzone sites were developed for Season I (from 80 applications). 
              The number of ZOOMzones will be increased and continuing support will be
              offered to existing sites during Seasons II and III.

 ZOOMdays:  During
              Season III, WGBH will develop ZOOMdays at shopping malls to reach youth who may
              not have access to ZOOMzones or ClubZOOM.

 ZOOMweb site:  This web site
              provides an outreach extension to the TV series by collecting and sharing
              submissions; illustrating and producing science and math activities; creating a
              ZOOM community; providing research links to other sites; and aiding adults who
              are interested in furthering ZOOM's science and math activities in their homes,
              classrooms, museums and after-school programs.





