Title       : Anisotropic Dispersion and Variable-Density Flow in Fractured Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9814820

Award Number: 9814820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin W. Schwartz frank@geology.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Motomu Ibaraki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814820
Schwartz


 This study proposes to investigate anisotropic
              dispersion in fractured media and convective mixing associated with
              variable-density flow.  It is generally not appreciated that the pattem of
              mixing in fractured systems can be anisotropic, as determined by the geometry
              of the fracture network, and can deviate from the classical isotropic theory. 
              In terms of unstable mixed flows in fractured rocks, results are limited to a
              few studies.  There are significant opportunities with our proposed study to
              contribute ftmdamental knowledge to physical mass transport in fractured rock
              systems.
The goal is to elucidate processes of physical mass transport in
              fractured rock systems - how dispersion and convective dispersion are
              influenced by characteristics of the fracture geometry.  To achieve this goal
              we propose to conduct both physical and numerical model studies of mass
              transport in 2-D and 3-D systems with complex fracture geometries.  We are
              interested in exploring the conditions under which anisotropic dispersion
              develops and is manifest in variable-density systems.
The study is organized
              around four different tasks.  Task I involves a series of laboratory
              experiments with 2-D fractured systems.  Task 2 extends the 3-D
              variable-density code MITSU3D to fracture networks with permeable matrix
              blocks.  Task 3 is designed to study physical mass transport experimentally in
              a well-characterized 3-D fracture network.  Task 4 is a complimentary model
              study designed to use the experimental results in conjunction with MITSU3D to
              develop appropriate methods to seed instabilities.
The proposed study will
              contribute to knowledge by: (i) providing ftindainental new knowledge
              concerning the nature of dispersion and convective dispersion in fractured rock
              systems, (ii) developing and applying new capabilities for the physical
              modeling of mass transport in complex fractured rock systems, and for
              visualizing tracer distributions in three dimensions, and, (iii) developing and
              applying new modeling approaches for discrete-fracture systems, which can
              accommodate complexities in network geometry and in processes.

