Title       : Collaborative Research: A Dynamical Approach to Attending
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9814808

Award Number: 9814808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Large large@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                What happens when we pay attention to a complex, dynamically changing sound
              such as a sentence or a symphony? What makes some music and some speech easier
              to attend to than others? Previous research has shown that temporal structure
              (i.e. rhythm) is an important determinant of the ability to attend to auditory
              events. This collaborative research project addresses the question of why this
              is so. Briefly, our theory states that rhythm is important determinant of
              attention because attending is a fundamentally rhythmic process. More
              specifically, attentional oscillations entrain to the rhythms of complex
              events, allowing listeners to predict when important events will occur. Thus,
              rhythms whose structures facilitate entrainment should be easy to attend to,
              while events with irregular rhythms should be more difficult to process.  The
              current research project develops this approach along two fronts. First, we are
              developing mathematical models and computer simulations of auditory attending
              that make specific predictions about responses to different types of events.
              Second, we are investigating the response of listeners to the same auditory
              events, allowing us to evaluate the model's predictions. In particular, we test
              how people attentionally follow simple auditory patterns that contain
              unexpected changes in timing. Analyses of these behaviors, together with our
              mathematical models, will allow use to determine whether or not internal
              oscillations underlie the ability to attend to auditory events. If so we expect
              to be able to say, with mathematical precision, a great deal about how
              attending in time works.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
