Title       : A Quasi-Static Optoelectronic ATM Switch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9814856

Award Number: 9814856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347695             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Jonathan Chao chao@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheuk H. Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The virtually unlimited bandwidth of optical fibers has caused tremendous
              increase in data transmission speed during the past decade, thereby stimulating
              high demanding Gb/s multimedia services such as distance learning and video
              conferencing.  ATM has been accepted by ITU-T as a promising and efficient
              technique of transporting Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network (BISDN)
              applications.  The new challenge lies in the deployment of Tb/s multicast ATM
              switches tomeet the exponential growth of multimedia and internet
              traffic.

Based on the concept of the researcher's path switching, they
              propose a Tb/smulticast ATM switch architecture that interconnects electronic
              switch modules with a quasi-static controlled optical interconnection network
              (OIN).  Routing in the OIN is predetermined to avoid slot-by-slot processing
              and to provide flexible switching capacity on virtual pathlevel.  The
              surrounding electronic switch modules support multicasting, fast dynamic
              routing and statistical multiplexing to compensate the the quasi-static routing
              in the OIN to achieve totally a Tb/s switching capacity.  This quasi-static
              switching architecture simplifies the design of a Tb/s ATM switch to specially
              featured Gb/s switch modules: the electronic multicast input and output modules
              and optical central interconnection, which are all feasible with existing
              technology.

The  future research plan includes three aspects.  First, the
              researchers will develop an updating mechanism for readjusting the middle-stage
              route pattern to adapt the traffic change.  The tradeoff between time
              complexity and performance will be investigated.  Secondly, they will identify
              the requirement of the optical devices to effectively control the crosstalk and
              the power budget based on our proposed OIN.  In
addition, they will
              investigate several approaches of performing output contention resolution
              within multicast electronic switch modules: work out a cost-effective design
              for each approach, study the performance in terms of throughput, cell delay and
              loss rate, and finally identify the best approach that has high performance and
              reasonable construction complexity.


