Title       : Kinks and Surface Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2000   
File        : a9814055

Award Number: 9814055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299503             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Spence spence@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Min Zuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe Weierstall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9814055
Spence
This project addresses dislocation kink dynamics, and
              measurement of the Coulomb potential normal to a surface by quantitative
              convergent-beam reflection high energy diffraction (Micro-probe RHEED).
              Dislocation kinks will be observed by atomic resolution TEM in materials such
              as sapphire, SiC and MgO, where it has been found possible to prepare
              atomically flat terraced surfaces for thin TEM samples under moderate (10-7
              Torr) vacuum conditions by annealing in oxygen or vacuum. "Forbidden" Bragg
              reflections, arising from the stacking fault between partial dislocations, will
              be used to form lattice images, allowing images to be formed without surface
              noise. The approach is to determine which process (kink formation, kink
              migration or obstacles along the dislocation line) limits kink (and hence
              dislocation) velocity, for given conditions of temperature and stress. By
              extending prior quantitative convergent-beam TEM measurements of bonding in
              crystals to the RHEED geometry, it is planned to refine the electrostatic
              potential extending into the vacuum from ceramic surfaces. This potential is
              critical for chemical reactions at surfaces, for adsorption, catalysis,
              epitaxy, the diffusion bonding process, oxidation, and semiconductor crystal
              growth. The surface potential barrier is also critical in electronic processes,
              such as field emission and secondary electron emission. Measurements of the
              modification to this potential which result from the deposition of a monolayer
              or more, of atoms can provide a direct experimental understanding of how bonds
              are formed at surfaces, and of the modification of atomic charge
              densities.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to new aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  Experimental tools are
              now available to allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes
              which when better understood allow advances in fundamental science and
              technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the performance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***
9814055
Spence
This project addresses dislocation
              kink dynamics, and measurement of the Coulomb potential normal to a surface by
              quantitative convergent-beam reflection high energy diffraction (Micro-probe
              RHEED). Dislocation kinks will be observed by atomic resolution TEM in
              materials such as sapphire, SiC and MgO, where it has been found possible to
              prepare atomically flat terraced surfaces for thin TEM samples under moderate
              (10-7 Torr) vacuum conditions by annealing in oxygen or vacuum. "Forbidden"
              Bragg reflections, arising from the stacking fault between partial
              dislocations, will be used to form lattice images, allowing images to be formed
              without surface noise. The approach is to determine which process (kink
              formation, kink migration or obstacles along the dislocation line) limits kink
              (and hence dislocation) velocity, for given conditions of temperature and
              stress. By extending prior quantitative convergent-beam TEM measurements of
              bonding in crystals to the RHEED geometry, it is planned to refine the
              electrostatic potential extending into the vacuum from ceramic surfaces. This
              potential is critical for chemical reactions at surfaces, for adsorption,
              catalysis, epitaxy, the diffusion bonding process, oxidation, and semiconductor
              crystal growth. The surface potential barrier is also critical in electronic
              processes, such as field emission and secondary electron emission. Measurements
              of the modification to this potential which result from the deposition of a
              monolayer or more, of atoms can provide a direct experimental understanding of
              how bonds are formed at surfaces, and of the modification of atomic charge
              densities.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to new aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  Experimental tools are
              now available to allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes
              which when better understood allow advances in fundamental science and
              technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the performance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***

