Title       : West Antarctic Ice Sheet Surface Melting: Recognition Controls and Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9814485

Award Number: 9814485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Alley ralley@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to study the occurrence of melting in the Ross
              Embayment of West Antarctica, from a physical and historical perspective, using
              a combination of techniques  (snow-pit, ice-core, AWS, and remotely sensed
              data, and experiments on melt generation).  Surface melting on polar ice sheets
              occurs as temperatures increase above some threshold.  Looking at a variety of
              records of past surface melting events in Antarctica will reveal changes in the
              occurrence of especially high temperatures.  Joint interpretation of melt and
              other paleothermometers (borehole temperatures, isotopes, etc.) may allow
              seasonally resolved paleothermometry.  Melting on the surface of an ice sheet
              can be measured in many ways.   Space-based microwave sensors record the
              occurrence of liquid water or refrozen ice layers in the near surface. 
              Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) record the high temperatures that are linked
              to development of liquid water.  Snow-pit and ice-core studies show layers
              where refreezing of sufficient liquid water has caused a visibly distinct layer
              to form.  These different measures of melt occurrence are not identical, and
              are presently not calibrated well to each other.  This proposed project will
              enable the determination of how different measures of melting are related to
              each other.  This knowledge will help glaciologists to learn how melting and
              climate have changed and affected Antarctic processes in the past, and how they
              may change in the future.  Special focus will be on the critical Ross Ice Shelf
              and Siple Dome regions of West Antarctica.
