Title       : Motional Modeling by NMR Relaxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9814431

Award Number: 9814431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik R. Zuiderweg zuiderwe@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding of protein function can only approach completeness if structure,
              interactions and local dynamics are understood in detail.  In the past funding
              period, the foundation to experimentally derived motional models for fast local
              dynamics in protein modules has been established.  The goal was to not only
              detect the existence of local dynamics but also describe what the motions
              actually are.  this is achieved by measuring the NMR relaxation behavior for
              several nuclei associated with a single motion unit.  This data is interpreted
              in terms of dynamical parameters for the different magnetic interaction vectors
              associated with the relaxation, from which a motional model can be developed. 
              In the present work this new paradigm will be extended and refined with new NMR
              techniques for the description of local anisotropic dynamics of the protein
              backbone.  Protein sidechains dynamics modeling will be approached in a similar
              way by measuring dynamical parameters for several different sidechain
              interaction vectors.  The methods for the measurements of sloe conformational
              change dynamics will be improved.  These dynamics are often associated with
              ligand/substrate interaction.  By combination of several methods, structural as
              well dynamical, one can obtain models for the slow motions.  The methods will
              be developed with and applied to the active site dynamics of a small
              ribonuclease and of a flavoprotein.  In favorable cases the new methods can
              differentiate between correlated and uncorrelated local motions.

Biological
              molecules such as proteins, DNA and RNA are essential to life.  In order to
              understand how they function, many of these molecules have been analyzed in
              terms to their static structures in the recent decades.  While this has yeilded
              much insight into function in qualitative terms, explanations in quantitative
              terms have remained elusive.  Most biological molecules can be seen as engines
              or factories.  Just as real engines ot factories only work when they are in
              motion, biobolecules have to move to carry out their functions.  Thus,
              knowledge of how biomolecules actually work can only be complete when their
              dynamical aspects are studied in addition to static pictures.  This porject
              will study the molecules in terms of their small-scale motions and will focus
              especially on dynamics of the active sites of enzymes.  The resulting knowledge
              will contribute to the basic understanding of life-processes.  For this
              research the technique of nuclear magnetic resonance at the highest possible
              magnetic field strengths will be used.
