Title       : LT: Economic and Optimization Analyses of the Reuse of Traditional Waste
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9814551

Award Number: 9814551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Swan cswan@emerald.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey E. Zabel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Drusilla Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814551 Swan The objective of this research is to evaluate factors that effect
              the reuse/recycling of traditional waste products.  Industrial manufacturing
              can be simplified into a set of processes that utilize, directly or indirectly,
              material resources to create final products.  Waste materials are inevitably
              produced and these wastes must be handled and properly disposed of.  For many
              environmentally inert materials, this final material management strategy is
              highly inefficient and simply results in disposal in landfills.  The most
              efficient ecosystem would be one which optimizes its various interacting
              components (such as material, manufacturing and waste management processes) so
              as to minimize raw material use and waste generation, in part by maximizing the
              reuse and recycling of spent materials.  The research is divided into two
              complimentary components.  The first will analyze, on a generic level, how
              making a "waste" from the production or use of a product into a "resource" in
              the production of a new product (1) affects the local and global optimization
              of the manufacturing processes associated with both the original and new
              products, and (2) creates new economic linkages associated with the production
              of the new product as well as modifies those linkages associated with the
              original product.  The research will analyze both the direct and indirect
              economic impacts, and specifically investigate how the optimization of
              production activities changes when post-process wastes are re-categorized as
              raw materials for production of other products.  The second component will
              apply these analyses to the case of recently-developed, synthetic construction
              aggregates developed from two, traditionally large-quantity, waste materials:
              coal-combustion fly-ash and recoverable waste plastics.  The research will lead
              to the development of an engineering tool for economic evaluation of new and
              innovative construction materials, thus providing a stronger rationale for
              their use as alternative materials.  This grant is made pursuant to the joint
              NSF/Lucent Technologies Industrial Ecology Research Fellowships Program 1998.
