Title       : Sensitivity to Change in Arid Land Ecosystems (SCALE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9814510

Award Number: 9814510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Ehleringer ehleringer@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond D. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Arid-land ecosystems are among the most sensitive to  changes, whether these
              changes are associated with  human land-use activities or shifting climate
              conditions.  These ecosystems experience high variability in precipitation from
              year to year, with El Nino and La Nina  events representing two extremes of the
              range of moisture input.  Most ecosystem processes in arid lands are
              constrained to brief pulses of moisture.  Because of the constraints that the
              availability of  water imposes on arid-land-ecosystem processes, changes in
              water availability are likely to play a much more prominent role in the
              functioning of arid-land ecosystems in the near  future than are other global
              change factors.  The SCALE project is directed at understanding how both
              short-term  precipitation pulses and longer-term season-to-season and
              year-to-year variability of precipitation affect ecosystem structure and
              function.  The researchers will examine changes in ecosystem function with
              respect to carbon, water, nitrogen, and trace-gas fluxes.  The core idea of
              this project is that climate change acts on arid-land ecosystems through
              changes in the magnitudes and distributions of moisture pulses.  The
              researchers have  established that there are species differences in use of soil
              moisture, implying possible long-term instability in  current species
              composition with a shift in precipitation patterns.  Though a series of field
              experiments, field manipulations, and modeling, the researchers will examine
              the impacts of climate change on arid-land ecosystems on the Colorado Plateau.
