Title       : Ab Initio Electron-Gas Models With Polarizable Ions: Applications to Complex
               Minerals in the Transition Zone and Lower Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9814304

Award Number: 9814304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Bukowinski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814304
Bukowinski
This is a continuation of a project that uses density
              functional theory to develop self-consistent ab initio models, as well as
              efficient pseudoempirical models, of the response of deformable ions to
              pressure and
temperature induced changes in crystal environments.  These
              models are designed to complement first principles methods by providing
              accurate and yet very efficient techniques capable of simulating complex
              minerals like garnets that remain beyond the practical reach of fully first
              principles methods.  Spherical and non-spherical deformations will be included,
              as well as the effects of long-ranged van der Waals interactions.  The model
              will include, as special cases, current electron-gas potential theories. The
              fully developed models will then be used to examine the static and dynamic
              properties of transition zone and lower mantle minerals composed of SiO2, MgO,
              FeO, CaO and Al2O3.  Monte Carlo, molecular dynamics and simulated annealing
              techniques, will be used to explore mineral structures that may form at
              ntermediate and very high pressures and temperatures, as well as the effects of
              pressure on the structure of melts with silicate compositions.  The same
              methods will be used to estimate thermal parameters needed to model mineral
              assemblages that may account for the observed seismic properties of the mantle.
              The new models should also allow examination of the pressure dependence of
              ionic polarizabilities, as well as crystal polarizabilities and the effects of
              polarizability on diffusion, element partitioning and IR and Raman amplitudes. 
              If successful, the new models stand to provide a link among various types of
              experimental data and models of minerals and fluids at extreme conditions of
              temperature and pressure.  The expanded understanding and new theoretical tools
              should lead to a better understanding of possible sources of radial
              discontinuities, anisotropy and lateral heterogeneity of seismic velocities in
              the mantle of the Earth, and of thermal, structural and chemical effects on
              seismic velocities and the geochemical evolution of the earth. This project is
              jointly funded by the Petrology & Geochemistry and Geophysics Programs.

