Title       : Workshop on "Karst Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9814864

Award Number: 9814864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hess jhess@geosociety.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Karst Water Institute
	      P.O Box 490
	      Charles Town, WV  254140490    702/895-0451

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814864
Hess 

The Karst Waters Institute plans to sponsor a workshop on
              Karst Modeling, February 2427, 1999 in Charlottesville, Virginia.  The workshop
              will bring together groundwater hydrologists and modelers, karst researchers,
              engineers, and economic geologists to discuss how best to quantify karst
              porosity to fit practical needs.  The field experience of hydrologists, the
              computer expertise of modelers, and the geomorphic and geochemical studies of
              karst specialists are all too often isolated from one another.  To allow the
              field to advance, it is necessary to draw on the experience of a broad variety
              of scientists having these diverse but complementary backgrounds.

"Karst
              modeling," as envisioned for this workshop, concerns the development of
              conceptual, geochemical, numerical, mathematical, and statistical models that
              can be used to organize our knowledge of karst systems.  The most important
              topics are: optimizing groundwater supplies; tracking, monitoring, and
              remediating contaminants; and solving problems of land stability in karst. 
              Specific questions include: (1) What are the relative percentages of the
              different types of porosity in a karst aquifer -- e.g., intergranular, fissure,
              and solution porosity -- and what is their spatial variability? (2) How do they
              interact hydrologically? (3) Can the distribution of solution conduits be
              predicted? (4) How do they affect the head distribution and flow within the
              surrounding aquifer? (5) How can one predict or monitor contaminant paths in
              karst aquifers? and (6) Is it possible to construct valid digital models of
              karst aquifers?  If so, are traditional models adequate, or is it necessary to
              devise entirely new software?

The meeting will be tightly structured so that
              these topics will build upon each other in order to identify gaps in
              understanding that can best be filled by interdisciplinary cooperation. 
              Keynote speakers at the workshop will be well-known specialists from a variety
              of fields who can bridge these gaps.  The workshop will be three days in length
              and include a field trip to karst areas in Virginia.

The workshop is being
              advertised in several professional outlets including Geotimes, GSA Today, EOS,
              and the newsletter of the Association for Ground Water Scientists and
              Engineers.  Announcements will also be mailed to major environmental consulting
              firms, relevant state and federal agencies, and universities.  Extended
              abstracts will be published by the Karst Waters Institute.  Meeting summaries
              will be submitted to various appropriate professional outlets.



