Title       : Evolution of Photoperiodic Time Measurement in the Pitcher- Plant Mosquito,
               Wyeomyia smithii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9814438

Award Number: 9814438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Bradshaw bradshaw@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    A wide variety of plants and animals use the length of day to synchronize
              their
development and reproduction with the warm days of summer and to
              synchronize their entry into
hibernation in advance of the cold days of
              winter.  At more northern latitudes, winter arrives
earlier when days are
              longer than at more southern latitudes.  Consequently, northern
              organisms
respond to longer daylengths to switch from active development to
              hibernation in anticipation of
the forthcoming winter.  Many temperate plants
              and animals, including some of the most
problematic agricultural pests in the
              United States, originated from more tropical latitudes or
migrated north after
              the last ice age.  This migration required evolving the appropriate
              responses
to daylength before the immigrants could thrive in their new
              northern habitats.  Thus, evolved
responses to daylength to cue the seasonal
              programming of development, reproduction, and
hibernation represent one of the
              most pervasive and important adaptations of temperate
organisms. 
     The
              question then remains as to how they do it.  What is the physiological basis
              for the
measuring of daylength within and between geographically distant
              populations?  Are the
physiological processes that underlie genetic variation
              for day-length measuring within
populations the same processes that change
              over geographic distances; i.e., does understanding
genetic variation in the
              physiological clock within populations permit us to predict how
              these
populations might evolve in the future?  The PIs have pursued these
              questions in temperate
populations of a formerly tropical mosquito.  The PIs
              have found that the internal biological clock
(circadian rhythm) plays a role
              in the day-length measuring process in southern populations; but,
the
              expression of the circadian clock declines with increasing latitudes so that
              northern
populations measure day length with essentially a physiological
              hourglass.  Yet, when unrelated
populations are crossed, their offspring show
              a reversion to the southern or ancestral switching
daylength.  This grant will
              help the PIs to determine whether reversion to the ancestral daylength also
              brings out the ancestral expression of the circadian clock. 
     In addition
              to contributing to our understanding of the genetic and physiological basis
              for
adaptive evolution of biological time measurement, results of this study
              have implications for
physiological adaptation to changing environments in
              general.  If vestigial physiological
capabilities reside covertly within
              populations, physiological adaptation to environmental change
may proceed far
              more rapidly than would be predicted from present-day, overt genetic
              variation
for that trait in a population.  If these covert capabilities are
              relics from ancestral genes lying
latent in extant populations,  then response
              to selection may proceed faster towards ancestral than
towards new
              capabilities.  Hence, predicting the rate of evolution in response to
              environmental
change such as global warming may depend critically upon
              understanding the historical role of
masked or covert genes in physiological
              adaptation.


