Title       : The Internet and WWW: Potential Educational Uses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9814141

Award Number: 9814141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank Wattenberg                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Vernon-Gerstenfeld svg@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore present and potential future use of the Internet and
              World Wide Web in undergraduate SMET education.  It will focus, in part, on the
              barriers to the use of electronic technologies in education and will describe
              the characteristics of adopters and non-adopters, including the characteristics
              of institutions or situations that promote or inhibit adoption.    A team of
              three or four engineering, science, or management students from Worcester
              Polytechnic Institute will work full time at NSF headquarters for two months
              under the guidance of full time WPI faculty and with the consultation of NSF
              personnel.  The team will use Rogers' model of the adoption of innovation as a
              starting point.      Because an explicit goal of this project is to provide
              research experience for the students, they will participate in a research
              methods course prior to arriving in Washington.  Their preparation will include
              developing a complete literature review of their subject and a description and
              justification of appropriate methodology -- for example, the use of focus
              groups.  They will also discuss how they will organize and analyze their data. 
              The literature review and methodology will form part of a research proposal
              that they will submit to their professors and DUE personnel before undertaking
              the on-site portion of their work.    The outcome of the project will be a
              substantive report that will be submitted by the students to their faculty for
              academic credit as well as providing input to NSF.  Students are expected to
              develop skills in formal presentations, in research proposal development and
              writing, and in the systematic analysis of qualitative and quantitative data. 
              In addition, they will have participated in serious research on a topic that
              has major implications for education in this country and abroad and for
              education public policy.
