Title       : Interpretation of an Aneromagnetic Survey Over the Butcher Ridge Igneous
               Complex, Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9814036

Award Number: 9814036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Behrendt behrendj@stripe.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to analyze and interpret
              aeromagnetic data collected over the Butcher Ridge Igneous Complex (BRIC) in
              the Transantarctic Mountains. These data were collected as a draped
              aeromagnetic survey in 1997-98 as part of the larger Transantarctic Mountains
              Aerogeophysical Research Activity (TAMARA) survey. TAMARA was conducted as a
              cooperative project between US investigators and the German Federal Institute
              for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR).

The BRIC, located in the
              Transantarctic Mountains at about 79 degrees 45 minutes S and 156 degrees E, is
              exposed in a 10-km-long, 600-m-high scarp, projecting through and bounding the
              East Antarctic ice sheet. Only part of the BRIC has been mapped geologically
              because of its inaccessibility. The BRIC appears to be a sill-like hypabyssal
              intrusion ranging in composition from tholeiitic basalt to rhyolite. A
              40Ar/39Ar age of 174 Ma and the chemical character of the basaltic rocks show
              the BRIC to be part of the widespread Jurassic Ferrar suite of continental
              tholeiitic rocks. This suite, that extends for over 3000 km across Antarctica,
              is the result of magmatic activity associated with the Jurassic Transantarctic
              (failed) rift, and comprises the Ferrar Dolerite sills (the great bulk of the
              exposures) and dikes, the extrusive Kirkpatrick Basalt flows and the massive
              gabbroic Dufek intrusion.

Significant volumes of crustal-derived rhyolite
              within the BRIC, requiring a substantial source of advective heat to be formed
              by melting of crustal rocks, suggested that a major high-level basaltic
              intrusion might underlie it. In 1990 a single aeromagnetic profile was obtained
              as part of a BGR-USGS survey over the adjacent Ross Ice Shelf. This profile
              showed an 8-km-wide positive anomaly with maxima of about 700 and 1000 nT
              (nano-Tesla), and was interpreted using magnetic models to indicate a gabbroic
              body beneath the BRIC >2-km thick. This interpretation implied that Ferrar
              magmatism was accompanied by large, upper crustal magma chambers in which
              assimilation-fractional crystallization occurred.

In 1997-98, a 2.5 by 20-km
              line spaced, draped aeromagnetic survey was flown by helicopter over the BRIC
              as part of the TAMARA survey. A preliminary compilation of the aeromagnetic
              survey over the BRIC shows a >1200-nT amplitude series of anomalies roughly
              associated with the topography. It is apparent that the high amplitude anomaly
              pattern, first crossed by the single 1990 profile, is more extensive than the
              10-km wide exposed outcrop. The highest amplitude anomalies appear south of the
              profile acquired in 1990, and extend out of the survey area. The new
              aeromagnetic data will allow determination of the extent of the thick cumulate
              body beneath exposures of Beacon sedimentary rock and ice in the survey area as
              well as beneath the small BRIC exposure. Working in cooperation with the BGR in
              Germany and the NSF supported PI's of the TAMARA survey, this award supports a
              detailed analysis and interpretation of the aeromagnetic survey over the area
              covering Butcher Ridge and the inferred buried extent of the BRIC. Two and
              three-dimensional models will be calculated, and in cooperation with the USGS,
              various derivative maps (e.g. pseudogravity gradients and magnetic terraces)
              will be produced. The models will be interpreted in terms of induced, and if
              possible, remnant magnetization for the mafic cumulate body inferred to
              underlie the BRIC and surrounding area.

Ultimately, this research will lead
              to comparisons between the magnetic signature of the BRIC to the patterns of
              magnetic variation observed over the Ross Sea, the Ross Ice Shelf, and over the
              ice covered area of the Byrd Subglacial Basin through which the West Antarctic
              Ice Sheet (WAIS) flows. This comparative work is important to interpretations
              of possible volcanic features beneath the WAIS that are inferred from magnetic
              anomaly maps in that region.


