Title       : ROA: Collaborative Research: Simulation of Metamorphism Near Plutons in the
               Middle Crust: An Approach Combining 3-D Thermal Models and Forward Models of
               Metamorphic Textures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9814418

Award Number: 9814418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Dutrow dutrow@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814418
Dutrow
This project utilizes an innovative approach linking
              sophisticated 3-D thermal modeling of intruding plutons with textural modeling
              studies of metamorphic rocks in order to provide a new tool to investigate the
              processes that control pressure and temperature in mountain belts.  The study
              will use quantitative models to interpret rock textures on a regional scale in
              northwest Maine as they relate to detailed aspects of the
              pressure-temperature-fluid flow history around intrusions that were emplaced in
              the middle crust during Devonian time.  This work will allow refinement of
              thermal histories of metamorphic events in northwest Maine, permit
              interpretation of subtle lateral variations in mineral textures related to
              variations in metamorphic conditions, and illustrate how reaction mechanisms
              progress in different parts of a metamorphic belt due to different
              pressure-temperature-fluid scenarios.  The general approach is applicable to an
              extremely broad range of metamorphic studies because unraveling metamorphic
              textures and linking them to a specific thermal field has the potential to
              provide critical insight into the development of many metamorphic systems. 
              This project is collaborative research between B. L. Dutrow at L.S.U. and C. T.
              Foster at the University of Iowa.  Dutrow is responsible for the thermal
              modeling studies and geothermobarometric determinations of pelitic rocks from
              the study area; Foster is responsible for documentation of textures in rocks
              from the study area and construction of thermodynamic and kinetic models to
              link them to the thermal models.

