Title       : Dissertation Research: Households and the Emergence of Inequality in the
               Prehispanic Calchaqui Valley, Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9814815

Award Number: 9814815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence N. D'Altroy tnd1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Terence D'Altroy, MS Kirsten Olsen will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project is to examine the
              relationship between the development of social complexity and organization of
              activities within individual household units. In recent years archaeologists
              have focused increasingly on household units. Remains of domestic structures
              are often abundant and readily identifiable within large sites and thus readily
              accessible to examination. Secondly it has become increasingly clear that even
              in complex state level societies most subsistence and manufacturing activities
              took place in households rather than temples or other ceremonial buildings and
              thus one can gain insight into broad social organization through study of the
              smallest fundamental units. A body of anthropological theory predicts that as
              societies grow complex, social roles become ore tightly defined and this has
              implications for within household organization. It has also been hypothesized
              that with increasing complexity inter-household stratification also occurs and
              that wealth and status differences emerge. MS Olsen will evaluate these
              predictions through the excavation a four sites in the Cachi Adentro region in
              the northern Argentina Andes. 

As the result of long term research in this
              region Dr. Terence D'Altroy and his colleagues have defined a prehistoric
              sequence which begins with early hunting and gathering groups and continues
              through Spanish conquest. During the Regional Development period (ca 1,000-1410
              AD) succeeding groups were characterized by increasing levels of social
              complexity and this provides an excellent context for MS Olsen to examine the
              change in household organization over time. She will excavate a series of
              domestic sites from each of two time periods and examine both wealth/status
              differences between households and the range and spatial distribution of
              activities within individual units. 

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide basic data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
              shed light on the development of social complexity and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.


