Title       : How Does Basalt Freeze? Field Experiments and Numerical Modeling of Kilauea
               Pahoehoe Lava Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9814344

Award Number: 9814344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Hart                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laszlo P. Keszthelyi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Self  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814344
Keszthelyi
A combination of field experiments and numerical modeling
              will be used to study three specific aspects of the freezing of basalts: (1)
              the cooling effect of wind, (2) the hardening of the crust on a flow, and (3)
              dynamic crystallization within the flow.  The ongoing eruption of Kilauea
              volcano is expected to continue to provide an excellent natural laboratory for
              the field experiments.  The numerical modeling is necessary to translate the
              findings in Hawai'i to basaltic liquids in general. Cooling by the wind is the
              dominant heat loss mechanism for pahoehoe lava flows, but the actual heat
              fluxes are only very poorly constrained - to no better than a factor of two. A
              new set of instrumentation, based on hot-wire anemometers, will allow heat flux
              estimates to be improved by about an order of magnitude. The rheology of the
              crust on a lava flow is more important in controlling its motion than the
              theology of the pure liquid. An improved penetrometer will be used to obtain
              field measurements of the hardening of the crust on pahoehoe lobes. While work
              on the cooling and crystallization of lava lakes has provided vital new
              information to link laboratory studies to ancient rocks, relatively little has
              been done with the more rapidly cooling lava flows.  In these flows the effects
              of dynamic crystallization are readily observed. These observations will be
              quantified by a combination of in situ measurements and detailed petrographic
              studies of samples from active flows to place "real-world" constraints on
              thermodynamic variables measured in the laboratory. Overall, the field
              experiments will be used to constrain a numerical model for pahoehoe lobes that
              includes cooling, crystallization, and motion.  The individual components of
              this model will be constructed to be transportable to models for the freezing
              of basaltic liquids in other situations.

