Title       : Stability and Sensitivity of ABR Flow Control Protocols for Integrated Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9814759

Award Number: 9814759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin W. Tsai wtsai@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to study stability and sensitivity of flow control protocols
              for best-effort or available bit rate (ABR) traffic on integrated networks. 
              Rigorous mathematical analysis will be carried out to produce a general
              stability and sensitivity theory for ABR flow control. The theoretical results
              will be obtained via extensive simulations and analytical derivation. Robust
              flow control protocols to combat spatial, temporal, and integration variations
              will be designed and tested.                                                   
                                                      
The following tasks will be carried
              out:                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      1.      A general
              theory of stability and sensitivity of rate-based ABR flow control protocols
              will be developed. The concepts of stability and sensitivity will be
              formalized. The new theory will use the concept of control but the formulation
              will be based on combinatorial analysis of the distributed asynchronous
              operations of the protocols. Various factors affecting the stability will be
              investigated and classified. The emphasis will be on the control laws
              themselves.
2.      The spatial aspects of the stability and sensitivity
              theory will be further investigated in conjunction with existing protocols. The
              emphasis will be on the robustness of the protocols in the face of network
              uncertainty, transient behaviors, and misbehaving components. A model spatially
              robust protocol will be developed.
3.      The temporal aspects of the
              stability and sensitivity theory will be further investigated in conjunction
              with existing protocols. The emphasis will be on the temporal variations of
              background traffic and disparity of feedback latencies. A model temporally
              robust protocol will be developed.
4.      The integration aspects of the
              stability and sensitivity theory will be further investigated in conjunction
              with existing protocols. The emphasis will be on interactions between protocols
              and traffic control mechanisms from networks of distinct architectures. The aim
              of this theory is to provide
guidelines on how to seamlessly integrate
              multiple networks or multiple protocols. A model interactively robust protocol
              will be developed.
5.      Well-known and widely deployed protocols and the
              new protocols developed in this project will be extensively simulated and
              tested in various integrated network configurations for stability and
              sensitivity. The purpose is to verify the theories derived and to test the
              protocols developed from this project.

