Title       : Oxygen Isotope Systematics in Polymetamorphic Rocks: The Effects of Multiple
               Periods of Deformation and Mineral Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a9814991

Award Number: 9814991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Moecher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814991
Moecher
Oxygen isotope analyses of metamorphic minerals provide
              critical constraints on the thermal evolution of, and fluid flow in, the crust.
               Studies of the oxygen isotope systematics of minerals in regional metamorphic
              rocks have mainly assessed the extent of isotopic equilibrium with increasing
              metamorphic grade based on isotopic fractionations among porphyroblasts and
              matrix phases.  However, few studies explicitly consider the deformation
              history of regional metamorphic rocks in terms of what effect punctuated fabric
              development (sequential foliation/crenulation development) and discontinuous
              porphyroblast nucleation and growth may have on the extent of isotopic
              equilibrium among minerals.  The current research will investigate the effects
              of deformation partitioning and punctuated fabric development on oxygen isotope
              systematics in minerals from two regional metamorphic terranes.  Specifically,
              the hypothesis that all minerals in all fabric elements are in oxygen isotopic
              equilibrium will be tested.  This will require spatial resolution on the order
              of millimeters and analysis of milligram quantities of material.  Such
              resolution will be obtained using laser heating fluorination of small volumes
              of minerals (including refractory porphyroblasts) separated from distinct
              domains within a multiply deformed rock. In the context of this study, oxygen
              isotope analysis will serve to link the geochemical (isotopic and major element
              equilibrium), thermal (based on isotopic fractionations) and physical (mineral
              reactions and deformation history) evolution of metamorphic rocks.  In addition
              to oxygen isotope equilibrium, stable isotope analysis provides insight into
              which minerals in a metamorphic assemblage are likely to be in major element
              equilibrium.  This has important implications regarding equilibrium among
              metamorphic minerals used in conventional geothermobarometry to reconstruct
              P-T-t paths in ancient orogens.

