Title       : IDPO/WG: Washington State Gender Equity Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9814070

Award Number: 9814070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $911901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Sanders jsanders@wri-edu.org  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington Research Inst
	      150 Nickerson Street
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/285-9317

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The Washington State Gender Equity Project is a collaborative project
              throughout the State of Washington.  Its goal is to transform the teacher
              education establishment in the state -- higher education institutions that
              certify new teachers, the state education agency, the state teachers union, and
              state professional associations in mathematics and science education and in
              teacher education -- by incorporating gender equity into existing instruction,
              policy and procedures.  The project will be managed by a steering committee of
              representatives of each participating organization.
	After all of the
              teacher-certifying institutions (there are 22) that want to participate are
              identified, we will hold a five-day seminar on gender equity in mathematics,
              science, and technology for 60 or more people from the participating
              organizations.  A team at each organization will form to undertake a gender
              equity needs assessment with project materials, after which they will plan and
              implement corrective instructional, procedural, and/or policy strategies as
              appropriate, with costs defrayed by the project.  Project staff will provide
              frequent technical assistance to all organizations, plus monitoring activities.
               Toward the end of the project there will be a dissemination meeting at which
              participating organizations will present to state and national colleagues.  A
              guide will be produced for subsequent national replication.
	During the
              project, nearly 6,000 preservice teachers (about two-thirds of all in the
              state) will be reached, through 150 faculty and 25 agency and association
              staff.  Significant statewide increases in the number of girls taking regular
              and advanced electives in mathematics, science, and technology should be
              noticeable within five to ten years.

