Title       : Dissertation Research: Female Mate Selection in Chimpanzees of the Tai Forest,
               Cote d'Ivoire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9814005

Award Number: 9814005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Doran ddoran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent genetic research on chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) of the Tai
              forest, Ivory Coast reveals that half of the offspring in the study community
              were sired by males from another group.  This is remarkable because females are
              thought to Remain primarily within their own territory, and extra- group males
              are rarely seen to mate with these females.  These surprising results have
              challenged many of our prior expectations regarding chimpanzee reproductive
              success and suggest that females may have more influence on paternity than
              previously thought.  The proposed 24 month study of chimpanzees in the Tai
              forest will directly address the extent to which females 1) express mate
              preference for particular males, 2) influence the outcome of sexual
              interactions, and 3) demonstrate greater influence on the outcome of sexual
              interactions during the time when they are most likely to conceive.  By
              following females throughout the duration of their estrous cycles, this study
              will examine female reproductive behavior at various stages of estrous.  It
              will elucidate factors that most influence a female's ability to affect the
              outcome of a sexual interaction, in light of the inherent conflicts between
              male and female mating strategies.  Results from this study will contribute to
              our understanding of the genetic and behavioral reproductive patterns of
              chimpanzees in the wild, assist in elucidating the factors responsible for
              differential reproductive success in chimpanzees, and provide essential
              information for informed decision-making regarding the conservation and
              maintenance of the genetic diversity of this species.  
