Title       : GOALI: Solution-based Fluoropolymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9814477

Award Number: 9814477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Beebe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9163,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project, carried out in the laboratory of Professor Thomas Beebe
              at the University of Utah, in collaboration with Charles Stewart of DuPont
              Central Research, is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program
              under the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry program.  The
              research addresses the interface formed between solution deposited copolymers
              of polytetrafluoroethylene and hexafluoropropylene and various metallic and
              glass substrates.  Various spectroscopic probes are used to characterize the
              polymer-substrate interface, and to relate its structure and composition to the
              interfacial adhesion.  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy will provide chemical
              state information about the interface, and TOF-SIMS and scanning probe
              microscopy will be used to characterize the polymer composition and morphology.
               A collaborative team, involving scientists and students from Utah as well as
              staff scientists at DuPont will work together to explore these novel and
              technologically useful systems. 

Spectroscopic studies of novel
              fluoropolymer-substrate interfaces are being explored in this collaborative
              research project involving the University of Utah and DuPont Central Research. 
              Chemical state information, polymer composition, and surface morphological
              studies are combined to give a clear picture of interfacial bonding in
              fluoropolymer-metal and fluoropolymer- glass systems.  These new solution based
              fluoropolymer coatings promise a number of important technological applications
              in corrosion resistant and low friction wear coatings. 

