Title       : The Role of Thin Filament Proteins in Myocardial Contraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a9814441

Award Number: 9814441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masataka Kawai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
A goal of Dr. Kawai's research is to document the molecular mechanisms of
              contraction in cardiac muscle.  Similar to an automobile engine, one power
              cycle of cardiac muscle consists of several steps: incorporate the fuel (called
              "ATP" in biology), burning the fuel (ATP hydrolysis to result in ADP and Pi),
              release the energy (force generation), and release the waste products (ADP and
              Pi).  In muscle, this power cycle is performed by a molecular structure called
              "cross-bridges", so that the entire process is called "cross-bridge cycle".  He
              is proposing to characterize elementary steps of the cross-bridge cycle and the
              mechanism of force generation.  He uses skinned myocardium, because the
              chemical environment of contractile proteins can be modified and tension can be
              measured in this system.  He removes one of its major components, the thin
              filament, and reconstitutes it with genetically altered mutant proteins.  He
              then studies which step of the cross-bridge cycle is affected by a particular
              change in the amino acid sequence of a protein, and establishes the
              structure-function relationship.  This procedure is equivalent of removing a
              critical part of the automobile engine, and replaces it with a modified part to
              examine engine's performance change.  The proposed changes are made in the
              N-terminal of actin, and isoenzyme switch of a- and b- tropomyosin.

To
              determine the step modified by the specific substitution, he determines
              cross-bridge cycle with seven states.  For this reason, he changes the length
              of the fibers sinusoidally at varying frequencies ranging four orders of
              magnitude, and observes the tension time course.  The length change modifies
              the reaction rate constants, which in turn causes transient instability in the
              steady state, resulting in transitions between the states.  These are observed
              as tension transients, from which four apparent rate constants are extracted. 
              By studying the effects of MgATP, MgADP and phosphate (Pi), ten kinetic
              constants of the elementary steps that characterize the seven-state
              cross-bridge cycle can be deduced.

