Title       : Investigation of Lead Diffusion in Monazite as a Potential Monitor of Thermal
               Perturbations Associated with Continental Rifting, Fosdick Mountains,
               Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1999  
File        : a9814937

Award Number: 9814937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Grove marty@argon.ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to use lead (Pb) diffusion in
              monazite as an indicator of the thermal history of metamorphism of rocks in the
              Fosdick Mountain region of Marie Byrd Land, West Antarctica. Rocks in this
              region provide an exceptionally clear record of the early stages of continental
              rifting leading to the mid-Cretaceous separation of New Zealand from West
              Antarctica.  The project builds on key elements of the structural, metamorphic
              and magmatic history that have been determined previously and utilizes existing
              samples for further work. The focus of this new work is on U-Th-Pb dating of
              age-zoned monazites that occur in highly metamorphosed igneous rocks
              (high-grade orthogneiss).  This work is possible because of recent advancements
              in knowledge of Pb diffusion in monazite and the development of ion microprobe
              techniques for dating of monazite by both spot analysis at 10 micron spatial
              resolution and depth profiling by ion drilling in the outer 1-2 microns of
              grain surfaces.  The ion microprobe method permits the determination of
              metamorphic monazite ages at the required scale and precision to resolve
              U-Th-Pb age gradients induced during high-grade metamorphic events.  Existing
              experimental Pb diffusion data allow the results to be interpreted in terms of
              duration of heating at anatectic (partial melting) conditions.  This new
              approach could lead to significant advancements in understanding time scales
              involved in incipient continental rifting, and provides information that is
              currently not otherwise obtainable.

The Fosdick Mountain region is an useful
              geologic setting to apply and test these new thermochronological techniques
              because the area experienced a major thermal spike related to the initiation of
              mid-Cretaceous crustal rifting.  Partial melting of the middle crust was
              accompanied by emplacement of high-level granites.  Peak temperature and
              pressure of middle crustal rocks based on mineral chemistry are 725-780 degrees
              C and 5 +/- 1 kilobar.  Rapid exhumation of the region preserved peak-grade
              mineral assemblages. Monazites with discordant ages were discovered in two
              orthogneiss samples by conventional isotope dilution U-Pb dating, and a pilot
              study using an ion probe subsequently confirmed a strong core to rim age
              variation in coarse monazite from one of these samples demonstrating the
              promise of our approach.

This project will undertake a detailed ion
              microprobe study of monazite from a range of metamorphic rocks to document
              intra-grain age variations. Diffusion modeling of these internal Pb
              distributions combined with available temperature and pressure data is
              anticipated to lead to firm temperature-time constraints on the duration of
              anatectic conditions.  This work will be supported by thermal ionization mass
              spectrometry U-Pb dating of single crystals to evaluate the domain size of
              diffusive Pb loss in monazite.  Additional U-Pb monazite and zircon dating will
              be carried out to tightly constrain the timing of peak metamorphic conditions
              relative to emplacement of high level granites in the region while whole-rock
              major and trace element analyses will aid in differentiating orthogneiss
              protolith (source rocks).


