Title       : Renal Function in Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a9814448

Award Number: 9814448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Dantzler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814448
Dantzler
This project involves comparative studies of kidney function
              in vertebrates.  The studies emphasize the general area of transport by the
              kidney tubules (the primary functioning units in the kidney), particularly of
              organic substances, and the regulation of excretion of ions and water.  Within
              these broad areas, the investigations will involve continuations of studies on:
              1) the mechanisms and regulation of kidney tubular transport of negatively
              charged organic substances *organic anions), primarily fluorescein (a
              fluorescent compound whose transport can be observed while it is occurring),
              and of positively charged organic substances (organic cations), primarily
              tetraethylammonium (TEA); 2) the regulation of the pH (i.e., the acid or base)
              within the cells of renal tubules; and 3) the mechanisms and regulation of
              reabsorption of filtered fluid by the renal tubules.  These studies concentrate
              on reptilian kidneys, with their simple renal tubule structure, and on avian
              kidneys, with their kidney tubules ranging from simple, superficial
              reptilian-like ones to deep, complex mammalian-like ones.  The renal tubular
              transport of organic molecules plays a particularly important role in
              eliminating many toxic exogenous substances and in regulating the
              concentrations of important endogenous substances.  The cellular steps in
              transport and the tubular sites of transport of these organic molecules show
              considerable variation in reptiles and birds and may relate to the types of
              tubules and their function in the transport of other organic molecules and ions
              and water.  Regulation of intracellular pH, which shows similarities in the
              proximal portions of reptilian tubules and reptilian-type avian tubules and
              differences in proximal portions of reptilian-type and mammalian-type avian
              tubules, may also play an important role in determining the transport of
              organic molecules.  The regulation of net tubular reabsorption of filtered
              fluid is essential to maintaining normal fluid balance.  It appears to show
              variation sin the different tubules populations in the avian kidney and this
              may relate to differences in filtration rate and its regulation.  The coupling
              of fluid reabsorption to solute reabsorption may differ significantly between
              reptilian and avian nephrons and among populations of avian nephrons and this
              coupling may relate to changes in filtration rate as well as the elimination of
              organic molecules.   The approach to these studies will involve work primarily
              with isolated perfused and nonperfused renal tubules and will take advantage of
              quantitative optical techniques as well as isotopic techniques to evaluate
              rates of transport, intracellular transport steps, and intracellular pH. 
              Evaluation of the process of fluid reabsorption will involve direct qualitative
              and quantitative measurements of the fluid being reabsorbed.  The results
              should supply significant information on the mechanisms and regulation of the
              transport of organic molecules and the reabsorption of fluid and how these
              processes relate to structural and other functional differences in reptilian
              and avian kidneys.  The information will help in understanding how these
              species survive in hostile environments and the ways in which their kidneys
              help them deal with current and potential environmental toxins.

