Title       : Concatenated Codes and Iterative Decoders for Magnetic Recording Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9814472

Award Number: 9814472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Ryan ryan@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The integrity of the data stored on magnetic disk and tape drives must be
              protected from error-inducing noise and distortion using error control codes.
              The most exciting discovery in quite some time in the area of coding is the
              so-called turbo code which involves a concatenation (cascading) of 
two
              distinct codes in a manner which facilitates iterative ("turbo") decoding. 
              This coding technique has enabled performance near theoretical limits on simple
              communications channels unlike any code before its discovery.  This research
              investigates the design of turbo codes and related codes for error protection
              in magnetic recording devices, which may be modeled as a (very difficult)
              communication channel. 
  
The goals in this research involve the design of
              high performance concatenated codes and their iterative decoders for magnetic
              recording. Both parallel and serial concatenated codes will be considered.
              Error control code design for magnetic recording has focused in the past on the
              design of trellis-oriented codes to maximize the minimum free Euclidean
              distance between pairs of received sequences. This has been a notoriously
              difficult problem since, by adding coding and its concomitant overhead,
              intersymbol interference is increased, hampering the 
intended benefits of the
              code. Concatenated codes, on the other hand, are capable of achieving gains not
              just by increasing overhead (lowering code rate) to increase minimum distance,
              but via interleaver gain. Early work has shown that unprecendented 
gains are
              achievable with concatenated codes and iterative decoding. 


