Title       : The Ferrar Magmatic Mush Column System, Dry Valleys, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9814332

Award Number: 9814332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Marsh bmarsh@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research on magma crystallization processes
              through studies of sills of the Ferrar Group in Antarctica.

Earth's basic
              structure came about through processes involving the crystallization of magma
              or molten rock. The operation of these processes over billions of years has
              produced a wide diversity of rock types that have in turn given rise to the
              basic surface features of Earth, namely, continents and ocean basins. Yet the
              very details of these physical and chemical processes remain largely
              undiscovered. Although present day volcanism exemplifies this overall process
              of differentiation through the variety of lava erupted, it is not clear how
              this dramatic end result relates to the prolonged and detailed processes at
              depth responsible for this result. Solidified bodies of magma (called plutons),
              once deeply buried and now exposed through erosion, also furnish evidence, but
              most often the context of these plutons within the magmatic-volcanic system is
              not clear. The aim of the present research is to make a significant
              contribution to solving this fundamental problem by studying a group of
              magmatic rocks in Antarctica that uniquely display these magmatic processes.
              They expose the relationship of plutonism to volcanism and may be an important
              key to understanding planetary magmatism.

The emerging global paradigm of a
              stack of magmatic sheets or sills connected below to a deep-seated magmatic
              source and above to a volcanic center is exemplified by the Ferrar magmatic
              system of the Dry Valleys, Antarctica (Ferrar-DV). The world's major magmatic
              systems (i.e., at ocean ridges, Kilauea, Mt. Etna, Stillwater, and Rum, among
              many others) tend also to exhibit this style of system, but only the Ferrar-DV
              clearly reveals the critical physical and chemical connections between the
              deep, mush-dominated system and the near-surface. pre-eruptive sill system. At
              the deepest level, for example, an extensive mush-filled, ultramafic sill forms
              a small (400 m) layered intrusion with many features common to the largest
              layered intrusions of similar composition such as Dufek and Stillwater. Moving
              up-section, the progressive loss of large crystals of orthopyroxene (opx),
              which largely form the mush, and smaller plagioclase leads to differentiated
              tholeiitic sills. Formerly extensive coeval and chemically contiguous lavas
              (Kirkpatrick Basalt) complete this remarkably complete, exceptionally exposed,
              and extensive (~10,000 cubic-km) magmatic system.

Previous work in tracing
              the opx mush tongue over an area of ~3,000 sq.-km has revealed the
              thunderhead-like filling pattern of a stack of sills interconnected in the
              fashion of the limbs and trunk of a fir tree. The opx tongue records an
              episodic sequence of sill emplacement coupled with pulsative filling of the
              individual sills themselves. The apparent emplacement rhythm of the Ferrar-DV
              system is akin to both plutonic and volcanic systems. Moreover, although
              layering is pervasive within, and confined to, the opx-rich tongue, at one
              locale (the Dais) the layers are particularly well formed on many scales (mm to
              m) and show scour and fill, ripples and other forms of sorting. The relatively
              small size and high crustal level of the magma body at the Dais allowed rapid
              quenching, uniquely preserving textures commonly lost to annealing in large
              magma systems.

This project seeks to ascertain the full physical and
              chemical nature of the Ferrar-DV magmatic system. The major goals are to
              delineate fully its vertical and horizontal extent; to understand the dynamics
              of its establishment; to understand the mechanics of formation of the Dais
              layered intrusion; to produce a map of Ferrar rocks throughout the Dry Valleys;
              and to produce a 3-D model of the opx tongue and feeder system. Overall, the
              project will attempt to elucidate a rarely seen transition between plutonic and
              volcanic systems, which may well have implications fundamental to planetary
              magmatism in the b

