Title       : Recovery of Early Danian Molluscan Faunas on Seymour Island from KT Mass
               Extinction Event
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9814533

Award Number: 9814533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Zinsmeister   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to study faunal recovery following
              the Cretaceous-Tertiary (KT) mass extinction as recorded in rocks of Seymour
              Island, Antarctica. Most of the debate about the mass extinction event at the
              end of the Cretaceous has focused on the validity and the immediate
              consequences of the impact event. A consensus has emerged that there was a
              major impact event at the end of the Cretaceous. However, there is still
              considerable discussion as to whether it was the sole cause or "the straw that
              broke the camels back" coming at time when the Earth's biosphere was under
              prolonged period of stress. Overshadowed in the KT debate until recently has
              been the post boundary-event recovery of the biosphere. A number of papers in
              the late 1980's and early 1990's have discussed the nature of recovery patterns
              following the KT boundary event. These studies have focused on the recovery
              along of the Gulf Coast region, which was in close proximity to the impact site
              on the Yucatan Peninsula. The Gulf Coast recovery pattern was characterized by
              an initial barren zone, followed by a species-poor assemblage of surviving taxa
              and opportunistic blooms of species, and eventually to a rebuilding and
              diversification of the benthic communities. The recovery along the Gulf Coast
              has become a model for global recovery during the early Paleocene. In a recent
              global compendium study of the recovery of molluscan faunas from northern
              Europe, northern Africa and Pakistan-northern India, it was found that there
              was no evidence of opportunistic recovery blooms outside the Gulf Coast.
              Various authors have noted that synoptic regional or global compendia provide
              important insight into events following the KT mass extinction, but they may
              obscure important recovery processes that may be apparent only in detailed
              studies of local sections. To enhance our understanding of post boundary-event
              recovery, there is a need for additional detailed stratigraphic and taxonomic
              studies of boundary sections outside of the Gulf Coast region.

Seymour
              Island, located on the northeast tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, contains one
              of the most complete well-exposed KT boundary sequences known and the only
              mid-shelf record of boundary events in the Southern Hemisphere. Located in the
              high southern latitudes, about 7000 km from the Chicxulub impact site, the
              sequence on Seymour Island will provide important insight into the recovery of
              marine communities in regions remote from the impact event. The Seymour Island
              sequence is of particular importance, not only because of the geographic extent
              of the exposure of the boundary (about 7 km), but it also contains an extensive
              record (1600 m of strata) of events during the Maastrichtian (66-74 million
              years ago) and Paleogene (23-66 million years ago). The goal of this two-year
              project is to complete the taxonomic study of the molluscs collected from the
              Danian (63-66 million years ago) of the Lopez de Bertodano and Sobral
              formations. The description of the Danian fauna will complete the taxonomic
              description of the molluscan faunas from the Maastrichtian to the Eocene (36-57
              million years ago) on Seymour Island.  The Seymour Island fauna provides an
              opportunity to examine faunal extinction, survival, and recovery in a region
              remote from the impact event and will provide an important data set for
              comparison with other regions for global syntheses of post KT mass extinction
              recovery.


