Title       : Air-Sea-Ice Interaction in the Western Weddell Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9814024

Award Number: 9814024
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar L. Andreas eandreas@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel E. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work consists of the continued analysis of a comprehensive data set on the
              structure of the winter-time atmospheric boundary layer over the antarctic sea
              ice cover.  The measurements covered the upper ocean, the sea ice, and the
              lower atmosphere from late austral summer into the austral winter of 1992. 
              While significant results have come from the analysis, two areas need to be
              examined further:  the formulation of a stability correction to Monin-Obukhov
              similarity theory, and the application of a one-dimensional model of surface
              energy and mass balance model to synthesize the earlier studies, and to
              simulate all components of the surface heat budget throughout the entire
              observation period.  
	
The Monin-Obukhov Similarity Theory is a universally
              applied theory to explain the structure of the atmospheric surface layer, and
              the vertical exchange processes of energy and momentum.  It is called the
              similarity theory because it postulates that both exchange processes are a
              function of a single length scale.  The length scale however is an empirical
              function of the stability of the atmosphere and is not firmly grounded at the
              very high stability's found over the ice cover.  The model that will be applied
              to the data set has been successfully used to simulate exchange processes in
              the stable surface layer over snow, and will be extended to the sea ice
              situation.

