Title       : Timescales of Geochemical and Isotopic Transport in Natural Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9814621

Award Number: 9814621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Criss criss@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Everett L. Shock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814621
Criss 

Funds are sought to develop and test a new model of solute
              and isotopic transport in natural waters from karst and non-karst watersheds. 
              This model has the potential to quantify the timescales of transport without ad
              hoc assumptions about mixing of groundwater and surface water components.  In
              this mathematical model, based on diffusion theory, storm events are treated as
              "delta functions" that induce a complex series of geochemical and physical
              responses.  The transport equations are readily transformed into linear
              versions whose intercepts accurately retrodict the timing of the storm events,
              and whose slopes reveal the time constants for transport of each geochemical
              constituent.  Our basic concept is to study the natural system with
              perturbations provided by natural processes.  In a sense this approach is
              analogous to the use of earthquakes in seismology to extract information about
              subsurface structure.

We propose to examine the physical, geochemical and
              isotopic response of surface streams and springs to storm events with the goal
              of determining the timescales of complex natural responses.  Our preliminary
              data show that different parameters (streamflow, ionic concentrations,
              nutrients, sediment, oxygen isotopes, etc.) behave in a qualitatively similar
              manner, explicable by the model, but that the timescales vary greatly among the
              natural parameters that collectively define the response of the natural system.
               We propose several rigorous tests of this new model.  First, a review will be
              made of on-line hydrograph data to test the model in karst and non-karst
              watersheds.  Second, geochemical and isotopic data will be collected from the
              unimpounded Meramec Basin in eastern Missouri.  Access provided by Washington
              University's Tyson Research Center, located on the Meramec river, will allow
              intensive sampling at the time intervals required to resolve timescales
              accurately.  Once timescales are established we can begin the work of
              identifying the reactions (solubility, ion exchange, adsorption, biological
              uptake, etc.) that control the availability of each constituent.  The new
              approach we propose appears to be applicable simultaneously to diverse
              geochemical, physical, and isotopic constituents, and has the unique potential
              to resolve the complexity of natural systems using natural events.

