Title       : Tracing Fine Sediment Transport in Fluvial Systems Using Fallout Radionuclides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9814814

Award Number: 9814814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77744              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Matisoff gxm4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Whiting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814814
Matisoff

Despite our understanding of the gross paths taken by
              sediments and sediment-bound pollutants, we have a poor knowledge of the
              transit time for their passage through the drainage network and to receiving
              bodies.  The goal of this project is to develop an innovative but broadly
              applicable tool to investigate the erosion mechanisms of fine sediment from the
              landscape and the transport characteristics of fine suspended particulates in
              channels.  Specifically, we aim to answer questions on the the source of the
              suspended sediment (Is it from sheet erosion, rill erosion, bank erosion, or
              resuspension of bottom sediments?); the delivery ratios of fine sediment from
              the watershed (i.e., the proportion of sediment that is eroded from the
              landscape and delivered to the receiving waters or the proportion that is
              transported only part way and resides on the landscape or in the streambed);
              the proportions of suspended sediment that is newly delivered from the soil
              mantled landscape versus resuspended from the bed; the transit distance of fine
              particulates; the residence time of particulates; and the flux of fines from
              the watershed.  We will employ a novel technique we have developed that uses
              fallout radionuclides ( 7Be , 137Cs, and 210Pb  ) as tracers of fine sediments
              suspended by streamflow.

The two-year study will be focused in the
              Yellowstone River watershed in Wyoming and Montana.  During the first year we
              will address the kinetics of the tracing and the characterization of the
              radionuclide signature of the snowpack, soils, bottom sediment, and suspended
              sediment.  During the second year we will characterize the sources and
              transport of fine sediment over a distance of 900 km during a snowmelt-driven
              hydrograph.  The experimental design includes collection of precipitation, soil
              cores, floodplain sediment, channel bottom sediment, and suspended sediment
              samples at various locations in the drainage networks; gamma spectroscopy of
              samples for naturallyoccurring short-lived (7Be) and lonaer-lived ( 137Cs  210
              Pb) fallout radionuclides and other  important radionuclide tags (214 Bi,  40K)
              that adsorb to sediment providing tracers of sediment movement over different
              time scales; tracing the movement of mine tailings that were released from an
              upland source area in the study area in 1950; analyses of particle sizes and
              concentrations; and wave kinematic and mass balance
              modeling.
9814814
Matisoff

Despite our understanding of the gross paths
              taken by sediments and sediment-bound pollutants, we have a poor knowledge of
              the transit time for their passage through the drainage network and to
              receiving bodies.  The goal of this project is to develop an innovative but
              broadly applicable tool to investigate the erosion mechanisms of fine sediment
              from the landscape and the transport characteristics of fine suspended
              particulates in channels.  Specifically, we aim to answer questions on the the
              source of the suspended sediment (Is it from sheet erosion, rill erosion, bank
              erosion, or resuspension of bottom sediments?); the delivery ratios of fine
              sediment from the watershed (i.e., the proportion of sediment that is eroded
              from the landscape and delivered to the receiving waters or the proportion that
              is transported only part way and resides on the landscape or in the streambed);
              the proportions of suspended sediment that is newly delivered from the soil
              mantled landscape versus resuspended from the bed; the transit distance of fine
              particulates; the residence time of particulates; and the flux of fines from
              the watershed.  We will employ a novel technique we have developed that uses
              fallout radionuclides ('Be, 117CS , and 21 OPb) as tracers of fine sediments
              suspended by streamflow.

The two-year study will be focused in the
              Yellowstone River watershed in Wyoming and Montana.  During the first year we
              will address the kinetics of the tracing and the characterization of the
              radionuclide signature of the snowpack, soils, bottom sediment, and suspended
              sediment.  During the second year we will characterize the sources and
              transport of fine sediment over a distance of 900 km during a snowmelt-driven
              hydrograph.  The experimental design includes collection of precipitation, soil
              cores, floodplain sediment, channel bottom sediment, and suspended sediment
              samples at various locations in the drainage networks; gamma spectroscopy of
              samples for naturallyoccurring short-lived ('Be) and lonaer-lived (117 Cs anCf2
              'OPb) fallout radionuclides and other important radionuclide tags (214 Bi, @K)
              that adsorb to sediment providing tracers of sediment movement over different
              time scales; tracing the movement of mine tailings that were released from an
              upland source area in the study area in 1950; analyses of particle sizes and
              concentrations; and wave kinematic and mass balance modeling.

