Title       : Probing the Structure and Energetics of Reactive Sites at the Mineral-Water
               Interface: Implications for Element Partitioning and Geochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a9814691

Award Number: 9814691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas P. Wagner                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70771              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Rakovan rakovajf@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814691
Rakovan
Reactions that take place at the mineral-water interface
              (e.g., sorption and desorption, growth and dissolution, catalysis, etc.) affect
              many fundamental processes that occur on the Earth's surface. One of
              the
hallmarks of mineral surface reactivity is its heterogeneous nature.
              Fundamental to understanding such heterogeneities is knowledge of the structure
              of protosites and the energetics of protosite reactions such as
sorption and
              incorporation.  This project has two parallel goals.  First, to determine the
              structure and energetics of different reactive surface sites that lead to
              heterogeneous reactivity of minerals; specifically heterogeneous adsorption and
              incorporation of trace metals into fluorite. This will be accomplished by using
              the differential incorporation REEs into fluorite as a probe of the structural
              differences between nonequivalent surface sites and to quantify energy
              differences associated with adsorption and incorporation of these elements. The
              resulting data will be the foundation for surface site selectivity models,
              which will be derived by first principle methods, based on molecular orbital
              theory. The second goal of this study will utilize the product of heterogeneous
              incorporation of REEs and the results from Part I to further develop a
              technique of intracrystalline isochron dating. In this method the Sm-Nd isotope
              systematics of coeval portions of compositionally different sectors of a single
              crystal are used to calculate an isochron age for the formation of that
              crystal, obviating several crucial assumptions required in normal isochron
              dating. This procedure thus represents a potentially powerful new method of
              dating that can complement more traditional techniques.

