Title       : SGER: Neuroendocrine Immune Interaction in the Seasonal Hamster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9814126

Award Number: 9814126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Yellon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra L. Nehlsen-Cannarella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loma Linda University
	      P O Box 2000
	      Loma Linda, CA  923540200    909/558-4531

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,9183,9237,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    There are many animals that show seasonal changes in  metabolism and
              reproduction, demonstrating a link between the  nervous system and hormonal
              system.  There also is a prominent  seasonal incidence of infectious disease in
              animals as well as  humans.  Seasonal changes in immune function have been
              shown in  many field studies on mammals, and a few lab studies on wild  species
              such as deer mice and voles.  Many immunological tools  exist to study the
              relation of immune function in laboratory mice,  but lab mice are not
              responsive to environmental factors that  drive seasonality changes in wild
              populations.  Immunological  techniques for species like deer mice and voles
              are largely  limited to relatively nonspecific basic cellular processes.  There
               are some pilot data that show Siberian hamsters, a non-laboratory  strain with
              well-known seasonal physiological changes regulated by  the neuroendocrine
              system, have some immune parameters enhanced by  a long-term exposure to short
              day lengths.  This project is a  Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
              for technical  development of state-of-the art immunological techniques that
              will  work on these hamsters and other non-traditional and wild rodents.  Novel
              antibody reagents will be identified and used to establish  highly sensitive
              and sophisticated methods to identify immune cell  types and to quantify their
              production of immunological products.     The likely impact of the results is
              very high, because the new  technical developments will clarify basic
              mechanisms of  neuorimmune interactions, specifically how immune responsiveness
               is adapted to seasonal challenges encountered by most mammals in  the real
              world outside the laboratory.  The new methodologies can  be applied to a wide
              diversity of immune cell responses across  species, with potential
              contributions also to veterinary care and  to maintaining endangered species.
