Title       : Factors Regulating Population Size and Colony Distribution of Adelie Penguins in
               the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9814882

Award Number: 9814882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598922             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Ainley dainley@penguinscience.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadav Nur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa T. Ballance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine A. Ribic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H.T. Harvey & Associates
	      3150 Almaden Expressway
	      San Jose, CA  95118    408/448-9450

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9814882
David Ainley  
This renewal project investigates the demographic and
              life-history mechanisms responsible for geographic structuring of colonies, the
              founding of new colonies and recent dramatic change in the size of existing
              colonies of Adelie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae.  The project will examine (1)
              the relative importance of resources that constrain colony growth -
              availability of nesting habitat versus access to food; (2) those natural
              history and demographic parameters that might be affected by exploitative or
              interference competition, in turn mediated by colony size (e.g. breeding and
              foraging effort and success); and (3) behavioral mechanisms that influence
              colony growth as a function of initial size and distribution (e.g. philopatry -
              the immigration-emigration balance).  In this first empirical a priori study to
              consider the geographic structuring of a seabird population, we ask, Why do
              neighboring penguin colonies differ in size? Why are new colonies founded? 
              Overall, the methods will bring together several well-established techniques,
              e.g. aerial photography  for assessment of nesting habitat, satellite images
              for examination of  sea ice extent, radio telemetry for assessment of overlap
              in colony feeding areas, tagging to assess demographic parameters and
              dispersal, and time depth recorders and doubly labelled water for determination
              of energetic costs of foraging.  Results will increase understanding of
              population regulation and patterns of dispersion, and the effects of climate
              change, mediated through changes in sea-ice cover, on penguin populations.  In
              addition, results will provide a context in which to interpret conflicting data
              on penguin population trends from existing programs that use Adelie penguins as
              an indicator species for point source anthropogenic impacts on Antarctic
              fishing resources.

