Title       : Macromolecular Structure Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a9814284

Award Number: 9814284
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5388631            (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Berman berman@rcsb.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9814284

This award to Rutgers University supports the development and
              operation of an online database of atomic coordinates of proteins and other
              biological macromolecules whose three-dimensional structures have been
              determined experimentally.  Most known structures have been obtained through
              use of x-ray scattering or nuclear magnetic resonance.  The database will use
              modern relational database technologies to acquire, archive and distribute
              information about individual molecules, to enable database queries that survey
              the entire content of the database, and to facilitate linkage to other online
              databases, such as those providing protein and genomic sequence information. 
              The PI and her colleagues at Rutgers University, the National Institute of
              Standards and Technology and the University of California at San Diego are
              skilled in all aspects of database construction and operation, and have
              expertise in the experimental techniques used to generate structural
              data.
Knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of proteins and other
              macromolecules is of great importance in both applied and basic modern biology.
               Among the types of studies for which such information is critical are the
              determination of the function of newly discovered genes and the design and
              modification of new pharmaceuticals.  As the amount of such information
              increases, new uses in understanding the functional interaction of enzymes and
              other cellular constituents can be expected.  Much of this work will depend on
              the availability of data through the central repository being funded.




