Title       : Scalable Routing and Multicast in Mobile Ad Hoc Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9814675

Award Number: 9814675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Gerla gerla@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this study the researchers consider a large population of mobile stations
              which are interconnected by a multihop wireless net. The applications of this
              wireless infrastructure range from ad hoc networking (eg, collaborative,
              distributed computing) to disaster recovery (fire, flood, earthquake), law
              enforcement (eg, crowd control), search and rescue and battlefield.  Key
              characteristics of this system are the large number of users, their mobility
              and the ability to operate without the support of a fixed (wired or wireless)
              infrastructure.  The last feature sets this system apart from existing cellular
              systems and in fact makes its design much more challenging.

In this
              environment, the researchers propose to develop routing and multicast
              strategies which scale well to a large number of nodes and which can handle
              mobility.  The combination of large number and mobility makes the problem very
              hard.  In fact, large networks can be effectively handled with hierarchical
              routing, if nodes are stationary.  When nodes move, the hierarchical
              partitioning must be dynamically changed - a significant challenge.  Mobile IP
              solutions work well when there is a fixed infrastructure supporting the concept
              of fixed "Home Agent".  When all nodes move, the Home Agent strategy is less
              obvious. In addition to large number and mobility, we address also the need to
              support multimedia communications, with low latency requirements
              for
interactive traffic and QoS support for real time streams
              (voice/video).

In the wireless routing area, several schemes have already
              been proposed and implemented (eg, hierarchical routing, on-demand routing
              etc). The researchers will discuss the pro's and con's of the existing schemes,
              and will introduce two new schemes - hierarchical, mobile routing and Fisheye
              routing - which overcome some of the limitations of the existing schemes.  In
              the wireless multicast area, we review the traditional schemes used in wireline
              networks (eg, Source Trees, Core Based Tree, etc) and show how they perform
              poorly in highly mobile networks. We then introduce a new concept, Forwarding
              Group Multicast, in which the Tree is replaced by a mesh of Forwarding Nodes -
              the latter being much easier to maintain than the tree in the face of mobility.
              The researchers propose to extend the on-demand routing strategy to such
              structure to handle large scale.


