Title       : Landscape Evolution and Ice Sheet Stability: New Chronologies from the
               Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9814888

Award Number: 9814888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to obtain and interpret new
              chronological data for glacial deposits and landforms in the Transantarctic
              Mountains. One focus will be to determine the age of the Sirius Group deposits,
              which are generally believed to record significantly warmer Antarctic climates,
              implying that the East Antarctic Ice Sheet has been unstable in the past.
              Because the East Antarctic Ice Sheet contains such a large fraction of the
              Earth's fresh water this is crucial to understanding past climate changes. The
              primary evidence for warmer Antarctic climates is the existence of fossil Beech
              leaves and wood within some Sirius Group tillites. The central question is when
              this occurred, with evidence based on fossil diatoms in the Sirius Group
              suggesting that it was roughly 3 million years ago, and evidence based on
              geomorphology suggesting it was at least 10 million years ago. In order to
              obtain minimum ages for these important glacial deposits, cosmic ray produced
              helium and neon (3He and 21Ne) will be measured in clinopyroxene mineral
              separates from key Sirius Group outcrops. The method, commonly referred to as
              exposure age dating, relies on the assumption that the accumulation of 3He and
              21Ne in surficial samples is related to cosmic ray exposure, and hence is
              directly related to time. The studies will include samples from the Dry Valleys
              region of McMurdo Sound as well as those far to the south in the Queen Maude
              Mountains (Beardmore and Shackleton Glacier area) that were collected during
              the 1995/1996 Austral summer field season. Preliminary ages from Bennett
              Platform (Shackleton Glacier) demonstrate the viability of the method, yielding
              ages of approximately 11 million years. The new data will help determine
              whether there are systematic age differences between the various localities,
              which might help reconcile the conflicting climatic and geologic models. In
              order to establish the reliability of the methods, multiple samples from each
              locality will be analyzed, and several different cosmogenic nuclides will be
              used to check for consistency. The preliminary data already demonstrate that
              some locations yield excellent age consistency (Bennett Platform and Table
              Mountain) while others do not. Field observations will be used to evaluate the
              assumptions of the method, including measurements on associated bedrock samples
              (which should yield older ages) and shielded samples (which should yield zero
              age). The exposure age data for the bedrock samples will yield minimum age
              estimates for the landscapes in the Transantarctic Mountains and allow
              calculation of the maximum erosion rates, both of which will test the
              hypothesis that ice-free landscapes in the Transantarctic mountains are at
              least 10 million years old and are modified minimally by erosion.


