Title       : Acquisition and Operation of Broadband Seismograph Equipment at Chilean Bases in
               the Antarctic Peninsula Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9814622

Award Number: 9814622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Wiens doug@kermadec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gideon P. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided jointly by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of
              the Office of Polar Programs, supports research to transform three temporary
              seismometers in the Antarctic Peninsula into semi-permanent stations and to
              continue basic research using these data. During 1997 and 1998, a network of 11
              broadband seismographs in the Antarctic Peninsula region and southernmost
              Chilean Patagonia were installed and maintained. Data return from this project
              has been excellent and interesting initial results have been produced. The
              continued operation of these instruments over a longer time period would be
              highly beneficial because the number of larger magnitude regional earthquakes
              is small and so a longer time is needed to acquire data. However, instruments
              from this project are borrowed from the IRIS-PASSCAL instrument pool and must
              be returned to PASSCAL in April, 1999. This award provides funds to convert
              three stations at permanent Chilean bases in the Antarctic to permanent
              stations, and to continue the seismological investigation of the region for a
              period of four years. As part of this project, a fourth station, in Chilean
              Patagonia, will continue to be operated using Washington University equipment.
              The funding of this project will enable continued collaboration between
              Washington University and the Universidad de Chile in the operation of these
              stations, and the data will be forwarded to the IRIS data center as well as to
              other international seismological collaborators. Mutual data exchanges with
              other national groups with Antarctic seismology research programs will provide
              access to broadband data from a variety of other proprietary broadband stations
              in the region. The data will be used to study the seismicity and upper mantle
              velocity structure of several complicated tectonic regions in the area,
              including the South Shetland subduction zone, the Bransfield backarc rift, and
              diffuse plate boundaries in Patagonia, Drake Passage, and along the South
              Scotia Ridge. In particular, the operation of these stations over a longer time
              period will allow a better understanding of the seismicity of the South
              Shetland Trench, an unusual subduction zone showing very slow subduction of
              young lithosphere. These seismometers will also be used to record airgun shots
              during a geophysical cruise in the Bransfield Strait that is being planned by
              the University of Texas for April, 2000. These data will provide important
              constraints on the crustal structure beneath the stations, and the improved
              structural models will enable implementation of more precise earthquake
              location procedures in support of a seismological understanding of the
              region.


