Title       : Respiratory Paleophysiology of the Dinosaurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9814437

Award Number: 9814437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Ruben rubenj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willem J. Hillenius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1571,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is far more to dinosaurs than just their impressive appearance in museum
              displays and fearsome demeanor in movies. In many respects they were probably
              the most successful of all the land vertebrates. Their 150+ million year
              cosmopolitan reign over the terrestrial environment (from the Late Triassic to
              the Late Cretaceous) far exceeds the magnitude of dominance by any other group
              of tetrapods, including the mammals and their ancestors. Dinosaurian diversity
              was spectacular and their variety encompassed some of the most specialized
              herbivores and carnivores ever to have existed. Little wonder that so much
              energy has been devoted to understanding the biology of these long extinct
              reptiles. No other aspect of dinosaur biology has sparked more interest or
              controversy than have attempts to decipher their metabolic status. The
              currently popular notion that dinosaurs may, like living mammals and birds,
              have been endothermic (or "warm-blooded") provides a model that reinforces the
              interpretation of these animals as having led particularly active, interesting
              lives. The traditional alternative, that dinosaurs were ectotherms (or
              "cold-blooded"), is conventionally, albeit mistakenly, associated with
              unintelligent brutes leading sluggish, sedentary lives. Fortunately, recent
              discoveries have provided exciting new insight into the subject.
	Respiratory
              turbinates are bony or cartilaginous structures located in the nasal passage of
              all living terrestrial endotherms (birds and mammals). They function to reduce
              respiratory heat and water loss and are absent in all cold blooded vertebrates.
               The PIs propose to look for evidence for the presence, or absence, of
              respiratory turbinates in a variety of dinosaurs, including the meat-eating
              dinosaurs as well as in the great assemblage of the ornithischians, or
              herbivorous, dinosaurs.
	Additionally, information about rib/lung morphology
              in dinosaurs is likely to provide insight into the activity capacity of these
              animals. Given the distinct rib/sternal features associated with ventilation of
              the lung in living birds and mammals, it seems likely that dinosaur lung
              structure can be at least approximated by a careful examination of axial
              skeletal elements in fossils of these animals. Accordingly, it is proposed to
              undertake an examination of dinosaur axial skeletal structure with a view
              toward a reasonable, data-based reconstruction of the theropod lung. 

