Title       : Glacial History of the Amundsen Sea Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9814692

Award Number: 9814692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99328              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Kellogg tomk@iceage.umeqs.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel F. Belknap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Davida E. Kellogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports a marine geological investigation of the
              Amundsen Sea region toward a better understanding of the deglaciation history
              of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). The WAIS may be inherently unstable
              because it is the last marine-based ice sheet in the world. Unlike other
              embayments in West Antarctica, major ice streams draining into the Amundsen Sea
              from the interior of the WAIS lack buttressing ice shelves. Mass balance data
              for the distal portions of these ice streams (Pine Island and Thwaites
              glaciers) appear to be in balance or may be becoming negative. Because both ice
              streams have beds that slope downward toward the center of the ice sheet,
              grounding-line recession resulting from either continued thinning or sea-level
              rise could trigger irreversible grounding-line retreat, leading to ice-sheet
              disintegration and consequent global sea-level rise. The limited marine
              geological and geophysical data available from the Amundsen Sea suggest that
              grounded ice or an ice shelf occupied the inner Amundsen Sea embayment until
              perhaps as recently as 1000 to 2000 years ago, and this ice may have retreated
              rapidly in historic time.

This project, a study of the marine geology and
              geophysics of the Amundsen Sea continental shelf from 100 degrees W to 130
              degrees W, is designed to address the Amundsen Sea part of WAIS Science Plan
              Priority Goal H2: "What is the deglaciation history in the eastern Ross, the
              Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas?" This project will examine bathymetric data
              of the Amundsen Sea continental shelf to determine the positions of former
              ice-steam channels, and to aid in choosing sites for sediment coring.
              Single-channel seismic reflection studies will be conducted in order to
              determine sediment-thickness patterns, to aid in choice of coring sites, and to
              locate and identify morphologic features indicative of former grounded ice
              (e.g., moraines, scours, flutes, striations, till wedges and deltas, etc.).
              Coring will be concentrated along former ice flow-lines. Core samples will be
              analyzed in the laboratory for sedimentology, to determine whether of not basal
              tills are present (indicating former grounded ice and its former extent), and
              for calcareous and siliceous microfossils. The chronology of grounding-line and
              ice-shelf retreat from a presumed Last Glacial Maximum position near the shelf
              break will be established using accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) carbon-14
              dates of acid-insoluble particulate organic carbon.

This project will share
              ship time in the Amundsen Sea with a physical oceanographic project. Marine
              geologic data and samples collected will be integrated with findings of other
              investigators toward developing a comprehensive interpretation of the history
              of the WAIS.


