Title       : Soft-Decision Decoding of Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9814054

Award Number: 9814054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc P. C. Fossorier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, there has been a great demand for efficient and reliable
              digital data transmission and storage systems.  This demand has been
              accelerated by the emergence of large-scale, high-speed data networks and
              global satellite telephony for exchange, processing, and storage of digital
              information in military, governmental, and private spheres.  A merging of
              telecommunications and computer technology is required in the design of these
              systems.  A major concern of the designer is the control of transmission and
              storage errors so that reliable reproduction of data can be obtained.  This
              research proposal addresses some efficient means to achieve reliable data
              transmission and storage.
Error control coding is the most powerful technique
              for achieving reliable data transmission and has become an integral part in
              almost every data communication system design.  Today very sophistical error
              control coding schemes are being used in a broad range of data communication
              systems to achieve reliable data transmission.  This project is set up to
              investigate an important aspect of error control coding, soft-decision decoding
              of codes.  The objective is to devise efficient soft-decision decoding
              algorithms for codes to attain either optimal or suboptimal error performance
              with reduced decoding complexity and delay.  Algorithms to be investigated
              include: (1) MAP algorithms; (2) MLD and suboptimum decoding algorithms; (3)
              trellis-based decoding algorithms; and (4) turbo decoding of Reed-Solomon codes
              through binary decomposition.  Important features in these decoding algorithms
              are: bi-directional and parallel processing, code decomposition and multistage
              decoding.

