Title       : Field-Petrochemical Investigation of Ultrahigh-Pressure Garnet Periodotites from
               the Sulu Terrane, Eastern China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9814468

Award Number: 9814468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juhn G. Liou liou@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814468
Liou
Previous studies allowed identification of two distinct types of
              garnet peridotites in the Sulu-Dabie ultra-high pressure (UHP) terrane. Type A
              peridotites represent fragments of the mantle wedge of the Sino-Korean plate
              and Type B peridotites are crustal-derived mafic-ultramafic complexes of the
              Yangtze plate emplaced into continental crust prior to subduction. Olivine,
              garnet, and pyroxene of these peridotites contain minute mineral inclusions
              that may be very high-P phases or dense hydrous magnesian silicates. 
              Furthermore, the most negative delta 18-oxygen values ever recorded for garnet,
              omphacite and phengite suggests extremely limited fluid/rock interactions
              during UHP metamorphism and subsequent exhumation; thus primary mantle features
              are expected to be well preserved. This research bridges the gap between mantle
              petrology and mineral physics and will address the following questions: (1) Can
              UHP garnet peridotites provide new constraints on petrotectonic processes of
              the upper mantle? (2) What can geochemical microanalyses of minerals contribute
              to understanding the processes of mantle-slab and rock/fluid interactions? (3)
              What is the significance of exsolution lamellae in UHP minerals? (4) What other
              mineralogical evidence records the UHP metamorphism of garnet peridotites?
              Major thrusts on both core and surface samples from the Sulu terrane include:
              (1) petrological characteristics and metamorphic evolution of garnet
              peridotites; (2) geochemical constraints for their source and initial tectonic
              setting; (3) both radioactive and stable isotopic compositions to evaluate
              interactions of crust/mantle and rock/fluid; and (4) age determinations by
              various methods including SHRIMP dating of zircons. Such comprehensive
              petrochemical and geochronological constraints are prerequisites to evaluate
              the nature of the upper mantle associated with continental collision and
              subduction.

