Title       : Characterization of Stratified Iron-Oxide-Apatite Ores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9814761

Award Number: 9814761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Richard Naslund naslund@bingsuns  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9814761
Naslund
Deposits of magnetite, apatite, and hematite are important
              ores of iron in many parts of the world.  In addition, many of these deposits
              are associated with economic concentrations of Cu, Au, Ag, U, and rare earth
              elements.  Most of these deposits appear to have formed from iron- and
              phosphorous-rich liquids (magmas or fluids) of extreme compositions which have
              either intruded at depth, erupted onto the surface, or hydrothermally replaced
              host rocks.  Many of these deposits contain laterally-extensive, stratified,
              iron oxide- and apatite-rich units.  These stratified iron oxide-apatite ores
              do not appear to have formed by the same mechanism in all localities.  The
              purpose of this project is to examine the field relationships, textural
              characteristics, and compositions of stratified iron oxide-apatite ores from a
              variety of localities, to determine what characteristics can best be used to
              discriminate between the various mechanisms that have been proposed for their
              origin.  Field studies will sample and map in detail stratified iron
              oxide-apatite ores from Sierra Bandera, Chile.  Samples from stratified iron
              oxide-apatite ores at El Laco, Chile; Kiruna, Sweden; Pilot Knob, Missouri; and
              Cornwall, Pennsylvania have already been collected.   Experimental studies will
              examine the stability of iron-oxide liquids and fluids over a range of
              temperatures, pressures, and volatile compositions.  This project will be a
              cooperative study between the State University of New York at Binghamton, the
              Universidad de Santiago, Chile, and the Swedish Museum of Natural History.

