Title       : Solarmax Large Format Film
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9814641

Award Number: 9814641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1741321            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Eather   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Weiley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Wickstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Sci & Ind
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9814641
Eather

The Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago is producing a
              large format film that examines the sun and the relationship between the earth,
              its inhabitants, and our mother star.  SOLARMAX will present some of the newest
              discoveries about the sun and will place special emphasis on the defining
              impact of the sun on human life and culture.  The influence of solar cycles on
              global warming will be explored and new, unprecedented high-definition images
              of the sun will be included for the first time in a large format film.  The
              film will examine how multiple scientific disciplines interact to build a
              complete picture of the universe by delving into the history and philosophy of
              science, astronomy, astrophysics, solar physics, helioseismology, meteorology,
              spectrography, mathematics, and biology.  

The Museum of Science and
              Industry, Chicago, will serve as Executive Producer and distributor of
              SOLARMAX. The film will be produced by Robert Eather, an expert in
              magnetospheric physics and a science filmmaker.   The Co-Producer, Writer, and
              Director will be John Weiley who previously served in these roles for the large
              format film, Antarctica.  Advisors in the fields of space weather, solar
              physics, and archaeoastronomy include Louis Lanzerotte, Paul Dusenbery,
              Gaerhardt Haerendell, George Siscoe, and Edwin Krupp.  

