Title       : Soundprint Explores Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1993    
File        : a9150140

Award Number: 9150140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106945             (Estimated)
Investigator: WILLIAM H. SIEMERING   (Principal Investigator current)
              Moira K. Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  SOUNDPRINT, the weekly half-hour, nationally heard public                 
              radio documentary series proposes SOUNDPRINT EXPLORES SCIENCE,                 
              five programs that will make science more understandable and                   
              accessible to general audiences, with secondary use in                         
              instructional settings.  SOUNDPRINT proposes three different                   
              treatments of science:  1) Programs that profile scientists and                
              the life of a scientist; 2) A comprehensive examination of a                   
              long-term science project; and 3) Explorations of issues on the                
              frontiers of science.  Two programs will profile scientists to                 
              illustrate what it is like to live the life of a scientist, how                
              she/he became interested in a particular subject, why it is                    
              important, current research on the subject and scientific                      
              method.  One program will trace, over time, a scientific                       
              project: it will be recorded over time and presented in a                      
              compressed half hour.  Listeners will learn about the                          
              scientific method, share in the human interest and suspense.                   
              Two programs will bring listeners the latest  thinking on a                    
              subject from individuals working on a scientific frontier and                  
              present it in an engaging, understandable manner.  SOUNDPRINT                  
              has a successful track record of initial science programming                   
              within the on-going series.  SOUNDPRINT documentaries combine                  
              journalistic excellence, personal storytelling and state-of-                   
              the-art audio production to create compelling programs which                   
              present issues and ideas in an accessible, memorable way.                      
              Distributed by the American Public Radio Network, SOUNDPRINT                   
              reaches over 300,000 listeners each week; cassette copies of                   
              program reach a broad post-broadcast audience in schools,                      
              libraries, community centers, youth centers, colleges and                      
              informal sharing by listeners.
