Title       : Discovering Biology: The Process of Learning, the Process of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1991   
File        : a9150782

Award Number: 9150782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel B. Hagen jhagen@qmail.biology.runet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R.Charles Kugler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radford University
	      Radford Univ Post Office
	      Radford, VA  24142    703/731-5000

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              A new introductory biology course that begins the training of                  
              biology majors and meets the general education science                         
              requirement for non-majors.  Significant biological content is                 
              presented within the following pedagogical framework.  First,                  
              students are introduced to the fundamental methodological and                  
              philosophical principles of science, including: controlled                     
              experiments, analysis of historical evidence, modeling and                     
              simulation, drawing correlations, statistical inference, and                   
              reasoning by analogy.  Second, students are introduced to the                  
              history of biology, to provide them with an appreciation for                   
              how scientific discoveries have actually been made, and provide                
              insights into how contemporary scientists go about their work.                 
              Third, students consider the social context of science, because                
              if students are to think critically about the important                        
              scientific issues of today, they must realize that science                     
              interacts with other social institutions in complex ways.                      
              Fourth, students learn about science by doing science.  The                    
              laboratory portion of the course is designed to give students                  
              hands-on experience with research techniques.  Students learn                  
              to identify research problems, formulate hypotheses, design                    
              methods of testing, analyze assumptions, interpret results, and                
              present findings for peer review.  Fifth, students are given                   
              the opportunity to develop the thinking and communication                      
              skills that are the hallmarks of the educated individual.  This                
              framework produces greater understanding of biological concepts                
              and provides intellectual tools for life-long learning.
