Title       : New Mexico FAME
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1994       
File        : a9150244

Award Number: 9150244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Cole  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary F. Dever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Griego  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albuquerque Pub Schs
	      P. O. Box 25704
	      Albuquerque, NM  871250704    505/843-6400

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Albuquerque Public Schools seeks funds for a three-year                    
              program to enhance 15 teachers of grades K through 4 to                        
              become Fellows for the Advancement of Mathematics Education                    
              (FAME) and to serve as school-based mathematics teacher-                       
              leaders.  Each year Fellows will participate in a two-week                     
              summer session and weekly classes during the academic year.                    
              They will study such mathematical topics as number systems                     
              and number theory, algebra and geometry, the history of                        
              mathematics, computer application, discrete mathematics and                    
              intuitive calculus.   Attention will also be paid special                      
              concerns of teaching in a multicultural setting, learning                      
              theory as related to the learning of mathematics,                              
              pedagogical, leadership development, and working with                          
              parents.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Each year, 15 additional teachers will be selected from the                    
              Fellows' schools to be FAME teachers.  These teachers will                     
              work closely with their Fellows to improve classroom                           
              mathematics instruction and will also study university                         
              mathematics content.  Fame Fellows will have extensive                         
              responsibilities as teacher-leaders and will receive                           
              released time to handle these responsibilities.                                
                                                                                             
              It is anticipated that a minimum of 73 teachers will be                        
              enhanced.  Fame Fellows will earn 30 graduate credits which                    
              may be applied toward a master's program or an education                       
              specialist degree.                                                             
              Albuquerque Public Schools and the University of New                           
              Mexico's cost-sharing accounts for 26% of the NSF budget.                      
                                                                                             
              This project couples a solid mathematics component to a                        
              school-based leadership component.  It is run by and for                       
              teachers, with excellent backup by university mathematics                      
              and mathematics education staff.  It may serve as a model                      
              for K-4 district-wide systemic change in mathematics                           
              teaching and learning.
