Title       : Miami University Physics Education Program, Introductory Level Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1991      
File        : a9150837

Award Number: 9150837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Kelly   (Principal Investigator current)
              Perry R. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn M. Julian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Priest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan M. Yarrison-Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Miami University Physics Education Program, Introductory Level                 
              Sequence.A Prototype Project consisting of a three-semester                    
              sequence of new calculus-based introductory physics courses                    
              emphasizing laboratoy experience is being developed and                        
              implemented.  Its intent is to enhance student interest, while                 
              providing more insight into how physicists think, by                           
              introducing, as early as possible, advances made in physics in                 
              the twentieth century.  Featured in the first two semesters are                
              major sections on quantum mechanics, statistical physics, and                  
              special relativity.  The third-semester Contemporary Physics                   
              course builds on the first two semesters:  it develops basic                   
              concepts in order to describe recent research results.The                      
              three-semester sequence serves as the introductory component of                
              an undergraduate physics education program, as typified by the                 
              Freshman and Sophmore years.  The entire sequence is                           
              appropriate for students majoring in engineering, mathematics,                 
              and the sciences, and in other technical fields.  However,                     
              because for many students in majors other than physics the                     
              first two semesters constitute the only physics course taken,                  
              these two semesters are designed to stand alone.  They                         
              introduce ideas of twentieth century physics which can be used                 
              in advanced courses taken by students in other science and                     
              technical majors.  The three-semester sequence is designed to                  
              be transportable to other Colleges and Universities where class                
              size is moderate to large.
