Title       : The Integration of Economic Principles with Design in the Engineering Science
               Component of the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1991      
File        : a9150429

Award Number: 9150429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Thuesen   (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project demonstrates how the design activity, fully                       
              integrated with economic principles, can be effectively                        
              utilized to teach the engineering science component of the                     
              undergraduate curriculum.  A course is developed and taught                    
              that utilizes a design paradigm to teach engineering science                   
              principles in thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid                         
              dynamics.  Integrated in this subject matter are economic                      
              principles concerned with costing, design for manufacture and                  
              selection of design alternatives.  Additionally, a new course                  
              dealing with the economics of engineering design that bridges                  
              from the lower to the upper division is developed.  Professors                 
              from 4 different universities are involved in preparing                        
              educational materials for this new course and for the economics                
              components of the modified engineering science core courses.                   
              Computer software and computer-based teaching aids focusing on                 
              the means for estimating cost-to-manufacture for various                       
              thermosystem components are developed.  Case studies focusing                  
              on economics principles in design are initiated.  Course                       
              materials such as computer modules of an intelligent tutoring                  
              system are developed.
