Title       : Projecv for the Improvement of Mathematics Education PRIME: Mathematics Teacher
               Education Faculty Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9150038

Award Number: 9150038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Lamon   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Moyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip Makurat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Marquette University seeks funding for The Project for                    
              the Improvement of Mathematics Education (Prime):                              
              Mathematics Teacher Education Faculty Enhancement, a                           
              three-year plan to bring mathematics education in Wisconsin                    
              into alignment with the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation                         
              Standards and with the MAAguidelines, A Call for Change.                       
              To accomplish this goal, the PI, Professor proposes a                          
              two-phase project.  The first phase involves the                               
              development of preservice mathematics education courses                        
              appropriate for the preparation of teachers at each                            
              of the certification levels: elementary, middle, and                           
              secondary school.  The curriculum development will be a                        
              collaborative effort of teachers, mathematics and                              
              mathematics educators, including state supervisors.  The                       
              Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction (WDPI) supports                     
              the projectand will be a part of all of its activities.                        
              WDPI will play a role in publishing and disseminating                          
              course syllabi in the state and will use them as a basis                       
              for program review in state certification requirements and                     
              guidelines for teacher preparation programs.  This first                       
              phase of the project also includes two state conferences                       
              for the professional enhancement of the faculty, both in                       
              mathematics departments and colleges of education, at                          
              colleges and universities in the state who teach                               
              mathematics education.  The second phase of the project is                     
              to establish a collaborative network of three centers in                       
              the state which will facilitate and sustain mathematics                        
              education reform at institutions that prepare teachers.                        
              Each regional center, located at a university, will serve a                    
              segment of the state and will coordinate and promote                           
              activities which involve faculty and preservice teachers as                    
              well as novice teachers. Project activities will also                          
              involve leaders in the Wisconsin Mathematics Council in                        
              collaboration with colleagues in other mathematics                             
              organizations such as the MAA.                                                 
                                                                                             
                   This project has potential for making a significant                       
              impact in the state and for serving as a model for other                       
              states.  Furthermore, the project has the components to                        
              promote systemic changes and improvement in all aspects of                     
              mathematics teacher education in Wisconsin.                                    
                                                                                             
                   The cost-sharing will amount to 17% of the NSF total                      
              cost.
