Title       : A Cross-cultural, Multi-Media, Ethnographic DataBase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9150224

Award Number: 9150224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $927843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Lomax   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will develop a hypermedia, interactive data base                  
              that presents an audio/visual enthnography of world culture and                
              provide the analytic tools for its analysis for classroom                      
              instruction in schools and colleges. This "Global Jukebox" will                
              bring the world-view of anthropology to the classroom and will                 
              find wide use in teaching and research in human geography and                  
              other fields. The purpose of this data base is to make available               
              non-print materials and related data that capture the nature of                
              human beings and the*l*;r culture. For example, the 20th century               
              brought a major advance for research in the performance arts, as               
              song and dance were recorded on tape and film in every part of                 
              the wotld, making it possible for the first time to study the                  
              whole range of the rhythmic arts. The Columbia University Cross-               
              Cultural Study of Expressive Behavior applied methods for the                  
              systematic descriptions of performance to large samples of                     
              audio/visual data from a stratified sample of cultures, where                  
              coded data on social relations was also available. Out of this                 
              comparative study came linked taxonomies of song, dance,                       
              orchestration and speech style, together with a body of social                 
              theory sufficient to explain the cross-cultural variations of                  
              style.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              This whole data-base, including its hundreds of illustrative                   
              selections of music, dance and speech, can now be made available               
              in an interactive media format. The GLOBAL JUKEBOX will allow                  
              laymen, students and specialists to explore the broad universe of              
              human creativity and culture in a systematic fashion, with                     
              audio/visual illustrations. This interactive learning facility                 
              realizes, indeed challenges, the potentials of present-day                     
              computing systems, stretching their capacities for storage,                    
              retrieval, analysis, and multi-tasking, in handling and                        
              presenting this multi-scalar, multi-modal audio/visual database.               
              For lay users, it will offer an enlightening vision of cultural                
              variety and integrity. For students and specialists it will                    
              provide a platform for the study of expressive behavior in it                  
              total cultural context. The materials will be evaluated in                     
              schools, colleges and public libraries.
