Title       : Development of Multifaceted Modules for Introductory Thermodynamics at
               University of Louisville
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9150567

Award Number: 9150567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Chesley as Backup AA            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Lindauer gclind01@ulkyvm.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Hnat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Mullin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Geoffrey Cobourn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville
	      South Third Street
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/588-5555

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              A module for the introductory course in thermodynamics is to be                
              developed which is to be sufficiently flexible to match the                    
              learning styles of most engineering students. The combined                     
              expertise of subject matter experts and teaching psychology                    
              experts are used to define the boundaries and content of the                   
              module and the order and method of presentation of material.                   
              Technologies appealing to the visual senses, including use of                  
              computer controlled interactive displays of full motion graphic                
              images are exploited.  Performance of students is to be                        
              compared with that of students exposed to the standard lecture                 
              format, and the results will be correlated.  Results will be                   
              disseminated by sending a paper submitted for publication                      
              outlining the results of the study and a videotape of a sample                 
              lecture to all the mechanical engineering departments in the                   
              United States.  It is expected that this rapid dissemination of                
              results will result in the incorporation of some or all of this                
              module into thermodynamics courses taught by many engineering                  
              schools. In addition, it is hoped that the results of this                     
              study will encourage professors to utilize the principles                      
              developed in this research to develop courses in other areas                   
              such as dynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer.
