Title       : ADVANCED COMPUTING FOR SCIENCE EDUCATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9150211

Award Number: 9150211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1288294            (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Miller p.miller@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Ettensohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Advanced Computing for Science Education project proposes to               
              utilize and build upon state of the art computing technology to                
              construct a general purpose science learning environment.  The                 
              environment will provide a powerful and unique integration of                  
              computing tools that is specifically targeted to the needs of                  
              students in a scientific discipline.  It seeks to develop a                    
              general language and learning environment that supports student                
              efforts to pose and answer broad classes of  questions of                      
              scientific interest and to test them in a simulated environment.               
              The proposed work is innovative in that it promotes a style of                 
              learning and scientific inquiry that is not available in current               
              computer-based learning environments for science.  This is                     
              accomplished by utilizing a programming language as a vehicle for              
              scientific discourse, exploiting abstraction as a means of                     
              dealing with complexity, and incorporating high quality graphics               
              and animation capabilities.  It is intended to supplement a                    
              complete science curriculum with a virtual laboratory that allows              
              experimentation which may otherwise be impossible or require                   
              prohibitive resources.  In contrast to traditional systems,                    
              student participation is not limited to avenues that have been                 
              anticipated in advance by the author of the lesson.                            
                                                                                             
              The proposed work is important because it addresses widely                     
              perceived problems of science education by motivating and                      
              encouraging students to apply their knowledge and develop their                
              skills of scientific inquiry in exploring important and                        
              interesting topics of advanced science.  This work postulates                  
              that a computer programming language is useful and powerful as a               
              language of scientific discourse.  This assertion will be tested               
              by evaluating the effectiveness of the environment in situations               
              of varying teacher-student computing backgrounds in an advanced                
              course in developmental biology, freshman college course, and in               
              a high school biology course. //
