Title       : Development of Upper-Division Solid State and Plasma PhysicsLaboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9150979

Award Number: 9150979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38275              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Essick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis L. Eggleston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Specialized upper-division laboratories in fields of                           
              contemporary interest are an important component of a vital                    
              physics curriculum.  This Occidental College Physics Department                
              project is developing two such laboratories in the areas of                    
              solid state and plasma physics. These laboratories, to be taken                
              concurrently with lecture courses already offered by the                       
              department, complement the lecture presentation of particular                  
              topics as well as broaden the scope of these courses by                        
              introducing students to experimental techniques of the type                    
              used in current scientific research.In the solid state                         
              laboratory, students investigate important condensed matter                    
              phenomena such as resistivity, the polarity of charge carriers,                
              the crystalline bandgap, electron-hole recombination, impurity                 
              doping of a semiconductor, and semiconductor statistics.  The                  
              experiments familiarize students with cryogenic techniques and                 
              introduce state-of-the-art instrumentation such as a lock-in                   
              amplifier, scanning monochromator and digitizing oscilloscope.                 
              Many of the experiments involve computer-controlled data                       
              acquisition and sophisticated data analysis schemes (e.g.,                     
              boxcar correlator).The plasma laboratory, the first of its kind                
              at a small liberal arts college, is based on two custom made                   
              plasma-containment machines: the double plasma and the pure                    
              electron plasma devices. Through seven experiments, students                   
              explore single particle drifts, plasma wave dispersion and                     
              damping, plasma stability, and transport. Additionally,                        
              students become acquainted with vacuum technology and computer-                
              controlled data acquisition/analysis techniques.NSF grant funds                
              are being matched with funds from non-federal sources.
