Title       : Discrete Mathematics Instruction in a Cooperative Problem- Solving Mode
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9150026

Award Number: 9150026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Gaines   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Colorado State University seeks funding for a three-year                       
              project:  Discrete Mathematics Instruction in a Cooperative                    
              Problem Solving Mode.  The idea for the development of the                     
              project is the recommendation that Discrete Mathematics                        
              become a part of the secondary school curriculum, as                           
              outlined in the Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for                        
              School Mathematics for the National Council of Teachers of                     
              Mathematics.  The PI proposes through this project to                          
              develop and implement a course sequence in discrete                            
              mathematics required of secondary mathematics preservice                       
              teachers.  The course will be team-taught in a cooperative                     
              learning/problem solving mode by mathematics faculty                           
              members who will have received special instruction, and two                    
              graduate students who have extensive teaching experience as                    
              former high school teachers.  The project will also                            
              emphasize writing in mathematics and model alternative                         
              instructional formats.  The preservice students will take                      
              the course with a required lab in which:  they will be                         
              studying about the teaching and learning of mathematics in                     
              these modes; they will be assistants in the teaching of a                      
              freshman course in discrete mathematics taught by the same                     
              faculty team; and cooperatively they will develop                              
              instructional modules to be use in the elementary course                       
              which can also be used in high school classes with minor                       
              modifications.  Thus, the preservice teachers will gain                        
              knowledge and experience in discrete mathematics, in                           
              cooperative learning, in complex problem solving                               
              strategies, and in writing in the mathematics discipline                       
              both as teachers and learners.  Inservice teachers will be                     
              invited to take the courses and to produce projects for                        
              their own classes.  The training components for faculty                        
              will also be open to area teachers.                                            
                                                                                             
              The project is one which can be easily replicated and                          
              disseminated and has the potential to become a model for                       
              content and instruction not only for the preparation of                        
              teachers, but for the teaching of mathematics for all                          
              students at the collegiate level using alternative formats                     
              of instruction.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Colorado State University is supporting the project by                         
              providing 40% of the total cost.
