Title       : Can Algebra Save the World, or Can the World Save Algebra? ANew College Freshman
               Mathematics Course: Algebra with Applications to Environmental Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9150624

Award Number: 9150624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75372              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Schaufele   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy E. Zumoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              The project is to pilot, refine, and implement an introductory                 
              level college mathematics course, Algebra with Applications to                 
              Environmental issues (AAEI), which will replace the traditional                
              college algebra.  The format and context are radically new,                    
              stressing experintial learning motivated by real-world problems                
              in conservation, ecology and the environment.  AAEI is designed                
              in the spirit of the NCTN Curriculum and Evaluation Standards                  
              for School Mathematics adapted to the college level,                           
              emphasizing mathematical modeling of real data, decision                       
              making, reading and writing.  Use of technology eliminates the                 
              boredom and drudgery of manipulation.  Group assignments,                      
              individual analysis, student presentations and written reports,                
              will replace traditional classroom lecture and provide students                
              with hands-on experinece in mathematics.  This course is                       
              appropriate for all entering college students, even those with                 
              limited mathematical experience, and offers greater access to                  
              further study inthe sciences, engineering ro mathematics.  AAEI                
              will be fully integrated into the institution curriculum and                   
              will then be disseminated to each Institution in the University                
              System of Georgia for consideration as a course to satisfy the                 
              core mathematics requirement.  A newsletter is planned to                      
              introduce AAEi nationally.  The response to units of this                      
              course already piloted indicate that students have gained a new                
              perspective on mathematics as a tool, thus increasing                          
              awareness, enhancing interest and appreciation of its role in                  
              society.  Perhaps we can even eliminate the time-worn question,                
              "What's this stuff good for?."
