Title       : Assessments for Science Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9150108

Award Number: 9150108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $701088             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Pallrand pallrand@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a proposal for a three year project to develop new forms               
              of assessments and teaching protocols for use by high school                   
              science teachers.  Explanation-based and procedural-based                      
              assessments that will be presented via video tapes are proposed.               
              Initially, the assessments will be based on teaching materials                 
              which are used to introduce topics of current interest in science              
              and technology into high school courses.  These materials,                     
              science teaching modules, have been developed by teams of                      
              university and industrial scientists working collaboratively with              
              high school teachers through the University/industry scientists                
              Science Modules Program at Rutgers University.  This program will              
              extend materials selected from module topics to create innovative              
              assessments and teaching protocols.  These assessments will later              
              be broadened for general use by high school science teachers.                  
              This will be accomplished through the joint efforts of faculty                 
              and staff from Rutgers University and Educational Testing Service              
              (ETS) working with high school science teachers.  ETS researchers              
              have been leading a number of efforts involved in developing non-              
              traditional assessment models.  The ETS programs emphasize                     
              teacher collaboration in the development of assessment                         
              instruments and in the assessment of student performance.  The                 
              association of Rutgers and ETS researchers forms a collaboration               
              that draws upon the unique strengths of individuals from both                  
              institutions. *** //
