Title       : Biological Education: Development of Curriculum Frameworks for High School,
               Two-Year and Four-Year Non-Majors Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9150808

Award Number: 9150808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodger W. Bybee rbybee@bscs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon E. Uno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Biol Scs Curriculum Study
	      5415 Mark Dabling Boulevard
	      Colorado Springs, CO  809034720    /   -

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Articulation of biology education and reform of undergraduate                  
              programs for non-majors requires clarifying fundamental                        
              biological concepts, recognizing the unique characteristics of                 
              institutions, and considering the role and influence of pre-                   
              college education in the life sciences.  The Biological Science                
              Curriculum Study (BSCS) proposes to complete a design study of                 
              biology education at pre-college and college levels.  The goals                
              of the study are to elaborate the conceptual structure of                      
              biology and to determine appropriate curriculum frameworks for                 
              high school, community colleges, and undergraduate courses for                 
              non-majors.  The development of curriculum frameworks for                      
              collegiate courses for non-majors biology can provide                          
              substantial leadership for the biology education community.                    
              The concurrent development of high school programs based on a                  
              similar conceptual framework will help accomplish the objective                
              of bridging the gap between precollege and undergraduate                       
              science.  Because the proposed undergraduate program includes                  
              two-year colleges large numbers of women and minority students                 
              will be served, groups that are currently underserved by                       
              science education.The eleven-month study will use experts to                   
              identify and clarify the major concepts of biology and                         
              recommend curriculum frameworks for pre-college and college                    
              programs.  The recommendations of this study will be published                 
              and disseminated to professional societies in biology and                      
              biology education for further distribution.
