Title       : The Effects of Problem-Based Instruction on the Geometric Knowledge of High
               School Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1993   
File        : a9150027

Award Number: 9150027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1151994            (Estimated)
Investigator: W Gary Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7258,7355,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics of the          
              National Council of Teachers of Mathematics calls for a shift in               
              paradigm in the teaching of school mathematics from skills-based               
              instruction to problem-based instruction.  This proposal describes a           
              research project in which the effects of problem-based instruction on          
              the concepts and thought processes of high school geometry students will       
              be studied.  Over the course of the proposed three-year project, a             
              teaching model which focuses on student solving of problems and which is       
              accessible to students of varying abilities will be designed.  The             
              effects of the instruction will be assessed from two contrasting yet           
              interactive perspectives--use of problem-solving processes and knowledge       
              of particular geometric concepts.  The geometric problem-solving               
              processes to be investigated include the abilities to (a) generalize           
              from empirical evidence, (b) generalize using deductive evidence, (c)          
              deal with reverse trains of thought, (d) flexibly refocus a train of           
              thought, and (e) visualize a geometric situation.  The geometric               
              concepts to be investigated include the concepts of (a) proof, (b)             
              infinity, (c) similarity and congruence, (d) area, perimeter, and              
              volume, (e) parallelism, and (f) transformations.  Data collection will        
              be three-fold, including (a) teaching experiments with individual              
              students to assess particular instructional approaches; and (b) teaching       
              experiments with intact classes to assess the changing nature of               
              instruction and classroom interactions; and (c) status testing to              
              document developing concepts and processes.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project is jointly funded by the Instructional Materials                  
              Development Program.
