Title       : Numerical Simulation Assisted Teaching Laboratory on Physical Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9150197

Award Number: 9150197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yong W. Kim ywk0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              A critical analysis shows that the very successful tradition of                
              formalism-intensive physics teaching has inadvertently deprived                
              college students of the opportunity to learn about, and                        
              experience with, a wide range of physical phenomena of                         
              contemporary interest.  The key to remedy the situation                        
              significantly is to expose the students early in their college                 
              education to physical phenomena, the very stuff that sustains                  
              physics.  This project involves a new concept of laboratory                    
              teaching with a strong phenomenological orientation in order to                
              bring about a balance to the otherwise effective and rigorous                  
              tradition.  The two key requirements are to compensate for the                 
              gap in the students preparedness and to break down the physical                
              phenomena of interest to the point where it is both transparent                
              and accessible.  This can be accomplished by complimentary use                 
              of numerical simulation and experimental measurement with                      
              emphasis on optical and electrical visualization.  A new                       
              teaching laboratory has been created toward this goal, suitable                
              for an introductory instructional setting where students of                    
              broad curricular background participate.  A number of theme-                   
              oriented experiment modules have been developed to different                   
              levels of completeness, with topics drawn from mechanics,                      
              electricity and magnetism, optics, spectroscopy and                            
              thermodynamics.  Further research and development of selected                  
              experiment modules are being carried out, with a view toward                   
              ready transferability of the concept to other institutions as                  
              well as to other scientific disciplines.
