Title       : The BioQUEST Curriculum Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9150656

Award Number: 9150656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jungck jungck@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to help support The BioQUEST Curriculum              
              Development Project.  The program is an extension of an inaugural              
              curriculum development effort of a consortium of biologists who                
              designed instructional materials based on a three P's (Problem-                
              posing, Problem-solving, and Persuasion of peers) approach to                  
              learning.  This first demonstration project has resulted in a                  
              national network of biologists dedicated to the improvement of                 
              introductory and non-majors level undergraduate biology education              
              by stressing the use of open-ended problems.  Now the intent of                
              the BioQUEST project is to enlarge this network by gathering an                
              additional consortium of biologists who will be part of a major                
              instructional materials development project aimed at integrating               
              a research approach to learning.  These materials will include                 
              the development of additional software simulations and tools, the              
              design of instructional materials built around existing software,              
              the development of materials that reflect the 3P's approach that               
              are not computer dependent, and the development of materials and               
              approaches that can be used in large lectures to engage students               
              in problem-posing, problem solving, or persuasion.  Funds from                 
              this award will be used to develop materials in a broader array                
              of topics than the initial demonstration project which focused on              
              biochemistry, ecology, evolution, genetics, and physiology.  The               
              materials developed in these workshops will be tested, refined,                
              discussed in a follow-up mini-workshop, and then disseminated as               
              widely as possible.  Besides coordinating the efforts of these                 
              sixty teacher/developers, BioQUEST staff will continue to develop              
              their own investigative lab and field exercises, computer                      
              simulations, and other teaching materials; will edit and                       
              disseminate materials; coordinate campus testing and evaluation                
              of materials; and present national symposia on the development                 
              project.
