Title       : Workshop on Seafloor Deformation Models, May 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9713299

Award Number: 9713299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas E. Synolakis costas@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9713299  Synolakis  This action is to support the organization of a two-day 
              workshop on seafloor ground deformation models. The workshop  is to be held at
              the University of Southern California  Marine Science Station on Catalina
              Island, 14-15 May 1997.    The objective of the workshop is to examine the
              state-of-the-  art of interfacial seismology and tsunami hydrodynamics; in 
              particular, whether the initial conditions for the seafloor  displacement
              inferred from seismic records are adequate for  tsunami runup computations.   
              Whereas there have been significant advances in  hydrodynamics, these advances
              have concentrated almost  entirely and appropriately on the refinement of the 
              inundation computations. At the same time, despite anecdotal  advances in
              seismology, these advances have not been  absorbed by the hydrodynamics
              community. As a result,  hydrodynamics modelers use very elaborate shoreline 
              computations, while using -- at the very best -- initial  conditions based on a
              dislocation theory which has been in  existence for twenty years or more. Also,
              the usefulness of  the hydrodynamics computations to better define the ground 
              deformation needs to be better understood by the seismology  community.   
              Since inundation maps for the west coast of the US are  currently being
              prepared using tsunami runup computations,  the question of the determination
              of the ground deformation  is critically important. It is the objective of the
              workshop  to provide a forum for seismologists and hydrodynamicists to  discuss
              advances, and to identify short-term research needs  to better use the
              respective results. In each of the one-day  discussions, the objective is to
              identify critical issues,  to attempt to answer all the criteria questions
              which lie  within the present state-of-knowledge, and to discover areas 
              requiring more extensive study.    At the conclusion of the workshop, it is
              expected that the  tsunami research community will be in a better position to 
              focus -- in a continuing way -- on the r emaining questions  whose answers are
              needed to quantify better the input  provided by ocean-bottom pressure
              transducer recordings to  tsunami warning systems.
