Title       : The Evolution of Primate Enamel Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9713148

Award Number: 9713148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Maas mcmaas@mda.com.mx  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The teeth of primates, both living and fossil, represent the most complete
              evidence of the evolution, ecology, life history, and taxonomy of this
              important group.  The microscopic structure of tooth enamel, a previously
              neglected aspect of tooth morphology, holds great promise for increasing our
              understanding of primate dental function and phylogenetic relationships.  This
              research will document enamel variation in a broad taxonomic sample of living
              and fossil primates, and use these data to test specific functional hypotheses
              and to assess the phylogenetic utility of enamel characters.  It represents an
              important step forward in the comprehensive study of these rare biological and
              fossil specimens.  The research design consists of two components:  1) analysis
              of intraspecific and interspecific variation in enamel in a broad sample of
              living primates and 2) analysis of enamel evolution, based on comprehensive
              sampling of molar tooth enamel of fossil primates.  Analyses will be based on
              scanning electron microscopy of histological specimens of mature enamel.  The
              objectives of the study are:  1) To test the hypothesis that differences in
              occlusal enamel among functionally distinct areas of molar teeth are linked to
              differential resistance to wear.  2) To test the hypothesis of linkage between
              some enamel features and body size.  3) To test hypotheses of functional
              constraints on enamel structure among developmentally and functionally distinct
              parts of the dentition (e.g., incisors, canines, premolars, molars).  5) To
              assess the phyletic utility of enamel characters among living primates, and,
              using phylogenetically reliable enamel characters, to test hypotheses of
              relationships among fossil primates.  This research will be the most
              comprehensive study of primate enamel structure to date.  By study of
              mechanically important enamel characters it will contribute to a broader
              understanding of dental function and evolution in Primates.  Moreover, it will
              go al long way towards establishing how enamel structure can and cannot be used
              to resolve questions of phylogeny and systematics.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
