Title       : FSML- Renovation of Dauphin Island Sea Lab's Wet Lab Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9713963

Award Number: 9713963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Crozier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Florence I. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Aronson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Dauphin Island Island Sea Lab (DISL) serves Alabama's  research and
              instructional needs in the marine sciences.  Students at all educational
              levels, including K-12  pupils,undergraduate and graduate students,
              teachers-in-  training, elderhostel participants, and the general public, 
              benefit from the programs offered at DISL. Although DISL's  academic staff and
              physical plant have been growing steadily  during the quartercentury of its
              existence, its educational  and research missions have been hindered by the
              lack of  adequate Wet Lab facilities for experimentation under  controlled
              conditions.    DISL has a University Programs staff of ten academic  faculty,
              all of whom are active researchers and teachers.  The faculty study a variety
              of basic and applied problems in  oceanography and marine biology, and they
              provide advice to  industry, government, and the public.  Research areas 
              include the effects of spatio-temoral scale on  herbivory in seagrass
              communities, predation on commercially  important fish at the larval stage,
              flow and mass transfer  of nutrients at scales ranging from the individual
              organism  to the whole ecosystem, the effects of eutrophication on 
              water-column dynamics in near-coastal ecosystems, the  chemical oceanography of
              organosulfur compounds,  paleoceanography and paleobiology, and the ecology of 
              gelatinous zooplankton.    DISL's current Wet Lab facility was assembled in
              1987 and  destroyed by Hurricane Opal in 1955.  It is at present  running at a
              basic level and being used primarily for  holding specimens and for minimal
              instructional purposes.  Each member of the University Programs faculty at DISL
              has  need of a far more sophisticated facility for teaching and  research. 
              Collaborations between DISL faculty and  researchers at regional, national, and
              international levels  would be greatly enhanced by an improved Wet Lab.    This
              vibrant project will support the partial renovation of  the Web Lab, bringing
              it to a level of operation  commensurate with the growin g marine science
              institution  that is DISL.  The existing building will be refurbished to 
              include a plankton and larval fish culture room; indoor  recirculating flumes
              for experiments on the biomechanics of  flow; and indoor wet tables for holding
              specimens.  An on-  site computer facility will be used  to monitor the
              seawater, freshwater, electrical, and  associated control systems; provide data
              management and  processing capabilities; and make data available to other 
              researchers through the World Wide Web.
