Title       : A Design Methodology for Uncertain, Unstable Plants with Hard Actuator
               Saturation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9713670

Award Number: 9713670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suhada Jayasuriya sjayasuriya@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The major objectives of this research project are to develop a  transparent and
              practical set of design tools for synthesizing  controllers for guaranteeing
              acceptable performance in uncertain,  unstable plants under hard actuator
              saturation; to develop a  methodology that removes the need for integral
              control and more  generically the need for imbedding an internal model inside a
               control loop for a large class of problems; and to demonstrate  the
              applicability of the developed methodologies on two  laboratory systems; one a
              single flexible link attached to a  rigid hub and the other a flexible link
              driven by a worm gear  transmission. In order to achieve the objective of
              developing a  design methodology, first stable, uncertain singleinput single- 
              output (SISO) plants under saturating control is considered.  Next, SISO,
              linear, uncertain plants with poles in the closed  left half plane subjected to
              actuator saturation are enclosed and  finally linear, uncertain plants with
              poles in the right half  plane subjected to actuator saturation are
              investigated.  Preliminary results indicate that using local feedback around
              the  saturation nonlinearity such that the closed loop system has an  impulse
              response of one sign allows the system to gracefully come  out of a saturation
              state so that feedback remains active for the  most part. Both time domain and
              frequency domain methods are  considered. To demonstrate the feasibility of the
              proposed design  methodology two laboratory scale systems currently available
              in  the PI's lab at Texas A&M University are used. Both systems are  fully
              instrumented to be controlled by a PC. One of the systems  has a model
              linearized about a trajectory characterized  by poles  on the imaginary axis
              and the other has a linearized model  characterized by poles in the right half
              plane. The key goal of  the demonstration are to let the driving d.c. motors
              saturate and  to compare the performance with a controller design that does not
               explicitly consider hard saturation.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
