Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Environmental and Industrial Biotechnology and
               Product Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9713617

Award Number: 9713617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Munnecke ebt@ix.netcom.com                       www.netcom.com/~ebt  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Enviro Biotech Inc
	      969 C Industrial Road
	      San Carlos, CA  94070    415/596-1015

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9713617  Munnecke    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by  Dr. Douglas M. Munnecke, Founder and President, Environmental 
              BioTechnologies, Inc. in San Carlos, CA, and Dr. A.M. Azzam,  Genetic
              Engineering and Biotechnology Research Institute (GEBRI)  in Mubarak City for
              Scientific Research in Alexandria, Egypt.  The  objective of this joint project
              is to investigate the applications  of advanced biotechnology discoveries in
              various industries,  including food, agricultural and environmental monitoring
              and  control industries, and the potential for US-Egypt industrial  production
              cooperation. The two sides intend to: define the market  needs and size for
              selected industrial bioproducts and  bioprocess; identify available American
              products and technology  for importing into Egypt; and finally initiate
              contacts between  American and Egyptian biotechnology companies for possible
              joint  activities. Scope:  This project will involve a US scientist with 
              extensive experience in developing applications  for discoveries and advanced
              research results in the area of  biotechnology, in various fields in the United
              States.  On the  Egyptian side, the cooperating scientist is an experienced 
              chemical engineering researcher who is now in charge of a major  government
              research laboratory (GEBRI) with a mission to make  possible the utilization of
              the rapid advances and discoveries in  the field of biotechnology. The work in
              this project will seek to  utilize the scientific advances made in Egypt and in
              the US in  biotechnology for economic development in Egypt and in other  Middle
              East countries.  The results can have a major impact on the  economic
              development and also on the environmental quality, and  general health services
              in these countries and on their technical  cooperation with the United States. 
              Most of the work will be done  in Egypt with support from the US scientist,
              with the rest to be  done in the United States.  This proposal meets INT
              objective of  supporting US- foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. 
              This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund  Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both  countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.  ***
