Title       : Torsional Vibration and Gear Rattle in Automotive Manual Transmissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9713914

Award Number: 9713914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Wang yuwang@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis C. Wieczorek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI/IUCP (Industry-University Collaboration Project)  is a joint research
              program between the New Venture Gear  Inc. (Troy, MI). It develops modeling,
              analysis and design  techniques for the reduction of torsional vibration and
              the  elimination of gear rattles in manual transmissions of  passenger cars and
              light trucks. Gear rattle is produced by  the impacting of gear teeth through
              their unloaded mesh  backlash as a response to engine torque fluctuations. The 
              complexity of torsional vibrations and various  nonlinearities (e.g., backlash,
              friction hysteresis, and  multi-stage stiffness) of manual transmission present
              many  challenges for the analysis of torsional vibration  characteristics and
              gear rattle behavior. This GOALI/IUCP  investigation focuses on a comprehensive
              understanding of  the torsional vibration and gear rattle characteristics. 
              Through the development of a new and powerful numerical  analysis technique,
              finite elements in the time domain (FET)  an efficient modeling and simulation
              capability is attained  for performance assessments and parametric studies of
              the  strongly nonlinear system. This modeling capability is  utilized to
              develop computer tools to be used by the design  engineers to discover;
              feasible conventional improvements  and to optimize powertrain configuration.
              Furthermore, the  computer analysis tools are integrated within Chrysler's 
              vehicle powertrain technologies such as the automated clutch  with controlled
              slip. This project provides a unique  opportunity to combine the strong
              expertise in basic  research available in academic settings and the Chrysler's 
              extensive experimentation and product development. With  Chrysler's support of
              research funds and the participation  of a 8-member team, this collaboration
              further strengthens  an established partnership with expanded
              industry-university  interactions through mutual visits, student summer 
              internships, and collaborative experiments, allowing the  university
              researchers to sharpen their research focus while  tackling a serious
              real-world application problem.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
