Title       : Guest/Host Interactions in High-Silica Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9713516

Award Number: 9713516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul F. Lobo lobo@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Prof.  Raul F. Lobo will study the host-guest interactions of organic
              structure-directing agents in as-synthesized high-silica zeolites, in order to
              obtain correlations between organic structure and pore structure. The synthesis
              will evolve systematically from pure silica cathrasils to high-silica
              silica-alumina zeolites, utilizing various derivatized alkylammonium salt
              templates, and will affect cage and pore structures. Additionally, Prof. Lobo
              will investigate how to control the density and location of defect and Al3+ 
              sites during the synthesis. Thermogravimetry will be used to measure internal
              volume. Multinuclear solid-state NMR experiments will be used to characterize
              the interaction, deuterium NMR to investigate the dynamic state of organic
              molecules as a function of temperature and molecule size, and NMR of other
              selected labels of the organic molecule to describe the molecule motion in
              several zeolite structures.  Heteronuclear chemical shift correlation of 29Si
              and 1H will be used to obtain information on the molecular arrangement with
              respect to the location of tetrahedral Al3+  cations and zeolitic framework
              defects. To characterize the defects, also X-ray diffraction experiments will
              be done, for which 25 ? single crystals of pure ZSM-11 will be synthesized. The
              NMR experiments and in particular the spin-echo double resonance (SEDOR,
              23Na{1H}) and rotational echo double resonance (REDOR, 29Si{23Na}) will be done
              to determine the spatial proximity of organic and inorganic components of the
              as-synthesized zeolite. The proposed research will help to improve the design
              and synthesis of zeolitic materials. This information will also be reflected in
              more accurate molecular mechanics and quantum mechanical models used for
              template selection and zeolite synthesis, and will improve the molecular
              simulation models of transport and diffusion in zeolites. Extrinsically, it
              will provide a stronger fundamental basis for the design of catalysts and
              molecular sieve separation materials with tailor ed pore structure and active
              site distribution. These chemically active materials support a major fraction
              of the chemical industry, including petrochemical, fuels, fine chemical,
              agrochemical, and others.
