Title       : FSML: Enhancement of Research With Experimental Aquatic Ecosystemics at the
               Kansas Ecological Reserves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9713956

Award Number: 9713956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10705              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. John O'Brien wjob@falcon.cc.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Val H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              SHARON L. DEWEY  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Annett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Huggins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dean Kettle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. deNoyelles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard C. Ferrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As environmental disturbance, fragmentation, and  pollution become more
              widespread, it is imperative that  new collaborative mutidisciplinary research
              provide  insights into complex ecological phenomena on a larger  scale than has
              been possible in the past.  The facility  that is the subject of this project
              is a regional center  for research on the responses of lake systems to 
              disturbance at varying scales.  The investigators  associated with this
              facility have many years of  experience using small experimental surrogate 
              ecosystems(e.g.. experimental ponds) to identify the  responses to disturbance
              of larger, "real world",  systems.  The objective of this project is to enhance
              the  aquatic research facility at the University of Kansas  field station, the
              Kansas Ecological Reserves (KER), in  order to continue the extension of this
              work to larger  scales.    The aquatic facilities at the KER are extensive with
               nearly 200 experimental ponds over 55 outdoor  fiberglass tanks and different
              types of enclosures for  smaller scale experiments within these systems. 
              Research over the 20 year history of this aquatic  program, reported in nearly
              100 publications, has often  focused on the use of these relatively small
              surrogate  ecosystems for aquatic research.  This work has  firmly established
              that experimental perturbations  applied to these surrogate adequately simulate
              a  variety of environmental changes.  New modeling  techniques are being
              developed to extrapolate these  results to the "real world at larger spatial
              and temporal  scales.    To extend this empirical research to larger lentic 
              ecosystems )lakes and reservoirs).  1991 a 4.5 ha, 13 m  deep reservoir was
              constructed in a protected 50 ha  watershed.  This reservoir was constructed as
              a model  ecosystem with many of the important characteristics of  larger lentic
              systems.  Now investigators working at KER  can conduct empirical
              investigations in a large, secure  and carefully managed lake/ reservoir
              surrogate.  The  proximity of this lar ger scale surrogate ecosystem to one  of
              the largest experimental pond facilities in the nation  makes the facility
              attractive to researchers from  institutions throughout the region.  No
              limnological  manpipulations are conducted in the reservoir at the  whole-lake
              scale so that natural reference conditions can  be continually provided. 
              However, experimental  perturbations simulating environmental change at this 
              reservoir scale can be studied in situ enclosures and in  adjacent smaller
              experimental ponds and tanks.
