Title       : Construction of Tidal Marsh Mesocosms at the Baruch Field Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9713886

Award Number: 9713886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Allen dallen@belle.baruch.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bushek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Madilyn M. Fletcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop and construct sets of large  outdoor mesocosms which
              will be used by resident and  visiting investigators to conduct manipulative
              experimental  research. The facility represents the next phase in the 
              development of field laboratory infrastructure designed to  expand the
              usefulness of the seawater, stimulate new  research directions and
              collaborations, and provide student  training and public opportunities at the
              Baruch Marine Field  Laboratory.  New administrative, faculty, and staff 
              appointments coupled with record levels of research and  educational use of the
              field station have resulted in plans  for the future growth and enhanced
              productivity of the  Baruch Institute. The mesocosm facility represents  a
              major new initiative designed to promote the testing of  hypotheses regarding
              salt marsh structure and function.  Comprehensive long-term datasets based on
              up to 25 years of  regular measurements in the North Inlet Estuary have 
              provided insights into the role of abiotic and biotic  factors in long-term
              change, but opportunities for  researchers to conduct large scale manipulative
              experiments  in the tidally dominated natural system are limited.  A  group of
              engineers and scientists will design a set of eight  replicate 3.5m by 13m
              units which can be planted, flooded,  and drained in such a way as to simulate
              conditions in the  adjacent tidal marsh.  Associated infrastructure and 
              controls will allow for future manipulations using  hydroperiod, salinity,
              and/or temperature as test factors. A  set of smaller mesosms will be
              established to provide  research opportunities for addressing questions which 
              require different spatial scales or time frames.  Together,  the array of units
              for ecological studies will advance the  research and educational goals of the
              facility, perhaps more  than any other improvement that can be made at this
              point.
