Title       : Evolution of Grain Structure in Thin Film Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9713439

Award Number: 9713439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katayun Barmak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Rickman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9713439  Barmak    It is the objective of this research to understand the 
              kinetics of thin film reactions and the morphology of  associated product
              microstructures.  The focus is on two  prototypical systems, Ti/Al and Nb/Al. 
              The former system is  of importance in semiconductor metallization schemes
              while  the latter is a simpler model system with qualitatively  similar
              reaction kinetics.  Studies include the reactions of  Ti and Nb with pure A1
              and the effects of Cu in A1 on phase  reactions in these systems given the
              importance of Cu  alloying in mitigating electromigration failure in 
              integrated circuits.  Reaction kinetics are investigated by  differential
              scanning calorimetry (DSC) and the  microstructure of reactant and product
              phases by  transmission electron microscopy (TEM).  TEM studies are  used to
              correlate the location of product phase nucleation  sites with the
              microstructural features of the reactant  layers, such as triple junctions. 
              Partially reacted samples  are examined in cross section by high resolution
              analytical  electron microscopy (AEM) to measure the composition  profiles in
              the reactants and products at various times and  to clarify the effect of
              reactant and product grain  boundaries on the progress of the reaction. 
              Complementary  analytical calculations and simulations are used to  interpret
              the experimental results.  These include a kinetic  model of phase formation
              based on coupled rate equations and  a lattice model of phase growth and
              impingement which  permits the determination of space-time correlations in 
              evolving microstructures.  %%%  This research on the kinetics of microstructure
              formation in  thin films is important to the application of metallic films  in
              the magnetics and electronics industries.  ***
