Title       : Investigation of the Adhesion of Enteromorpha clathrata and the Consequent
               Impact on Cavitation, Dynamic Response, and Performance Characteristics of
               Lifting Surfaces of Marine ...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a9713110

Award Number: 9713110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sathya N. Gangadharan sathya@db.erau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Embry Riddle Aero Univ
	      600 S. Clyde Morris Blvd.
	      Daytona Beach, FL  3213900    386/226-6319

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9713110  Gangadharan  The two previous research grants awarded by the National 
              Science Foundation led to: (i) understanding of the adhesion  characteristics
              of Enteropmorpha clathrata and their  consequent effects on the hydrodynamic
              drag of flat plates;  (ii) the design, construction and operation of a cost- 
              effective water tunnel at Harbor Branch Oceanographic  Institution, and (iii)
              experimental and theoretical  investigation of the flow characteristics (lift,
              drag and  pitching moment) over fouled and unfouled bydrofoils.  The  current
              research is an extension of some of this work with  the intention of first,
              continuing the investigation of the  adhesion of Enteropmorpha clathrata on
              hydrofoils,  subsequent impact on flow field cavitation, and hydrodynamic 
              response characteristics on hydrofoils and marine  propellers; secondly to
              develop a detailed theoretical model  of Enteromprpha clathrata fouling on
              hydrofoil surfaces,  perform extensive experimental testing on hydrofoils in
              the  water tunnel using the Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV)  system, develop a
              model from experimental results using  response surface methodology and
              correlate the results  obtained from theory and experiments and thirdly to 
              theoretically investigate the impact of fouling of the hull  on propeller
              vibrations and noise.    This 3-year research project will be separated into
              three  phases:  Phase I (Year 1): Involves the study of the flow 
              characteristics around the fouled hydrofoil surface using  the Laser Doppler
              Velocimeter (LDV) available at the water  tunnel facility at Harbor Branch
              Oceanographic Institution.  Phase II (Year 2): Involves the investigation of
              the impact  of fouling on cavitation.  The hydrofoil model will be  treated as
              a single blade of a propeller and allowed to  cavitate with fouling.  The LDV
              system will be used to  characterize the flow patters at Harbor Branch
              Oceanographic  Institution.  Phase III (Year 3): Efforts will be primarily 
              concentrated in arriving at a relationship between  the  biological material
              properties and cavitation by inducing  biological growth or to remove/minimize
              the biological  growth on marine surfaces by inducing cavitation.  ***
