Title       : Synthesis of Optimal Plantwide Control Systems for Integrated Chemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9713599

Award Number: 9713599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi (Alex) Q. Zheng zzheng@spock.ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Zheng - 9713599    Plantwide control refers to control of an entire
              (continuous chemical) plant consisting of many interconnected unit operations. 
              Before the 1950's, it was commonly assumed that the objectives of plantwide
              control were the same as those of servomechanisms (i.e. good control means fast
              control).  This strategy of forcing variables to their steady-state values as
              fast as possible may fail in plantwide control because of the interaction among
              various loops.  An alternative strategy, "setpoint environment control" was
              developed, whose underlying philosophy was that if flows, temperatures,
              pressures, etc., in the plant were held constant, the product quality would
              also be constant.  These requirements can be inconsistent, for example, it is
              impossible to hold reflux flow constant and at the same time manipulate it to
              compensate for a disturbance.     The concept of "dynamic process control,"
              resolves these inconsistencies by distinguishing between material balance
              controllers and product quality controllers.  Material balance controllers act
              as low-pass filters (i.e. regulation) and product quality controllers act as
              high-pass filters (i.e. servo systems).  Surge capacities can be chosen such
              that the break frequency of the material balance control system is an order of
              magnitude lower than that of the quality control system to avoid significant
              interaction between the two control systems.  Thus, poor quality control can be
              overcome by installing sufficiently large surge capacities in the process.  For
              traditional processes with large surge capacities and over-designed unit
              operations, this approach is adequate for designing an effective plantwide
              control system.    Global economic competition has forced the process
              industries to improve their capital productivity and raw material utilization. 
              The overall goal of this research is to develop a systematic method for
              synthesizing optimal plantwide control systems for integrated continuous
              chemical processes.  A controllabil ity index, which quantifies the cost
              associated with dynamic controllability, is defined.  The Optimal Load
              Distribution Principle (and the Minimal Dynamic Cost Principle), which allow
              optimal handling of disturbance propagation and uncertainty propagation
              throughout the entire process, are introduced.  These two concepts permit a
              systematic design of a plantwide control system which minimizes the total cost.
               The theory can also be used to quantitatively compare alternate flowsheets
              based on both steady-state economics and dynamic controllability.  Case studies
              will include several industrial processes, e.g. a hydrodealkylation of toluene
              to produce benzene, styrene, and cumene, and butane alkylation.  The results
              will be incorporated into the undergraduate process control course so that
              students can design a plantwide control system for the process that is designed
              in the process design course.
