Title       : Collective Absorption Processes of Neutrinos in Supernovae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9713234

Award Number: 9713234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234896             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Dawson dawson@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1062,1206,1215,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST- 9713234  ABSTRACT - J. M. Dawson    COLLECTIVE ABSORPTION PROCESSES OF
              NEUTRINOS IN SUPERNOVAE    A program to investigate the influence of collective
              interactions of  the intense neutrino flux from the core of a supernova with
              the plasma  of it's surrounding stellar envelope will be carried out. The
              mechanism  is similar to the Forward Raman Instability that occurs when intense
               light interacts with plasma by generating electron plasma waves.  In  the
              neutrino case, the instability is much weaker due to the weakness  of the
              neutrino electron interaction.  Recent work at UCLA has shown  that because of
              the extreme conditions that exist in a supernova, the  forward Raman
              instability takes place.  In the photon plasma case this  instability increases
              the interaction with the plasma by many orders of  magnitude.  By analogy,
              large enhancements of the neutrino plasma  coupling can be expected.  The
              neutrinos carry away most of the energy  of the supernova (100 times the light
              output).  Models of supernova  explosions have run into problems explaining how
              the supernova explodes  if so much energy is carried off by the neutrinos and
              additional energy  must be expended in dissociating iron and other heavy
              nuclei.  Explosions can be made to occur if a few percent of the neutrino
              energy  can be deposited in the stellar envelope.  The forward Raman 
              instability appear to be strong enough to do this and thus to influence  the
              dynamics of the supernova.  Techniques for computing the transport  of the
              neutrinos through the stellar plasma and the resulting energy  transfer will be
              developed.  This will involve two quasi-linear  equations, one for neutrinos
              and one for electrons, plus an equation  for the evolution of plasma waves. 
              The quasi-linear equation for the  neutrinos describe the evolution of the
              neutrino spectrum due to their  interaction with the plasma waves.  The plasma
              wave equation computes  the spectrum of plasma waves produced by the neutrinos
              and includes  damping by electrons and the r esultant flow of energy from
              neutrinos to  electrons.  The quasi linear equation for the electrons describes
              the  evolution of the electron distribution function; this is primarily a 
              heating.  When the electrons become hot enough (~ 500Kev) the Forward  Raman
              Instability becomes the Forward Stimulated Compton Instability  because the
              waves become heavily Landau damped.  It is expected that  the Forward
              Stimulated Compton Instability will be much weaker and to  effectively turn
              off.  Computer software codes to solve these coupled  equations will be written
              and then used to explore the neutrino energy  deposited in the electrons and
              the electron temperatures reached as a  function of position in the star.  The
              effects of the interaction on  the neutrino energy distribution will be
              calculated to explore possible  signatures of the process that might be
              detectable.
