Title       : The Importance of Osmosis in the Volumetric Behavior of Undisturbed and
               Expansive Earth Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9713442

Award Number: 9713442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold W. Olsen holsen@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ning Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Vaughan Griffiths  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The geotechnical significance of osmotic mechanisms as influencing hazards such
              as expansive ground and landslides has yet to be clarified.  The major obstacle
              has been the lack of appropriate quantitative methods for either predicting or
              measuring the magnitudes of these mechanisms in situ.  This research will be an
              essential step towards establishing a quantitative basis for comprehensive
              evaluation of the significance of osmotic mechanisms for geotechnical problems
              in natural geologic systems such as:  1) damaging differential displacements in
              expansive ground, 2) the role of weathering mechanisms, such as oxidation of
              pyrite, in destabilizing ground and triggering landslides 3) geochemical causes
              of groundwater movement and abnormal pore-fluid pressures in low-permeability
              environments, and 4) the remediation of contaminated ground.   The current
              understanding of osmotic mechanisms is based primarily on controversial field
              studies concerning anomalous groundwater pressures and compositions in
              sedimentary geologic basins, and also on laboratory and theoretical studies of
              monominerallic clays with uni-electrolyte pore fluids. Laboratory studies of
              osmotic mechanisms on natural earth materials and unambiguous field studies of
              these mechanisms ion geotechnical systems are in their infancy.  The goals of
              this research are:  1) to develop an integrated experimental and theoretical
              approach for quantifying osmotic mechanisms on undisturbed samples of natural
              earth materials, and 2) to use this approach to quantify the importance of
              osmotic mechanisms that influence the expansive behavior of the Pierre Shale,
              namely osmotically-driven pore fluid flux and osmotically-induced volumetric
              repulsion among clay particles.  The objectives for accomplishing these goals
              include:  1) mobilizing a triaxial system for measuring the coupled fluxes of
              pore fluid constituents, 2) selecting, sampling, and characterizing a test site
              in steeply dipping strata of Pierre shale, using both conventional methods and
              the new experimental system, 3) expanding existing coupled-flow theory to
              include swelling pressures and volume changes in expansive clay shales from
              osmotic mechanisms, and 4) analyzing the new experimental data with the new
              theoretical framework to quantify the geologic, physical,  and chemical
              controls on the efficiencies of osmotically-driven pore fluid flux and
              osmotically-induced volumetric repulsion among clay particles.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
