Title       : FSML: Research and Facilities Planning for Sedgwick Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9713877

Award Number: 9713877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7419               (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Boucher v_bouche@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Omer J. Reichman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The University of California's Natural Reserve System  (NRS) provides a
              diversity of sites throughout  the state for such research.  Sedgwick Reserve
              (SR),  administered by the University of California, Santa  Barbara (UCSB)
              Natural Reserve System since 1993 and  located in the Santa Ynez Valley of
              central coastal  California, is the most recent addition to the NRS, SR  serves
              as a site for scientists and  educators from the  University of California and
              other university campuses  throughout the state and country to study ecology, 
              evolutionary biology, geography, soil science, geology,  agricultural science,
              anthropology and natural history.  Because of its recent history as a working
              cattle ranch  and farm, SR offers unique opportunities for studying 
              interactions between natural and agricultural and  rangeland ecosystems.  With
              its recent inclusion in the  NRS and the hiring of full-time, on-site
              directors,  Sedgwick Reserve is poised to develop its scientific,  education
              and public service missions.    SR is located 35 miles north of the city of
              Santa Barbara  and the UCSB campus in the Santa Ynez Valley. The 2050 ha 
              reserve encompassess an extremely wide variety of plant  communities including
              coastal sage scrub, blue oak  woodland, valley oak savanna, coast live oak
              forest,  serpentine chaparral, serpentine grassland, foothill pine  woodland,
              willow riparian forest, vernal pools, seeps and  springs.    A comprehensive
              planning effort by UCSB faculty and staff  is underway to develop SR's
              scientific, education,  stewardship and public service missions.  When fully 
              developed, SR  will fulfill the needs of interdisciplinary  research and
              instruction in the field sciences, of  preservation of critical and sensitive
              habitats, and of  environmental education and outreach for the general  public.
                 To further this multiple mission of research, education,  stewardship and
              community service, this project will  support a workshop to develop a
              long-range research plan  for SR.  The product of th e project will be a
              long-range  scientific research plan for the next 10 years
