Title       : A Unified Framework for Robust Parameter Varying Control with Applications to
               Engine Control Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9713724

Award Number: 9713724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230946             (Estimated)
Investigator: K M. Grigoriadis karolos@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with the analysis, design,and  implementation of
              robust controllers for nonlinear systems such  as operating under variable
              conditions such as internal  combustion IC engines. The operation of modern IC
              engines for  automotive use must satisfy a diverse range on conflicting 
              constraints imposed by economical, environmental , societal and  marketing
              factors, such as; regulating exhaust emissions to  near zero levels to meet
              government standards, providing  increased fuel economy consistent with
              consumer acceptance,  maintaining satisfactory vehicle performance over a wide
              range  of operating conditions, and performing safely and reliably  over the
              life of the vehicle. At the present time there exists  no unified control
              methodology to provide robust controllers  for nonlinear systems with
              time-delays, saturation constraints  and large operating parameter variations.
              In addition, since  modern controllers are to be implemented in a digital 
              microprocessor, issues related to the implementability of these  controllers
              are essential, but are often ignored. Hardware  limitations and real-time
              computational constraints require the  implementation of low-order digital
              controllers. This research  project addresses the important and challenging
              short comings  and limitations of modern control theory. Novel tools based on 
              recently developed robust gain-scheduled control, fixed-order  control
              sampled-data systems, alternating projection algorithms  and linear matrix
              inequality methods are developed. The model  of a diesel engine, provided by
              Cummins Engine Company, is used  as a design paradigm to demonstrate the
              applicability of the  developed techniques. Cummins has agreed to collaborate
              closely  with the investigators by providing industrial expertise,  simulation
              models, test data, and access to their experimental  test facilities. The
              research results provide valuable insight  and optimized design methodologies
              to control a large class of  practical control engineering problems,such as
              engines, robots  and manufacturing processes in a unified and computationally 
              efficient manner.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
