Title       : US-India Cooperative Reserach: Laser and Plasma Deposition and Study of Thin
               Films of Diamond and Diamond Like Carbon, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9713602

Award Number: 9713602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16935              (Estimated)
Investigator: S C. Agarwal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Satyendra Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Kanpur
	      
	      Kanpur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9713602  Agarwal  Description:  This award is for the US-India Cooperative
              Research: Laser  and Plasma Deposition and Adhesion of Diamond and Diamond Like
               Films.  The collaboration in materials science is under the direction of 
              Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh and  S.C.
              Agrawal, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur.  The  investigators will
              examine the structural and electronic characteristics of  diamond and diamond
              like films using laser and plasma processing  techniques. Complimentary
              research will be conducted by researchers at  the IIT, Kanpur.  Additional
              research will be done to improve the  adhesion of the films by employing
              electron donating elements to stabilize  SP3 bonding.    Scope:  Diamond and
              diamond like films constitute a very useful class of  advanced materials with
              applications ranging from corrosion and erosion  resistant protective coatings
              to advanced microelectronics and display  devices.  This research contributes
              to fundamental knowledge about the  basic physics of these films.  The NCSU
              group headed by Narayan is a  world-leader in this area; the IIT group has
              complimentary expertise in   the electronic properties of thin films.  The
              scientific results will be  published in the public domain. This research will
              provide training for  graduate students in advanced materials, nonequilibrium
              phenomena, and  advanced materials characterization.  This new collaboration
              supports INT  objectives.         ***
