Title       : Sojourn Time Control for Assembly Type Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9713974

Award Number: 9713974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hayriye Ayhan hayhan@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713974  Ayhan   The focus of this research is on the real time control of job
              sojourn time in assembly-type queueing networks.  The purpose of this control
              is to ensure that complete jobs are produced in a timely and predictable
              manner.  The real time control strategy will be executed based on the
              observation of the state of the queueing network.  These observations will give
              complete information about the location and the time in location of all jobs
              currently in the network.  The research will involve the following tasks.
              Assembly type queueing networks will be represented as Single Input Free Choice
              Nets which can be characterized by a set of stochastic difference equations. 
              These difference equation will capture the dynamics of assembly type queueing 
              networks and will serve as the mathematical model underlying real time control.
               The control procedure will be formulated as an optimization problem and
              efficient solution procedures will be developed.  Finally, the performance of
              this new control strategy will be tested against the existing WIP (Work in
              Process) limiting control strategies.   If successful, this research will lead
              to improvements in the performance of assembly operations.  The research real
              time control strategy will decrease the resource contention which will result
              in an increase in throughput and decrease in job sojourn time.  A major
              contribution anticipated from this research is the development of analytical
              models of complicated assembly operations.  Since these models will be the main
              tool in the formulation of real time control paradigm, they will lead to the
              development of the fundamental science base required to establish real time
              control in assembly-type queueing networks.
