Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Organization and Changing Labor Patterns in
               Anasazi Prehistory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9713107

Award Number: 9713107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9951               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Plog sep6n@Virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Stephen Plog, MS Tracy Perkins will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze changes in food preparation
              techniques among Anasazi peoples in the US Southwest during the period between
              ca. 800-1000 AD. While the use of domestic crops such a maize significantly
              preceeds 800 AD in this region, it was with the emergence of the Anasazi
              peoples that the foodstuff became the central dietary staple. A number of
              important social changes appear to be concomitant and villages changed from
              agglomerations of individual below ground pit structures to larger mulit-room
              above ground pueblos, examples of which can be found in the region today.
              Population size also increased and groups adopted a more settled way of life.
              Men's religious societies characterized by kivas also appear at this time. MS
              Perkins wishes to understand how the organization of labor and thus basic
              social organization was altered as part of this overall process and she will
              focus on one specific activity - maize grinding. This was a crucial subsistence
              activity since grinding maize before cooking significantly enhances its
              nutritional properties and abundant grinding implements attest to the
              importance of this task. Archaeological data indicates that at many Anasazi
              sites special grinding rooms were present and are marked not only by a
              concentration of grindstone but specialized bins built into walls and floors.
              MS Perkins will visit research centers in the Southwest and record and
              synthesize information  collected in the course of past archaeological
              excavations. She will include this in a single consistent data base and with
              this information determine how production changed over time and how it varied
              by environmental and geographic region. Preliminary analysis indicates that the
              pattern is not straightforward. The results will be integrated with other
              classes of data to provide insight into the broader process of social change. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will synthesize a widely
              recorded but little analyzed class of data and the results are likely to be
              used by many archaeologists. The work will shed new light on how complex
              societies arise and contribute to training a promising young archaeologist.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
