Title       : Multiple Sensor Integration for Rapid Surface Digitization and Agile Metrology
               of High Precision Engineered Mechanical Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9713768

Award Number: 9713768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Hsiang Menq   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of an integrated framework
              that supports information integration of multiple sensors for rapid surface
              digitization and agile metrology of high precision engineered mechanical
              components.  The objective is to develop an information integration technology
              that facilitates rapid acquisition of high precision coordinate data, and to
              demonstrate the developed technology using an integrated system.  This
              integrated system consists of a high precision coordinate measuring machine, a
              motorized probe, a high speed laser scanner, and a 3D vision system.  An
              intelligent information aggregation module for sensor fusion and feature
              recognition will be developed.  In this module, high level geometric
              abstractions will be extracted from discrete coordinates.  When CAD models are
              unavailable, the resulting geometric abstractions form a preliminary
              description of the surface geometry and feature topology of an unknown object.
              The obtained information is subsequently used to guide the laser scanner and/or
              the contact probe for high speed coordinate data acquisition and to
              strategically control the coordinate measuring machine for high precision/rapid
              sampling of critical surface areas.  By integrating the developed technology
              with the state of the art equipment, a highly automated, high speed, high
              precision, 3D coordinate acquisition system will be developed.       Rapid
              acquisition of high precision coordinate data from parts having complex
              geometry has many applications.  Typical examples include part localization and
              automatic calibration in inspection and agile machining, coordinate metrology
              in dimensional control, and reverse engineering in rapid product design and
              realization.  The primary goal of this work is to develop the required
              knowledge and technology that support multi-sensor integration and information
              automation in the context of rapid surface digitization and agile metrology. 
              If successful, the results of this research will lead to significant
              improvements in sensor integration and precision metrology.  It will have
              potential applications in a whole spectrum of manufacturing problems with a
              major impact on metrology, inspection, and reverse engineering.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
