Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Computer-Aided Design and Manufacture of Fiber
               Reinforced Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9713636

Award Number: 9713636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasser A. Gowayed ygowayed@eng.auburn.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                9713636  Gowayed    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative 
              project by Dr. Yasser A. Gowayed, Department of  Textile  Engineering at Auburn
              University in Alabama, and Dr. Faissal  Abdel-Hady, Department of Mechanical
              Engineering, Ain Shams  University, in Cairo, Egypt.  The objective of this
              joint  research is to study the feasibility of manufacturing fiber  reinforced
              composites using computer-aided design and  computer-aided manufacturing
              methods.  Specifically the goal  of the two sides is to design and manufacture
              a compressed  natural gas pressure vessel from composite materials to be  used
              in dual fuel passenger cars.  The two sides plan to:  connect novel compost
              design techniques, developed by Dr.  Gowayed, based on Non-linear Programming
              (NLP), to machine  control operators, developed by Dr. Abdel-Hady; construct a 
              computer-aided Manufacturing system for filament winding at  Ain Shams
              University; and manufacture a prototype for a  compressed natural gas pressure
              vessel for dual fuel  passenger cars.    Scope:  This research project will
              bring together the  expertise of two scientists from two countries towards 
              accomplishing an objective with potential benefits to the  United States and to
              Egypt, as well as to the global  environmental picture.  The purpose is to
              develop a light  weight vessel that can be used to store liquefied natural  gas
              for use as a fuel in dual fuel passenger cars, thus  reducing the adverse
              emissions that result from burning  petroleum products, especially in congested
              cities around  the world.  The project can lead to establishing a new  research
              capability in Egypt for the manufacture of fiber  composites using advanced
              computer-aided techniques.  An  important feature of this project is the
              participation of  two private-sector industrial concerns in Egypt in the 
              research and testing.  This proposal meets the INT objective  of increasing
              US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit  both sides.  This project is
              being supported under the U S-  Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
              to  scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out  these cooperative
              activities.  ***
