Title       : Trade-Off Based Robust Modeling and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9713882

Award Number: 9713882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sundar Krishnamurty skrishna@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian R. Grosse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding for the development of a trade-off based robust
              modeling and design methodology for identification of statistically optimal
              product specifications.  This research will exploit concepts from utility
              theory into a robust design paradigm to quantitatively incorporate qualitative
              knowledge and preferences of different attributes without loss of generality
              and accuracy.  Statistical exploration based design of experiment techniques
              will be developed to explore and generate system behavioral information, and to
              identify optimal product specifications from this quantitative representation
              of attribute data.  By incorporating explicit representation of higher level
              modeling and design knowledge in the design process, an interactive design
              system will be developed to enable designers make intelligent decisions during
              the design process.  Industry-driven design problems will be used as case
              studies to test and evaluate the proposed methodology.      If successful, this
              research will result in a unified methodology that offers a rigorous treatment
              of design process from an overall design perspective under conditions of
              uncertainty in data.  The primary goal of this research involves the
              determination of a trade-off based decision model formulation for direct and
              simultaneous treatment of multiple objectives and constraints in the design
              process, and its integration with a statistical exploration based robust
              optimal design generation strategy.  This research could lead to a better
              understanding of the engineering modeling process, and advance the state of
              knowledge by which the inherent complexities arising from representing physical
              design problems using idealized computer-based abstractions can be addressed. 
              Results of this research will also contribute towards the identification of a
              consistent body of synergistic, integrated engineering design methods based on
              design of experiments, utility theory, computer-based simulation models, finite
              element methods, and design optimization principles.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
