Title       : Time-resolved Spectroscopy of Anharmonic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a9713388

Award Number: 9713388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $486400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Nelson kanelson@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Keith Nelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by   the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his continuing   investigations of
              large amplitude lattice vibrations using time- and   space-resolved femtosecond
              optical pulse-shaping techniques.  Initially,   he will focus on crystals that
              undergo structural phase transitions, in   particular the switching among
              different ferroelectric phases.  In   addition, he will look at semiconducting
              materials whose bandgaps may be   influenced and perhaps closed by optically
              induced large-amplitude   coherent lattice vibrations.  Nelson also plans to
              examine the behavior   of molecular crystals in which the optical pulses induce
              motion along   reaction coordinates to affect crystalline chemical reactions. 
              He will   investigate both bulk and thin film perovskites to study structural
              phase   transitions and phonon-polariton cavities; diacetylene, perylene and  
              pyrene to study molecular crystals; and Ti2O3 and GeTe as semiconductors.   
              Prof. Nelson has demonstrated that significant nuclear displacements can   be
              induced in molecular crystals using high energy pulses.  In addition,   if the
              wavelength is long enough, damage to the crystal is minimized.  In   these
              studies Nelson will investigate alternative strategies for   achieving large
              nuclear displacements and what types of effects the   molecular properties have
              on the optimum strategy.    Prof. Nelson will apply techniques developed in his
              laboratory that   exploit femtosecond optical pulses to a wide variety of
              materials such as   ferroelectric crystals and small gap semiconductors, in
              order to   determine if it is possible to effect a chemical change.  In
              addition to   the direct advances this work will likely offer to the fields of
              lattice   spectroscopy and optical control of molecular processes, it can be  
              anticipated that the planned research will be of technological interest   and
              utility to designers of prototype devices for optical switching and  
              information transmittal.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
