Title       : Control of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems with Periodically Varying Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9713971

Award Number: 9713971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash C. Sinha ssinha@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan B. Marghitu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George T. Flowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with the dynamics and control of  complex mechanical
              systems, and addresses the order  reduction problem associated with a large set
              of ordinary  differential equations having periodic coefficients. A new 
              approach in the design of controllers for large-scale  general dynamic systems
              with periodically varying  coefficients is suggested. The idea is based on the
              fact  that all quasi-linear periodic systems can be replaced by  similar
              systems whose linear parts are time invariant via  the well-known
              Liapunov-Floquet (LF) transformations. A  general technique for computation of
              the LF matrices for  large-scale systems is presented. Hence, the control
              problem  associated with linear systems with periodically varying  coefficients
              is transformed to a time-invariant form. The  time invariant equations are then
              used to develop control  strategies for the time variant systems. Next, the
              problem  of controller design for nonlinear systems with periodically  varying
              parameters is addressed. It is proposed that the  `time-dependent normal form`
              theory be used to simplify the  quasi-linear systems resulting from the L-F
              transformations.  For the non-critical cases (where the real parts of the 
              eigenvalues of the linear part of the system are nonzero),  the designs can be
              achieved via normal form transformations.  In the event when linear part
              contains a critical  uncontrollable mode, the control system design is pursued 
              through an application of the `center manifold' theory and  suitable Liapunov
              control functions. The practical  significance of this study is demonstrated
              through  applications to some typical problems including the  controller
              designs for an asymmetric magnetic rotor-bearing  system, columns and plates
              subjected to periodic loads.  Large models using finite elements are
              constructed for these  problems and the control algorithm are implemented on
              the  reduced order systems.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
