Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: An 18 O Paleotemperature Curve for the North Atlantic
               for the Last 1000 Years, From Annual Growth Bands of the Bivalve Arctica
               islandica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9713547

Award Number: 9713547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Weidman cweidman@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9713547  Weidman    This study will produce an ocean temperature record for the
              northern North Atlantic covering the last 1000 years, based on stable oxygen
              isotope analysis of annual growth bands of the long-lived bivalve Arctica
              islandica.  Bands from the period ca. 500-1000 yr B.P. will be dated by
              radiocarbon analysis, whereas those from 100-500 yr B.P. will be dated by
              aspartic acid racemization which will provide significantly better precision
              than radiocarbon for this period.  An annual 18O record for the last 100 yr has
              already been constructed from live-collected Arctica (Weidman and Jones, in
              prep.).  The study will be carried out using subfossil shells dredged from
              surface sediments in the Nantucket Shoals region.  This outer continental shelf
              area is shallow enough to provide a temperature record of upper ocean waters
              but far enough off shore to be away from the influence of continental
              freshwater inputs.  The site is further distinguished by being the location of
              a particularly long instrumental record of temperatures obtained from the
              former Nantucket Lightship and is currently a NOAA long-term weather monitoring
              site.  A time series of ca. 25 shells, spanning the relevant age range and each
              containing a record of >50 years growth, will be selected for analysis.  The
              second primary goal of this study is to evaluate cross-matching of band width
              variations among individuals to construct an annual time series, analogous to
              tree ring series.  This has the potential to produce a continuous annual record
              of environmental changes in the North Atlantic over recent centuries.    Long
              (>100 yr), high-resolution records of marine environments are rare, in contrast
              to terrestrial environments, and are largely absent for higher-latitude ocean
              regions.  This paucity of suitable ocean temperature records restricts our
              understanding of linkages between atmospheric and oceanic climate variations. 
              Such information is critical to understanding the nature and causes of recent
              climate changes.  These  include the long-term (century scale) variations of
              the Medieval Warm Period, the Little Ice Age, and the warming trend of the 20th
              century, which have been documented from terrestrial records, as well as
              shorter-term (decadal scale) fluctuations such as the North Atlantic
              Oscillation.  The methods that are brought together in this study for the first
              time to extract such records from mollusk shells can also be used to obtain
              paleoclimatic records from other ocean regions.  The 1000-year time series of
              shell growth bands that will be assembled will serve as an archive of the
              marine geochemical record and will be made available to other workers for other
              types of analyses.    The proposed study constitutes a collaborative research
              project between G. Goodfriend at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and C.
              Weidman at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
