Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Synthesis, Characterization and Application of
               Reactive Sizes to Cotton Warps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9713609

Award Number: 9713609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdelfattah M. Seyam a seyam@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. 
              Abdelfattah Seyam, College of Textiles, at North Carolina State University,
              Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Nabil Abou-Zeid, of the Textile Research Division, the
              National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt.  The goal of this joint research is
              to seek improvement in the sizing materials used in manufacturing of textiles. 
              One objective is to reduce or eliminate the need for removing the sizing. 
              Current sizes are designed to be washed off after treatments, thus releasing
              considerable amounts of chemical waste in the water used for washing.  A second
              objective is to demonstrate that it is possible to improve the quality of the
              final product with the permanent sizing.  To accomplish this the researchers
              plan to seek chemical bonding between the sizing with the cellulose molecules
              of the cotton fabric.  For this purpose, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) will be used. 
              The work will involve converting PVA with different molecular sizes to reactive
              products through introduction of: N-methylol groups; chlorine; epoxy groups;
              and pendent double bonds.  These reactions will be carried out under various
              conditions to control the reaction and hence the reactivity of the products and
              their other properties.  Selected reactive PVA products would then be applied
              to cotton warps, and the resultant yarn will be tested for the desirable
              properties of the woven fabrics.   Scope:  This research project involves
              scientists with significant experience from two well known research centers in
              the area of textile chemistry and manufacturing.  The objectives of the
              research is to develop products that can be used as permanent sizes which can
              then impart to the yarns certain properties such as texture, wear, and weight. 
              The NRC in Cairo has already done a significant amount of exploratory work in
              the area of applying reactive compounds to typical starch sizing materials. 
              The NCSU researcher is an expert in the area of resin-treated cotton yarns. 
              The collaboration by these two scientists will benefit from their complementary
              expertise as well as from the wide range of chemical and manufacturing
              facilities at the two institutions.  The project objectives are of benefit to
              Egypt and to the US, since they both have strong interest in improving the
              environmental impact of the textile industry as well as the quality of the
              products.  This proposal meets INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign
              collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  This project is being supported
              under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
              engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
