Title       : Design Analysis for Sequential Ex-Situ Soil Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9713570

Award Number: 9713570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron A. Jennings aaj2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research will improve the practice of terrestrial remediation by developing
              a tool to help engineers design sequential ex-situ remediation.  Ex-situ
              remediation is one of the fundamental strategies for remediating terrestrial
              contamination, but is infrequently considered because it is believed to be
              inappropriate or prohibitively expensive.  However, there are situations where
              ex-situ remediation can be an excellent choice, including sites with numerous,
              distributed zones of contamination or Brownfield sites dominated by the
              problems of `old` soil contamination.  Ex-situ containment avoids the expense
              of individual campaigns against distributed sources, and allows reuse of large
              portions of sites while small areas accomplish remediation. Ex-situ containment
              also allows use of aggressive processes that would not be advisable in situ. 
              For cases where sequential ex-situ remediation is appropriate, it can improve
              the degree of remediation, reduce the cost of remediation and improve the
              confidence that performance goals have been achieved.  Unfortunately, the
              greatest impediment to implementing ex-situ remediation is the lack of a
              design/analysis tool to help engineers identify opportunities and to help
              configure and control a sequence of ex-situ remediation steps.  This research
              will develop an analysis tool to help engineers examine the merits of a
              sequence of remedial actions applied ex-situ at low cost.  This will be
              designed as a simulation engine interfacing with a large set of remediation
              process subprograms.  The simulation engine will define the structure of the
              problem (geometric containment, soil structure, barrier systems, environmental
              interfaces, state variables, etc.).  The subprograms will implement a wide
              variety of remediation processes (vapor extraction, bio-venting,
              bioremediation, soil washing, soil leaching, etc.) from arbitrary conditions
              and material fluxes provided by the simulation engine.  The package will help
              engineers configure treatment sequence, and design control strategies for
              sequence operation.  This will be a microcomputer analysis package constructed
              to run at acceptable speed on conventional `advanced` microcomputers.  The
              package will be designed with user-friendly interfaces, with graphical data
              displays and with extensive report authoring capabilities.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
