Title       : Pile Group Under Transient Impact Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9713951

Award Number: 9713951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasanta K. Banerjee cgosden@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Mander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Thevanayagam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Award: CMS 97-13951  P. K. Banerjee et al., SUNY Buffalo  "Pile Group
              Under Transient-Impact Loading"      This research focuses on the principal
              force experiences in  transportation and waterfront structures during impact
              which  is transient horizontal loading.  Such loads are often  transmitted to
              the structure's foundation supported on  groups of piles and/or drilled shafts.
               State-of-practice  design for lateral loading of pile and drilled shaft 
              foundations used beam-on-elastic-foundation analysis to  model this dynamic
              loading.  In this analysis, load shedding  from a pile to the soil is
              represented by "p-y" springs in  which the soil response (p-y or force versus
              deflection  curves) is modeled as a series of discrete nonlinear  springs.
              Although p-y curves have been empirically modified  to take into account many
              of the observed phenomena such as  non-linearity, slow cyclic response, shadow
              zones and group  interaction factors, etc., the propagation of dynamic 
              disturbance from pile-to-pile in a group has never been  considered. 
              Therefore, the use of these springs for dynamic  loading has !  to be
              significantly improved and soundly validated by  combined experimental and
              analytical research.    The objective of this research is to develop and
              validate an  improved method of analysis for the design of pile groups 
              (including drilled shafts) subjected to transient lateral  impact loads.  The
              research tasks encompass:  a) a critical  study of the transient impact
              behavior of pile groups  founded in layered media, both analytically and 
              experimentally, b) development of improved methods of  analysis; c) testing and
              validation of the proposed new  methods; and d) implementation of the improved
              methods in a  numerical code.  Experimental research will involve analysis  of
              existing load test data as well as creation of new test  data for testing and
              validation of the improved analytical  method.    The work will have national
              applicability as well as an  immediate impact.  From the re sults of this
              study, revisions  can be recommended to AASHTO for inclusion in rationally 
              applicable design specifications for the design of new  structures subjected to
              vessel impact loading.        ****
