Title       : Experimental study of Interfacial and Sub-Interfacial Quasistatic Crack Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9713557

Award Number: 9713557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sridhar Krishnaswamy s-krishnaswamy@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   Study   of   failure  mechanisms  in   bimaterial   and  multiphase 
              material systems is motivated by the  industrial  importance  of  multiphase 
              components  made  from   metals,  ceramics  and polymer composite materials. 
              An understanding  of   failure   modes  in  these  systems  is   relevant   in 
              applications   ranging  from  advanced  composite   aircraft  structures  to
              packaging of electronic devices.  Failure  in  such  systems can be due to a
              variety of mechanisms:  macro-  and  microcracking  of  a  brittle  matrix, 
              cracking  along  interfaces  between dissimilar materials, delaminations  and 
              so on depending on the specifics of the material system.       Under  a  prior
              research grant from the NSF,  the  PI's  research  group has developed a
              compact Polariscope/Shearing  Interferometer  (PSI)  that  can  be  used   as  
              either   a  polariscope  or  a  shearing  interferometer.   This  single 
              device  allows  one to obtain stress states  from  optically  anisotropic
              materials (such as Homolite and epoxy)  as  well  as  essentially optically
              isotropic materials (such as  PMMA  and  glass).  The range of material
              mismatch parameters that  can   be  provided  by  combining  optically 
              isotropic  and  anisotropic model materials essentially spans the range that 
              is   typically   obtained   in   technologically   important  bimaterial 
              systems,  consequently results  from  the  model  material   combinations  have
               wide  ranging  applicability.  Direct   optical   data  regarding  crack 
              initiation   from  statically-loaded bimaterial systems have been obtained.    
                In   this   work,  full-field  optical  interferometric  information  will be
              obtained about the stress state  around  quasi-statically propagating
              interfacial and sub-interfacial  cracks.   The  optical interferometers
              previously  developed  for  monitoring crack initiation will be used in this 
              study  in  conjunction with a relatively high-speed video  recorder  (6000  
              frames/see)  to  monitor  quasi-static  propagation.  Simultaneous  with the
              video recording of the optical  data,  load  and load-point displacement data
              will also be recorded  using  a  load  cell  and  a  linearly-varying 
              displacement  transducer mounted on the loading device, and these will  be 
              used   in  numerical  modeling  that  can  be  of   use   in  interpreting the
              experimental data.  A series of experiments  on  bimaterial  and  multilayer
              sandwich specimens  will  be  conducted.  Phenomena of particular interest are:
               *  the  interfacial crack propagation regime where the crack     propagates  
              entirely  on  the  interface   between   two     dissimilar materials;  *  the 
              crack kinking regime where the crack starts from the     interface   but  kinks
               into  the  material  with   lower     toughness;  *  the  sub-interfacial
              crack propagation regime  after  the     crack  kinks  from  the interface and 
              continues  in  the     material with lower toughness;  *  the crack tunneling
              mechanisms in sandwiched layers.  The  data  gathered,  and  the  analysis 
              performed,  should  provide  us  with additional information to  gain  a 
              better  understanding   of   crack  kinking  and   crack   tunneling 
              phenomena,  in addition to substantiating the current  state  of  knowledge of
              issues of interfacial crack initiation  and  crack paralleling.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
