Title       : High-Volume Low-Turbulence Inlet for Aerosol Sampling from Aircraft
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a9713408

Award Number: 9713408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273102             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Wilson jwilson@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. R. Seebaugh  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bernard G. Lafleur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9713408  Seebaugh       In this project, a high-volume low-turbulence aerosol
              inlet for use on the NCAR C-130 aircraft will be designed, constructed, and its
              performance demonstrated. This inlet will enable the sampling of supermicron
              aerosols up to 10 micrometer aerodynamic diameter. A low turbulence inlet is
              required to minimize particle losses to the inlet walls. Boundary layer suction
              in the diffuser section of the inlet will be used as the turbulence mitigation
              technique. The proposed inlet will have a flow rate of 200-400 liters per
              minute to supply a high-volume cascade impactor system. This project will also
              make it possible to design similar inlets for other more general aerosol
              sampling applications since the target flow rate is higher than many other
              requirements.   A reference inlet (without boundary layer suction) will be
              built to provide a baseline for evaluation of the turbulence reduction
              techniques. It will use a conical diffuser of conventional design to produce a
              velocity reduction (ratio of diffuser entrance to exit velocity) of a factor of
              20. The reference inlet will be tested over a range of conditions corresponding
              to the flight envelope of the C-130 aircraft to determine the flow
              characteristics (time mean velocity and turbulence intensity) at the diffuser
              exit. A low turbulence inlet (using boundary layer suction) will be built as an
              enlarged version of the inlet successfully demonstrated during prior NSF
              project. The diffuser section will be manufactured from a cast and sintered
              porous plastic. About 60-80% of the inlet flow will be removed by suction to
              achieve the desired velocity reduction of a factor of 20.    In the second
              year, the low turbulence inlet will be characterized and optimized in the
              laboratory. A flight system for the C-130 aircraft will be designed and
              constructed. By combining measurements of the flow characteristics at the
              diffuser exit and computational fluid dynamics analysis of the flow within and
              through the walls of the diffuser, the flow stre amlines inside the inlet and
              the inertial enhancement for large particles will be determined. The inertial
              enhancement will also be determined experimentally by measuring the size
              distribution of particles outside the inlet and at the diffuser exit during
              operation using either an optical particle counter or an aerodynamic particle
              sizer for several selected test conditions. The objectives of the third year
              effort are flight testing of the inlet and operational assistance for users of
              the inlet system.
