Title       : Temperature Superconducting Tapes and Wires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9713433

Award Number: 9713433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imtiaz Haque sih@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Said Ahzi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9713433  Ahzi  The mechanical processing of high temperature  superconducting
              tapes and wires is modeled by:  (1)  developing advanced micromechanical
              modeling of the elastic-  plastic response of compacted high temperature 
              superconducting powders with particular applications to Bi-  based oxides
              (BSCCO); and (2) implementing these models to  simulate wire drawing and tape
              rolling and pressing of the  oxide-powder-in-tube (OPIT) process for the
              fabrication of  superconductina tapes and wires.  The fabrication of the  BSCCO
              superconductors (tapes and wires) produced by the OPIT  process with optimal
              mechanical and electrical transport  properties is currently limited due to the
              lack of  understanding of the mechanical response during the  densification of
              powder oxides. Predictive tools for the  simulation and design of advanced
              processing methodologies  for producing long wires and tapes with optimal
              properties  are developed under this project. Physically-based models  for the
              polycrystalline matrix fully coupled with the  porosity modeling are developed.
               These models are based on  rate-dependent plasticity and have the unique
              ability to  predict the evolution of texturing during plastic  deformation and
              the evolution of the relative density of the  materials.  For superconductors,
              both mechanical and most  importantly electrical properties are strongly
              dependent on  the the final texture, relative density, and on the presence  of
              microcracks.  Therefore, physically-based material models  with the ability of
              coupling the texturing, porosity and  microcracking effects provide a better
              understanding of the  mechanical response during mechanical processing of these
               materials. The phenomenon of non-conformity (instability) in  the sectional
              area of the superconducting core of rolled  tapes, inherent to the rolling of
              two-phase composite  workpiece (Ag-sheathed BSCCO) is studied using 
              micromechanical models which account for the porosity,  textural hardening
              (locking), and weakening due to  micr ocracking in the superconducting core. 
              The modeling and  computational efforts are extended to simulate fabrication 
              of multifilamentary superconductors.  ***
