Title       : LExEn: Experimental Studies on Hydrogen Biogeochemistry in Anoxic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9713967

Award Number: 9713967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Reeburgh reeburgh@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,9104,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9713967  Reeburgh        Hydrogen plays a central role in microbial metabolism
              and is kinetically and thermodynamically maintained at low concentrations.
              Hydrogen partial pressure is a major control on anoxic systems, and can be
              supplied biologically and abiologically. Hydrogen can be detected and measured
              with great sensitivity, but reliable measurements on natural systems are
              difficult, as disruption of microenvironments by sampling may lead to
              production and consumption hydrogen. Most studies on hydrogen to date have
              involved the use of co-cultures, where two organisms are used to set and
              control the hydrogen partial pressure. This project includes the development
              and application of an apparatus that will permit setting and controlling the
              hydrogen partial pressure of a culture system. Rate measurements and gas
              composition changes occurring in the culture vessel detected by
              upstream-downstream gas measurements will be used to study methanogenesis,
              anaerobic methane oxidation (reverse methanogenesis) and isotope fractionation
              associated with both under a range of hydrogen partial pressures.  This project
              has three goals: 1) To build and operate a culture system in which the hydrogen
              partial pressure can be set and maintained at varying levels. The approach will
              be to set the system's hydrogen partial pressure and study microbial behavior
              under a range of partial pressures.  2) To use this apparatus to test the
              hypothesis that anaerobic methane oxidation is conducted by methanogens
              operating in reverse at low hydrogen partial pressures. Studies on pure
              cultures of methanogens, mixed cultures of methanogens and sulfate reducers,
              and samples from natural environments where anaerobic oxidation is known to
              occur  will be carried out.  3) To determine C and H stable isotope
              fractionation factors under a range of growth rate and culture conditions.
              Fractionation factors are available, but are difficult to apply generally
              because of the range of conditions under which they were obtained. The
              apparatus  developed in this study will permit upstream-downstream gas phase
              sampling and determination of isotope fractionation factors under a range of
              growth rate and substrate conditions.  In addition to settling the remaining
              question of the organisms and mechanisms responsible for anaerobic methane
              oxidation, this approach will permit determination of isotope (C and H)
              fractionation factors for both methanogenesis and reverse methanogenesis on
              pure and mixed cultures under a range of conditions. The techniques for
              controlling hydrogen concentration developed in this study may be useful in
              studies of hydrogen metabolism and interspecies hydrogen transfer by other
              groups of organisms in extreme anoxic environments.  Funding is being provided
              by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Directorate for Geosciences and
              the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences.
