Title       : Operational Methods In Semiconductor Manufacturing: Wafer Fab Operations:
               Modeling, Analysis, and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9713500

Award Number: 9713500
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley B. Gershwin gershwin@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713500  Gershwin    This grant provides funding for the development of methods
              for optimizing the design and operation of semiconductor wafer fabrication
              facilities. Descriptive issues concerning performance evaluation, as well as
              prescriptive issues concerning scheduling and planning will be studied.  The
              goal of the research on performance evaluation is to develop methodologies for
              determining the impact of process time variabilities, release policies,
              scheduling policies, hot lots, equipment failures, product mix, and cluster
              tools on the cycle-time performance of the plant.  In the area of scheduling,
              the goal is to design and analyze policies for making real-time decisions
              concerning   when to release new wafer lots into the plant, and how to schedule
              the large numbers of stations in re-entrant fabrication lines in the presence
              of equipment failures, set-up time constraints, batching   considerations, and
              operator availability constraints.  In the area of planning, the goal is to
              study the issues of yield learning, equipment utilization over time, effects of
              adding equipment over time, ramp-up, and non-stationary behavior.  Also,
              problems of managing capital outlays over time in the face of demand
              uncertainty will be studied.   If successful, the results of this research will
              lead to improvements in the design and operation of semiconductor fabrication
              facilities. They will provide methods for the prediction of the performance of
              large fabrication facilities before they are built.  They will also provide
              methods for efficiently scheduling the complex operations of expensive
              fabrication plants so as to improve their cycle-time performance.  The proposed
              work will thus contribute to the understanding of how to design and operate
              large wafer fabrication facilities.
