Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: New Reclaimable Sizes for Improved High Speed
               Weaving and Reduced Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9713610

Award Number: 9713610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour H. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Mansour
              Mohamed, Department of  Textile Engineering, Chemistry, and Science at North
              Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Ali Hebeish, at the National
              Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The objective of this joint research is
              to study ways to improve sizing agents and procedures for cotton and PES/cotton
              fiber materials.   The NRC staff will work with modifications of locally
              available starches.  Acrylic acid, alone or admixture with other vinyl monomers
              will be used as the polymerizable components of the composite.  The properties
              of the composites will be investigated, including film-forming, rheology,
              solubility, as well as its amenability to sizing, weaving, desizing, and
              reclamation.  By controlling the composite components and molecular size and
              substituents of starch, composites with pre-determined properties will be
              developed.   The NCSU team will test the NRC-produced sizing agents, as well as
              the resulting yarn quality.  They will also test these size formulations for
              their use in conventional and high speed weaving machines.  Scope:  This
              research project will involve two experienced researchers from well respected
              institutes for textile research, and with complementary expertise and
              facilities.  Finding optimum sizing materials that can be reclaimed and reused
              will address a major problem for a large industry in both countries, and would
              have special environmental impact on countries where textile industries are a
              major polluters.  Egypt and several other developing countries rely extensively
              on their textile industries, and yet these are some of the most polluting
              industries for the water available for human use.  The collaborating scientists
              plan to conduct chemical synthesis of new polymeric sizes in the laboratory,
              and to test them in the laboratory for their effectiveness and ability to be
              recycled.  They plan to scale the studies to actual manufacturing conditions. 
              This proposal meets INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration in
              areas of mutual benefit.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
