Title       : FACILE: A Clean Interface Design and Fabrication of Mechanical Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9713906

Award Number: 9713906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Jerard robert.jerard@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  The goal of the proposed research is to develop a system for the design and
              fabrication of mechanical parts that is analogous to the MOSIS system used for
              VLSI prototyping.  In the proposed model, a Discrete Part Interchange Format
              (DPIF) file will provide the basic infrastructure for exchange of information
              between the designer and fabricator. Data types in the DPIF include a Workpiece
              Description (WD), Part Description (PD) and three classes of Fabrication Blocks
              (FB).   Fabrication Blocks are simple and intuitive operators which also limit
              the designer's choices to shapes which are manufactureable.  Data are organized
              in a hierarchical data structure with associativity between the geometry
              contained in the Part Description and the Fabrication Blocks.  Attribute
              Schemas provide a powerful method for attaching information to the data types. 
              System functionality for the Designer includes creation, editing and `macro`
              simulation of the FBs.  System functionality for the Fabricator includes
              postprocessing, micro simulation and cost estimation.  Experiments will be
              performed in collaboration with other universities, and with a local machining
              contractor to test and refine the concepts.  Approximately 50-100 discrete
              parts will be produced.      This research, if successful, could fundamentally
              change the way that discrete parts of small lots sizes are produced.  Physical
              proximity of designer and fabricator would no longer be necessary, delivery
              times will be shorter, bids and contracts will be exchanged by electronic
              transmission.  Designers will request bids via a web based distribution system.
               Fabricators will estimate cost to build with minimum human effort and submit
              bids via email.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
