Title       : Purchase of a Flow Cytometer for the Large-scale Assessment of Biogenic
               Particles in Estuarine and Coastal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9713924

Award Number: 9713924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Malone malone@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                This project will provide for the acquisition of a  standard bench top flow
              cytometer with argon laser  illumination, five parameter analysis, and cell
              sorting  capability.  Flow cytometry is an important tool  for
              interdisciplinary research on the dynamics of  microbial populations and
              biogenic particles that  participate in the cycling and flux of major elements
              in  aquatic ecosystems of the land-sea margin.    Flow cytometry was originally
              developed as a tool to  analyze individual cells or biological particles  in
              cellular biology and clinical  research.  It has more  recently found wide
              applications in aquatic biology,  because it can provide a level of temporal
              and spatial  resolution of the abundance and characteristics of  biogenic and
              non-biological particles in aquatic systems  that no other current technology
              can match.  This  level of resolution is currently needed to complement 
              largescale models of elements cycling in estuaries  and oceans, where the
              distribution and characteristics of  biological particles are the key factors
              that determine  the fats and flux of essential chemical components.  Thus, flow
              cytometry is no longer a technology restricted  to clinical studies, but can
              profitably complement other  techniques routinely used in aquatic ecology and 
              biochemistry. This proposal represents an attempts to  expand the use of flow
              cytometry in the study of the  density, distribution, cellular characteristics,
              taxomic  composition and trophic interactions of biogenic  particles in
              estuaries and continental shelf  ecosystems  of the middle Atlantic region.   
              The instrument will reside at the Horn Point  Environmental Laboratory which
              has made a major  commitment to the study of plankton dynamics, physical 
              oceanography, and physical-biological interactions in  estuarine and marine
              ecosystems.  The instrument is  extremely versatile and will be used in
              laboratory-and  ship-based studies as well as in laboratory course work. 
              Operation is relatively easy and user-friendly, makin g it  an ideal tool not
              only for ecological research, but also  for education.
