Title       : Operational Methods in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Operational Methods
               Integrating Product Dynamics & Process Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9713720

Award Number: 9713720
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $801000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Fu mfu@umd5.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Motivated by the belief that the next major advances in increased operational
              efficiency in semiconductor manufacturing will require operational methods that
              integrate product level market dynamics and process level models, the research
              will proceed along two thrusts:  the integration of product and market dynamics
              into operational decision making, and the incorporation of process level models
              into optimization algorithms at the operational level.  The first thrust will
              develop finite-horizon transient models that are directed towards total life
              cycle decision support. Such models will handle the complex dynamics of the
              product market, and support the technologies that enable efficient
              manufacturing for the right products at the right time.  The second thrust will
              develop models that integrate operational level models and process level models
              for the purpose of qualitatively and quantitatively assessing how process level
              improvements and changes benefit factory level production objectives. Such
              models will incorporate process response surface models into the operational
              modeling framework.   Just as the principles of concurrent engineering brought
              together design and manufacturing engineers, the research integrating
              operational methods with product dynamics and process models will serve to
              bring together engineers from the process level up through the product level to
              enhance factory level operational efficiency. Successful implementation of the
              research will lead to specific insights into the structure of optimal
              operational policies and into the sensitivity of operational decisions to
              underlying process parameters. These insights can then be used by operational
              and factory integration personnel to support discussions of suggested changes
              in policies at the product level and parameter settings at the process level.
