Title       : Nanostructured Magnetic Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9713497

Award Number: 9713497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351030             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Barnard jbarnard@mint.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9713497  Barnard    This is a systematic study of 
              processing/microstructure/magnetic property  interrelationships in
              nanostructured magnetic networks.  The  project objectives include fabrication
              of a set of networks  of varying dimensions and magnetic materials,
              quantitative  assessment of network microstructure and topology,  determination
              of the physical origin of the unusual magnetic  properties, and evaluation of
              the potential of network  materials as magnetic recording media.  Networks are 
              fabricated using simple sputter deposition onto the surface  of nanostructured
              substrates (nanochannel alumina), e-beam  lithography, and naturally phase
              separating systems.  Quantitative microstructural and topological 
              characterization are carried out in both the as-deposited  and annealed states
              using a combination of scanning electron  microscopy, atomic force microscopy,
              and transmission  electron microscopy.  The nanostructural characteristics 
              (crystallite size, crystallographic texture, etc.) of the  networks are
              documented by transmission electron microscopy  and selected area electron
              diffraction.  Magnetic  characterization and correlation of magnetic properties
              with  network geometry and dimensions are at the core of this  proposal.  A
              multitechnique approach including temperature  dependent measurements,
              annealing studies, magnetic imaging,  and ferromagnetic resonance are used to
              develop an  understanding of network magnetic domain structures,  reversal
              mechanisms, and stability.  The unique topology of  the networks proposed here
              allows for detailed study of the  effects of transitioning from traditional
              continuous film  media (nanoscale in one dimension, the thickness) to media 
              comprised of discrete pillars, bars, and dots (nanoscale in  two or three
              dimensions).  This research project is  particularly strong in the areas of
              educational and human  resources development.  The program is multidisciplinary
              and  has strong fundamental and technological components.  Both  the graduate
              stude nt and post-doc budgeted for the project  employ aspects of solid state
              physics, metallurgy, thin film  science, magnetic characterization, materials
              processing,  microstructural characterization, and materials selection.  %%% 
              Nanostructured networks are a unique geometry which exhibit  unusual and
              potentially useful magnetic behavior associated  with their the small
              dimensions and novel topology.  A  nanostructured network is a contiguous
              topology which may be  pictured as a thin film with a high density of holes or 
              pores.  When the pore size, mean pore separation, and  network thickness
              approach nanoscale dimensions, strong  confinement effects on magnetic
              properties (such as  increases in coercivity of more than two orders of
              magnitude  over continuous films of equivalent thickness) are observed. 
              Networks are unique in that their dimensionality can be  continuously
              controlled at the nanometer scale by varying  the thickness, pore size, and
              porosity.  The properties of  magnetic networks are only beginning to be
              explored.
