Title       : NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering:Microwave Discharge
               Heating and Stability for Plasma-Assisted Processing Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9713298

Award Number: 9713298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Grotjohn grotjohn@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jes Asmussen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Microwave discharges have been developed and applied to a number of
              applications ranging from electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasma and ion
              sources for semiconductor etching and deposition to plasma-assisted CVD sources
              for diamond film.  This  research is directed toward the improved understanding
              of electromagnetic coupling and heating processes that take place in these
              physically bounded, high-density microwave discharges.  The approach will
              combine experimental data which is obtained from carefully constructed
              experiments, with the analogous data front theoretical/numerical models, which
              are formulated to match the actual experiment.  It is expected that results
              from this research will not only be the improved understanding of the
              fundamentals of microwave coupling and heating in bounded high-densitv
              discharges, but will also be the improved design and process controllability of
              these plasma sources.   Theoretical modeling will also be performed at a more
              detailed numerical simulation level.  The modeling effort will develop
              numerical simulation models for the behavior of microwave plasma sources which
              are capable of understanding and predicting source outputs, non-linearity,
              hysteresis and multiple steady states.  Such an understanding of the external
              circuit control and the energy coupling (i.e., electromagnetic field structure,
              coupling, and plasma heating) within the plasma source is key to understanding
              source stability, process controllability and further to microwave plasma
              source scaling and uniformity design issues in the future.
