Title       : Proactive Maintenance: Integration of Engineering, Statistics, and Operations
               Research Towards a General Framework and Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9713654

Award Number: 9713654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianjun (Jan) Shi shihang@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijayan N. Nair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This grant provides for the development of a science base for the integrated
              proactive maintenance strategy.  Various fundamental issues will be studied,
              which include affordable in-process sensing optimization and validation with
              consideration of the global goal of proactive maintenance; degradation
              modeling, analysis, and prediction by combining in-process data and limited
              historical information; multi attribute decision making; uncertainty
              measurement and risk analysis; and global optimal maintenance policy
              determination and evaluation.  The research will be organized into four
              interrelated tasks:  (1) Optimizing strategies for the use of affordable
              in-process sensing; (2) On-line feature extraction and sensor fusion from
              multi-dimensional observations; (3) Developing predictive failure models
              combining in-process sensing data, engineering knowledge, and limited
              historical data; and (4) Developing a simulation testbed for evaluation of
              proactive maintenance policy.  The central idea is to develop a methodology to
              achieve proactive maintenance by integrating information (with uncertainty
              consideration) provided by: (1) Engineering: in-process sensing and on-line
              modeling, diagnosis, and failure prediction; (2) Statistics; reliability models
              and self-learning/updating; and (3) Management Science: cost and risk analysis;
              uncertainty measurement, and performance evaluation.   The implementation of
              proactive maintenance methodologies are expected to significantly improve the
              maintenance of manufacturing equipment and processes, which has a significant
              impact on manufacturing quality, productivity, and cost.  The success of the
              research project will contribute to maintenance science by overcoming the
              barriers among different disciplines, and demonstrating the effectiveness of
              the integrated methodology on proactive maintenance. In addition, the research
              will also provide original contribution to each individual discipline's
              research in areas such as (1) affordable and optimized in-  process sensin g
              and feature extraction techniques; (2) reliability analysis with limited
              historical data; and (3) Bayesian decision-making and self-learning algorithms
              for maintenance policy improvements. The research testbed will serve as a basic
              for future research and demonstration of proactive maintenance.
