Title       : Power Efficiency of Active Structural-Acoustic Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9713755

Award Number: 9713755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Leo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with the development of a general  theory of power
              efficiency for active structural acoustic  control systems. Two classes of
              problems are studied: the  control of free-field sound radiation from
              structures, and the  control of structural sound transmission into enclosed
              spaces.  For both classes of problems, the power efficiency is defined  as the
              reduction of acoustic power output normalized with  respect to the
              electromechanical power input. The research  emphases are to derive expressions
              for the power efficiency for  both classes of problems; to determine the effect
              of transducer  selection and control law implementation on the power 
              efficiency; and to investigate the fundamental limitations in  power efficiency
              for active structural-acoustic control. The  research strategy consist of four
              classes. First, power  efficiency expressions are derived for both classes of
              control  problems. An investigation in transducer selection and control  law
              implementation is then performed with analytical models.  Next, the fundamental
              limitations in power efficiency for both  classes of problems are studied. The
              final task is an  experimental investigation of the concepts derived from the 
              numerical studies. The development of power efficiency models  is novel because
              it enables different control implementations  to be compared with a consistent
              metric. By providing a  systematic method of comparing the tradeoffs in active 
              structural-acoustic control, engineers are able to perform one  to-one
              comparisons of such factors as transducer selection and  location, control law
              implementation, and electromechanical  design. The research provides a tool by
              which practicing  engineers can quantitatively compare the merits of active 
              control designs for applications such as the suppression of  sound radiation in
              transportation systems, aerospace vehicles,  and precision machinery.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
