Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Environmental Sensors Using Sol
               Gel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9713635

Award Number: 9713635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18880              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Greenspan DCGUSB@AOL.COM  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U.S. Biomatls Corp.
	      One Progress Blvd.
	      Alachua, FL  32615    904/462-7660

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. David
              Greenspan, Chief Technology Officer, U.S. Biomaterials Corp. in Alachua,
              Florida, and Dr. Morsi M. Morsi of the Glass Research Department at the
              National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The objective of this joint
              research is to study the feasibility of manufacturing environmental sensors
              using biologically active sol gel glasses impregnated with active biological
              and synthetic organic molecules.  Sol gel processing is used to make many
              compositions of materials, among which are Gel-Silica Optics which have
              commercial value.  These materials are optically transparent, yet they contain
              a large volume of stable interconnected porosity.  The porous matrices can be
              impregnated with optically active second organic or inorganic phases for
              creating a new class of active optical sensors.  The project will involve work
              at the NRC to develop impregnation processes for incorporating organic and
              biological molecules inside the porous optical matrices; optical
              characterization of the IR and UV-Vis spectra of the sensor prototypes; and
              comparison of the optical characteristics of the sensor molecules in their
              matrices with the molecules in solution.  Work at the U.S. Biomaterials Corp.
              laboratory will include development of porous optical matrices of various
              composition of biologically active CaO-P2O5-SiO2 gel-glasses; characterization
              of the pore size distributions and surface areas and isoelectric points of the
              matrices; and conduct of biological activity testing of the prototype sensors
              to determine whether the conformations of the sensor molecules are retained
              intact following the impregnation process.  Scope:  This research project will
              bring together the bioactive gel-glass matrix technology of the US institution,
              and the sol-gel and biotechnology expertise of the NRC.  The project can lead
              to establishing a new capability in Egypt for high technology industry for
              manufacturing environmental biosensors capable of being coupled with the fiber
              optics device industry.  The application to environmental sensors in Egypt  is
              useful to the United States where the environmental quality is considered a
              global issue.  This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign
              collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.  This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
