Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Pollution Reduction and Material Conservation in
               Pretreatment of Cellulosic Textiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a9713642

Award Number: 9713642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24041              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hechmi Hamouda hechmi_hamouda@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9713642  Hamouda    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative 
              project by Dr. Hechmi Hamouda, Department of  Textile  Engineering, Chemistry,
              and Science at North Carolina State  University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Mohamed
              El-Rafie, Head of  the Textile Research Division at the National Research 
              Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The objective of this joint  research is to
              study the feasibility of combining  pretreatment processes of cellulosic
              textiles with the goal  of reducing the energy and chemicals used in
              pretreatment,  and of reducing the large amounts of water used in the  repeated
              washing operations, thus reducing the industrial  water pollution.  Two
              categories of textile fibers would be  considered, cotton and cotton-blends,
              and flax.  The first  of these requires three pretreatments of desizing,
              scouring  and bleaching, while flax fibers require scouring followed  by three
              bleaching steps of hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide  and sodium chlorite.  Each
              of these steps must be followed  by washing, thus the huge requirements for
              water, chemicals,  and energy, as well as the resulting pollution load.   
              Scope:  This research project will involve two experienced  researchers from
              well respected institutes for textile  research with complementary expertise
              and facilities.  Solution of the problem they will address would have 
              significant benefits to a major industry in both countries,  and would have
              special environmental impact on countries  where water use and polluted water
              discharge are problems.  Egypt and several other developing countries rely 
              extensively on their textile industries, and yet these are  some of the most
              polluting industries for the water  available for human use.  The collaborating
              scientists plan  to conduct laboratory tests, and to scale the studies to 
              actual manufacturing scale.  This proposal meets the INT  objective of
              supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas  that have benefits for both
              sides.  This project is being  supported under the US-Egy pt Joint Fund
              Program, which  provides grants to scientists and engineers in both  countries
              to carry out these cooperative activities.  *  *  *
