Title       : Generating Shared-Setups for Enabling Mass Customization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9713781

Award Number: 9713781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satyandra K. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This grant provides funding for the development of a framework for performing
              multi-part planning and generating shared-setups.  In this research, rather
              then generating process plans by considering one part at a time, multiple parts
              will be considered simultaneously and opportunities for sharing manufacturing
              resources will be exploited.  A given set of parts will be broken into sets of
              setup-compatible parts and shared-setups will be generated for every set of
              setup-compatible parts.  This research will help in creating process plans that
              will be optimized over the entire set of parts.  Shared-setups will be
              generated by using a two-step planning approach.  In the first step, the setup
              planning algorithm will identify the constraints imposed by a part feature on
              tooling and setups that will be used to create that feature.  In the second
              step, all the constraints imposed by various features in various parts will be
              gathered together and a constraint-driven setup planning algorithm will be used
              to identify the shared-setup that works for multiple parts.  Shared-setups will
              also allow procurement of new tools and fixtures that work for multiple parts. 
               Increasing emphasis on more personalized products and shrinking product lives
              is resulting in major changes in manufacturing practices.  As companies move
              towards mass customization, they will need ways to handle a wider variety of
              product mix on shop floors.  Setup changes constitute a major portion of the
              production time in the batch production environment.  The planned approach
              presents a significant improvement over the current part-centric setup planning
              approaches and can be used to significantly cut down the total number of setups
              and increase the overall throughput.  If successful, the results of this
              research will significantly reduce the required number of setup changes and
              will allow companies to handle considerably smaller batch sizes with very
              little increase in per part cost.
