Title       : FSML: Living Resources Care System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9713927

Award Number: 9713927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Ramus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The Marine Laboratory is a satellite campus of Duke  University.  Nicholas
              School of the Environment, located  on the coast of North Carolina near Cape
              Lookout and  180 miles from the main campus.  Its mission is research  and
              education in coastal oceanography, ecology and  policy.  Its serves
              researchers, educators and students  from Duke University and from many North 
              American  overseas institutions.  Many of these user institutions  have formed
              formal consortia with Duke University to  advance common goals, e.g., the
              Marine Science Education  Consortium (MESU), the Duke/University  of North
              Carolina Oceanographic Consortium (D/UNCOC) and  the NOAA Cooperative Institute
              of Fisheries Oceanography  (CIFO).  As a coastal field station serving a
              diverse  clientele, the DUML has the expectation and obligation  to provide its
              users with animal care facilities for  observational and experimental studies. 
              These  facilities must:        1) comply with the ever more rigorous USDA
              Animal                           Welfare  Act and DHHS policies related to the
              care and use of  laboratory animals.  2) provide the highest quality sea water
              for the                      maintenance of marine biota, and     provide sea
              water variously processed for research,  e.g., ambient, filtered, mixed
              salinity,  heated and chilled.    To meet its obligation, the Marine Laboratory
              will  repair, renovate and modernize its existing  running sea water and animal
              care infrastructure to the  functional status of a living resources  care
              system.    Repair, renovation and modernization will include the  following
              five elements:  1) four new 25m3   headboxes to gravity feed particle  and gas
              equilibrated sea water to eight  receiving stations in two separate systems, 
              2) a covering structure for a 1902  outdoor tank farm,  3) provision of fast
              sand filtered and cartridge filtered  sea water to two receiving  stations,  4)
              provision of chilled and heated sea water on a limited  basis to one receiving 
              station, and  5) renovation  of all animal care laboratories to comply  with
              American Association for  Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) 
              guidelines, both for vertebrate animals.
