Title       : 1998 NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference in Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9713384

Award Number: 9713384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lokenath Debnath ldebnath@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An NSF-CBMS Regional Conference on Wavelet Analysis as a Tool for  Computational
              and Harmonic Analysis will be held at the  Department of Mathematics,
              University of Central Florida on May  2-8, 1998.  Professor Ronald Coifman,
              Professor of Mathematics at  Yale University, will serve as Principal Lecturer
              of the  conference.  The organizing committee will consist of  mathematicians
              and scientists drawn from the Departments of  Mathematics, Electrical and
              Computer Engineering, Mechanical  Engineering and Aerospace sciences, the
              Center for research in  Electro-Optics and Lasers, and the Institute for
              Simulation and  Training at the University of Central Florida, as well as
              outside  experts from academic and industrial institutions.  The general  area
              of the conference's endeavor is of great topical interest  and has seen as
              explosive expansion of activity in the last ten  years, both in theoretical
              aspects and in applications of the  mathematical theory to problems in computer
              science, electrical  engineering, mechanical and chemical engineering,
              biomedical  engineering and their related areas.  Despite the intense  activity
              over the past decade, there are still numerous  outstanding issues, many of
              which are only now coming within the  ambit of modern computational techniques.
               Coifman, who is a  consummate lecturer and a major contributor to the area,
              has a  very broad view of the subject matter, from the mathematical  analysis
              to the numerical and computational work and even the  engineering and
              industrial aspects.  He is currently leading a  research program to develop new
              wavelet based mathematical tools  for future extraction recognition and
              denoising.  His lectures  will serve to survey and unify major developments in
              the field,  assessing both achievements and unsolved problems.  Professor 
              Coifman is an obvious choice to lead a gathering of experts in  this area.
