Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: High Yield Pulping of Rice Straw and Cotton
               Stalks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9713625

Award Number: 9713625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21109              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hasan Jameel h_jameel@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative  project by Dr. Jameel
              Hasan, Department of Wood and Paper  Science at North Carolina State University
              in Raleigh, NC,  and Dr. Housni ElSaied, Cellulose and Paper Department at  the
              National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The  objective of this joint
              research is to study ways to utilize  basic cellulosic raw materials considered
               to be waste from  agricultural products, for producing high quality pulp. The 
              main materials to be studied would be rice straw and cotton  stalks.  The final
              pulp would be tested for use in the  packaging paper products in place of the
              expensive imported  materials or in combination with recycled paper material. 
              The use of mechanochemical processes can be expected to  increase the percent
              yield, in pulp from the raw material,  from the low 20's to the 80's to 90's,
              while reducing the  aqueous effluent which usually include black liquor.  The 
              research will include laboratory studies at the NRC, large  scale testing at  a
              paper company (RAKTA) in Egypt, as well as at the US  laboratory  at NCSU.  
              Scope:  This research project will involve  a US  scientist from a highly
              regarded department, with a strong  research program, and a senior researcher
              in the area of  paper and pulp at Egypt's largest research laboratory, as  well
              as one of Egypt's largest industrial concerns.  These  three groups will have
              complementary research facilities,  and should be able to produce the results
              described above.  The problem they are seeking to address is quite significant 
              for many developing countries, especially where forest  resources are few or
              non-existent, such as in Egypt and many  countries in the Middle East.  It is
              also important to the  US where the use of agricultural waste is quite
              desirable to  limit the use of the nation's forest resources.  The work in 
              this project will seek to reduce the resulting pollution  from this generally
              polluting industry which utilizes  chemicals for dissolving and polishing paper
              products.  The  collaborating scientists plan to do laboratory work, to be 
              later scaled up to manufacturing conditions.  This proposal  meets INT
              objective of supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration  in areas of mutual benefit.
              This project is being supported  under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants  to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out 
              these cooperative  activities.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
