Title       : An Integrated Quantitative and Qualitative Life Cycle Cost Assessment Technology
               for Cost Benefit Evaluation of Bridge Deterioration, Renewal, and
               Rehabilitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9713158

Award Number: 9713158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rita A. Gregory rgregory@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9713158  Gregory  The database of bridge assessment is essential in  determining
              which structures are most critical for limited  monies.  However, an evaluation
              which would assess the  various costs associated with the various repair
              procedures  is unavailable.  Such an evaluation is highly needed to  assist in
              the immense task of selecting economically smart  repair/strengthen options
              available for these structurally  deficient bridges.  This research will assist
              in the  development of such an evaluation.  The life cycle cost  assessment
              technology for cost benefit evaluation of bridge  infrastructure
              rehabilitation/strengthening or renewal is  based on technical acquisition and
              assessment of bridge  design and repair options.    This research is a joint,
              integrated effort between Georgia  Tech and University of Arizona.  For the
              construction  industry, the life cycle cost benefit evaluation will  provide a
              thorough and consistent assessment technology for  handling the complex
              decisions and estimating in  infrastructure renewal.  The life cycle cost
              benefit  evaluation will allow construction and policy makers to  potentially
              save millions of taxpayers' and industrial  capital dollars.    The impact of
              the life cycle cost benefit evaluation will  provide, for the first time, an
              assessment technology to  evaluate various repair alternatives and emerging 
              technologies on infrastructure renewal and the bridge  construction industry. 
              To the academic and scientific  community, the life cycle research will push
              the bounds of  knowledge-based systems.  ***
