Title       : A Study of Structure-Process-Property Relationships in BlownPolymeric Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9713372

Award Number: 9713372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399989             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. N. Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hung-Jue Sue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynden A. Archer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This research has the long term objective of establishing  the 
              structure-process-property relationships in both high  density  polyethylene
              (HDPE) and low  density  polyethylene  (LDPE)  blown  films. Crystallization
              kinetics and film  morphology as a function of both molecular architecture and 
              processing parameters will be investigated using physical  models and numerical
              simulation of the  process. The research  will include the development of
              suitable constitutive models  for the theology and crystallinity of the 
              polymer being blown.  Experiments based on commercial scale film  blowing
              apparatus  will be used to evaluate Constitutive  models and determine 
              appropriate boundary and initial conditions for the numerical  simulation of
              the film blowing process. A transient, non-  axisymmetric, and nonlinear finite
              element model of the process  will be developed. The computational model will
              also be used to  study collapse and instability in a non-axisymmetric setting. 
              The three principal investigators are uniquely qualified,  because of their
              background in theoretical and computational  mechanics,polymer structure and
              mechanical property  characterizations, and polymer processing and theology, to
               successfully carry out the  research.                                      A
              stable film blowing process requires a delicate balance  between the excess
              pressure inside the bubble, the resin  extrusion rate, the film wind-up speed,
              and the cooling rate.  These parameters vary considerably from polymer to
              polymer due  to slight differences in  melt  strength and crystallinity. In 
              practice, the best combinations of process variables required  to produce good
              quality film is achieved through a series of  trial-and-error steps that
              results in large-scale wastage of  polymer resin and person hours. Computer
              simulations of film  blowing process offers an attractive alternative for at
              least  three reasons. First, computer simulations can help answer  basic
              questions about how  specific process variables influence  bubble stability.
              Second, simulations will help identify which  resin Properties are most
              important in determining performance  in film blowing processes. Third, if the
              constitutive  relationship between molecular orientation  and polymer 
              crystallinity is properly formulated, the connection between  the ultimate film
              properties and process conditions can be  identified.  Together-, these three
              factors should  significantly reduce the number of experiments needed to 
              optimize commercial film blowing processes for new polymer  resins.       The
              research investigates phenomena that are  interdisciplinary  in nature. Phase
              change, crystallization and surface flow  phenomena are of interest to various
              manufacturing processes  and scientific problems. The research will be carried
              with the  help of students, who will be trained to develop theoretical 
              formulations, finite element model, and interpretation and  correlation of the
              numerical results, and the students will  also be trained  to run  the film
              blowing equipment and collect  data to assist and  correlate numerical
              simulations. This  training of students to think and understand the
              fundamental,  as well practical aspects, is considered as important 
              contribution as the results of the  research.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
