Title       : Experimental and Modeling Studies of the TIPS Membrane Formation Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9713322

Award Number: 9713322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sani sani@pastis.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Krantz  (Principal Investigator former)
              Leonard J. Bond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      Proposal No:                       9713322         Proposal Type: 
                         Investigator Initiated Principal Investigator:    William B. Krantz 
              Affiliation:                       University of Colorado at Boulder    This
              grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-element
              of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and
              Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. William Krantz of
              the University of Colorado. The research involves fundamental studies of the
              thermally induced phase separation process (TIPS) for  membrane formation. The
              process involves cooling a polymer solution to effect phase separation and the
              formation of a dense polymer phase which is then recovered and becomes the
              membrane. The investigators propose to conduct their studies on fluorinated
              polymers due to the potentially wide applicability of these membranes and the
              lack of fundamental knowledge on optimal membrane fabrication. A  novel aspect
              of the research is the use of  acoustic time-domain reflectometry (ATDR) to
              characterize  the thermally induced phase transitions and obtain polymer phase
              thickness as a function of time. ATDR can also provide information on membrane
              microstructure and is complementary to information obtained through electron
              micrography. Finally, the investigators seek to use analogies to alloy
              solidification theories to model the TIPS process.     The research will
              provide a better understanding of membranes formed through thermally induced
              phase separation processes. This should have   a direct impact on membrane
              design and casting procedures to   fine-tune pore distributions and membrane
              thickness. Application lie in a variety of membrane separation technologies
              adapted to the chemical, petroleum and pharmaceutical industries.
