Title       : Acquisition of a Versataile Microwave Plasma CVD System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9713852

Award Number: 9713852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel C. Davis                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj N. Singh Raj.Singh@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Relva C. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. van Ooij  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                      Acquisition  of  a microwave plasma  chemical  vapor    deposition (CVD)
              system with capability for ECR  (electron    cyclotron resonance) source, in
              situ heater stage, and  DC    bias  will create a versatile CVD facility with
              capability    for   deposition  over  a  wide  range  of  pressures  and   
              temperatures.  Additional components including 12  channel    mass  flow 
              controllers, vacuum pump, traps, and  pressure    indicators/controllers  will 
              complete  the  CVD   system.    Furthermore, the 2 additional reactor chambers
              will  avoid    cross contamination because of the deposition of different   
              materials  by  Co-PIs  providing flexibility  in  cleaning    without  the
              reactor downtime.  The microwave  plasma  CVD    system  will  also be capable
              of enhancing chemical  vapor    deposition  of  hard-to-process and unique 
              nonequilibrium    materials/phases such as cubic boron nitride (c)-BN over a   
              range   of   temperatures  (including  moderate   to   low    temperatures)
              because of the ECR source and in situ heater    stage.         The  system 
              will  have  an  initial  capability  for    deposition    of    a    broad   
              range    of    high-tech    materials/coatings required for several research 
              projects    of  PI  and  Co-PIs.   This CVD system  will  be  used  to   
              synthesize   advanced  thin  films/coatings   and   unique    materials 
              including in particular: (a) Carbide,  nitride,    or  oxide  coatings on a
              broad range of fibers  to  create    engineered  fiber-matrix  interfaces  for 
              studying  their    roles  on  the micromechanics of crack bridging, fracture,  
               and  matrix  cracking behaviors in a number  of  research,    projects  on 
              fiber-reinforced  ceramic  composites;   (b)    Thermal/oxidation  barrier 
              coatings  on  superalloys  and    composites   for   aircraft/aerospace 
              applications;   (c)    Ceramic  thin films for electronics, sensor, and
              corrosion    protection  applications; and (d) Super-hard c-BN  coating    for
              cutting tool inserts because this material performance    better  than diamond
              coating for cutting iron-based alloys    and several US companies like
              Kennametal, MegaDiamond, GE,    and  Milacron  have showed interest in  c-BN 
              and  thermal    barrier  coatings.   While all of  these  are  interesting   
              materials,  only a few important ones, such  as  oxidation    resistant fiber
              coatings, c-BN, thermal/oxidation  barrier    (ZrO2/Al2O3) , and PZT will be
              synthesized initially.         An   interdisciplinary  team  consisting  of 
              several    faculty  from  the  Department of  Materials  Science  and   
              Engineering  and  a  Visiting Scholar will  be  using  the    proposed 
              microwave plasma CVD system to process  coatings    for  the  current  and
              future research projects.  Together    this  team has over 40 years of
              cumulative experience with    the processing of materials by CVD and
              characterization of    their  properties.  The availability of  the  system 
              will    enhance   their   capabilities  for  synthesizing   unique    inorganic
               coatings  for applications in  fiber-reinforced    composites,    cutting  
              tools,   corrosion    protection,    electronics,  and environmental-related
              areas.   A  strong    interest  is  shown by a number of industries on 
              research    work that will become possible because of the availability    of
              this facility.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
