Title       : A Dynamic Analysis of the Crankshaft-Block System in an Internal Combustion
               Engine Including the Elastohydrodynamic Behavior of the Main Bearings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9713793

Award Number: 9713793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nickolas Vlahopoulos nickvl@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zissimos Mourelatos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is a collaborative research and educational  effort between
              the University of Michigan and the General  Motors Research and Development
              Center. It targets the general  area of simulating the vibration and noise
              performance of an  operating engine, leading to design changes for noise 
              reduction. The specific research focus is on developing an  analytical tool for
              predicting the dynamic response of an  engine crankshaft-block system including
              the oil-film  hydrodynamics. Previous work on dynamic reduction and 
              lubrication constitutes the foundation of this effort. The  fundamental
              research concentrates in the areas of developing a  dynamic substructuring 
              methodology for capturing the local  flexibility of the cap and bulkhead of the
              block dynamics,  developing a new perturbation technique for solving the oil- 
              film Reynolds equation, developing a computational efficient  solution for the
              electrohydro dynamics (EHD) lubrication  problem, and developing a
              crankshaft-block-oil film coupling  algorithm. Applied research is performed in
              parallel by General  Motors Research and Development Center in applying dynamic
               reduction to crankshaft and block dynamics, including the local  flexibility
              of the bearing caps and engine bulkheads, utilizing  a `hourglass control`
              method for developing the oil-film  fluidicity  matrices, and performing the
              numerical  implementation and validation for the crankshaft-block-oil film 
              coupling algorithm. The educational objectives are identivied  in the ara of
              joint advising, introducing new technology into  the University curriculum, and
              developing a short course for  engineers in the Industry. Substantial
              investment in the part  of General Motors is included in the proposed work in
              terms of  the paralled applied research effort, performing testing for 
              validation, time allocation for joint advising, and  collaboration in achieving
              all the educational objectives.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
