Title       : Characterization of Local and Non-local Interactions of Stoichiometric
               Adsorption Complexes in High-Silica Zeolite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9713023

Award Number: 9713023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Gorte gorte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Profs. Gorte and White will investigate the interaction of chemisorbed molecules
              with Bronsted acid sites in high-silica zeolites, such as ZSM-5.  They will
              identify the reaction intermediates, determine the energetics of formation of
              1:1 stoichiometric complexes and their long-range interactions, and model the
              surface chemistry by molecular dynamics.  They will examine adsorbed
              intermediates derived from industrially significant reactant molecules, such as
              alcohols, thiols, aldehydes, esters, phenols and substituted aromatics, and
              will identify molecular probes suitable for the characterization of long-range
              interactions.  The spectroscopic characterization will be done with TPD, TGA,
              multi-phase solid-state NMR, NQR, and IR.  For the NMR work, the zeolite will
              be in the form of large single crystals mounted with random orientations in
              capillary tubes. The NMR spectroscopy will involve multiphase-pulse sequences,
              line-narrowing sequences, magic-angle spinning and isotopic substitution, with
              techniques such as REDOR and PISMA.  Particularly important is the addition of
              H NMR of methyl groups to investigate the environment of the acid sites. 
              Information from microcalorimetry of weakly basic molecules having various
              functional groups will be correlated with the spectroscopy, with the objective
              of rationalizing the energy barriers for surface reactions.  Those results will
              be complemented with ab initio quantum chemistry  calculations of structures
              and energies, and ab initio quantum molecular dynamics of the chemisorption and
              reaction steps of probe molecules in cluster models of the zeolites.
