Title       : Development of a Multiphase "3-D+" Boundary-Layer Flow Visualization Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9713857

Award Number: 9713857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Hoyt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9713857  J. Hoyt  A flow tracer suitable for turbulent flow
              visualization has been developed and tested by the P.I. for two-dimensional
              flows.  The tracer, composed of  shear-thickening and high extensional
              viscosity fluids, does not diffuse when the flow becomes turbulent like the
              previously used tracers do.  The extension of the visualization method to
              three-dimensional flows, with application to coherent structures in turbulent
              boundary layer, is proposed.  The new approach provides simultaneous viewing
              the flow three directions (called 3-D+), that allows for easier identification
              of the flow structures as projected on three different planes (side, top, and
              frontal to the flow direction).   The preliminary results on "horseshoe"
              vortices and large organized structures are very promising.  The experimental
              work will be performed in collaboration with Prof.  R.H.J. Sellin of the
              University of Bristol, where experimental facilities are prepared.    The
              method is expected to provide new insights into understanding and modeling of
              the spatial turbulent structures, including shear flows and wake flows.  The
              application of the technique to other complex flow, such as dispersion flows,
              sediment transport, turbomachinery, and for educational purposes also is
              envisaged.    ***
