Title       : MOTI: Innovative Service Delivery Strategies and Customer Segmentation:
               Integrating Investments in Technology, Work Process Design, and Human Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9713749

Award Number: 9713749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald Senich                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent R. Keltner keltner@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carleton R. Ruthling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Girardini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904013208    213/393-0411

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713749  Keltner    The goal of this project is to help service companies design
              and implement service delivery strategies tailored to the needs of different
              customer segments.  Information technology, work process design, and human
              capital investment are the three key enablers of innovative service delivery. 
              While these three enablers play a role in all market segments, the relative
              importance of each varies with customer product need and company product
              offerings.  Some market segments will be more conducive to service delivery
              using high levels of technology and automation, others to investments in work
              process design and human capital which support greater customization.  Drawing
              on both quantitative and qualitative data analysis, the project will produce
              evidence on appropriate combinations of resource investments by customer
              segment.  Three partner companies in the commercial banking, commercial
              insurance and telecommunications industries will collaborate in collecting
              organizational, technical, operational, and economic data.  Data collection
              will focus on the "mid-range" customer segments for high-end retail, small
              business and medium-sized business customers.  Factor analysis and standard
              regression techniques will be used to produce empirical findings on how service
              companies can most effectively combine resource investments in different
              customer segments.  The results of this analysis will be used to produce a
              decision-support tool which service managers can use in planning their resource
              investments and will enable service based companies, who are challenged by
              competitive pressures, to develop innovative service delivery strategies that
              both improve operational effectiveness and strengthen customer relationships.
