Title       : Operational Methods in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Wafer Fab Operations:
               Modeling, Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9713465

Award Number: 9713465
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266664             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. R. Kumar prkumar@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713465  Kumar   This grant provides funding for the development of methods for
              optimizing the design and operation of semiconductor wafer fabrication
              facilities. Descriptive issues concerning performance evaluation, as well as
              prescriptive issues concerning scheduling and planning will be studied.  The
              goal of the research on performance evaluation is to develop methodologies for
              determining the impact of process time variabilities, release policies,
              scheduling policies, hot lots, equipment failures, product mix, and cluster
              tools on the cycle-time performance of the plant.  In the area of scheduling,
              the goal is to design and analyze policies for making real-time decisions
              concerning when to release new wafer lots into the plant, and how to schedule
              the large numbers of stations in re-entrant fabrication lines in the presence
              of equipment failures, set-up time constraints, batching considerations, and
              operator availability constraints.  In the area of planning, the goal is to
              study the issues of yield learning, equipment utilization over time, effects of
              adding equipment over time, ramp-up, and non-stationary behavior.  Also,
              problems of managing capital outlays over time in the face of demand
              uncertainty will be studied.   If successful, the results of this research will
              lead to improvements in the design and operation of semiconductor fabrication
              facilities. They will provide methods for the prediction of the performance of
              large fabrication facilities before they are built.  They will also   provide
              methods for efficiently scheduling the complex operations of expensive
              fabrication plants so as to improve their cycle-time performance.  The
              researched work will thus contribute to the   understanding of how to design
              and operate large wafer fabrication facilities.
