Title       : Subsurface Construction, Resulting Ground Movements, and Protection of the Built
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9713854

Award Number: 9713854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Cording ecording@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research is aimed at developing guidelines for assessing, controlling, and
              monitoring ground movements and building damage that are acceptable to
              contractors, designers, and preservationists and that will provide adequate and
              economic protection of structures.  Tasks in this project include the
              following:  1) Large model-scale tests:  Four large model-scale tieback walls
              (1/10th scale) will be constructed to investigate the effects of excavation
              wall stiffness and building stiffness on potential building damage.  These
              tests allow control of the environment and material properties, and permit
              extensive instrumentation and monitoring of wall, soil, and building.  2)
              Collection and analyses of field date:  Field data from excavations and
              tunneling will provide additional information on behavior of full-scale
              structures.  Collaboration with major structural engineering firms, contractors
              and consultants will provide data from a wide variety of excavation and
              tunneling projects both in the U.S. and internationally.  Analysis and
              presentation of these data will furnish critical information for documenting
              behavior and improving guidelines for monitoring ground movement and
              controlling damage.  3) Numerical analyses:  Finite element modeling will be
              conducted to investigate the interaction between ground, retaining walls, and
              surrounding structures during and after excavation.  Results of analyses will
              be compared with field cases and with results from large model scale tests.  4)
              Development and assessment of guidelines for controlling damage:  Guidelines
              for evaluating and controlling ground movements and  limiting building damage
              will be developed from the results with participation of practitioners in
              workshops.  The recommendations will establish guidelines for estimating
              typical ground movements for various conditions, and help identify economical
              and accurate ways to monitor ground movements and building response. 
              Assessment of these guidelines will center around two workshops that will allow
              broad-based participation by leaders in the engineering, architecture,
              preservation, and construction communities to ensure that the guidelines and
              recommendations generated will be safe, fair, usable, and cost-effective as
              well as properly disseminated in spheres of both design and construction.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
