Title       : Reproductive Genetics of neurospora tetrasperma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9713015

Award Number: 9713015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141299             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Jacobson djjacob@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jacobson   97-13015  Unlike N. crassa, which is heterothallic and produces
              haploid ascospores of two separate mating types, N. tetrasperma is self fertile
              as a consequence of each ascopore receiving one nucleus of each mating type. 
              This reproductive system has been termed pseudohomothallism, because occasional
              single mating-type spores are self sterile and heterothallic, suggesting the
              potential for outcrossing in nature.  At one level, the mechanism of
              pseudohomothallism in N. tetrasperma appears quite simple.  An overlap of
              spindles at the second meiotic division, together with subsequent programmed
              nuclear movements, leads to four heterokaryotic ascospores per ascus, instead
              of the eight typical of N. crassa and other truly heterothallic species. 
              Despite this deceptively simple mechanism for creating self-fertile ascospores,
              it is now clear that pseudohomothallism in N. tetrasperma has important and
              complex implications.  One recent study revealed that laboratory outcrossing
              with geographically diverse strains of N. tetrasperma results in high levels of
              sexual dysfunction.  Another demonstrated that recombination between N.
              tetrasperma mating-type chromosomes is suppressed relative to that observed for
              truly heterothallic species, such as N. crassa;  and it demonstrated that the
              mating-type chromosomes and autosomes of N. tetrasperma reflect very different
              evolutionary histories.  Paradoxically, suppressed recombination on the
              mating-type chromosome, coupled with the unique sexual developmental pathway of
              N. tetrasperma, has produced wild-type strains with high levels of
              heteroallelism on the mating-type chromosome, but with virtually complete
              homoallelism for sequences on autosomes.  The results of these two studies
              appear to be very much interrelated.  For example, one aspect of sexual
              dysfunction seems to involve protoplasmic incompatibility brought about by
              heteroallelism at certain loci.  The high levels of homoallelism observed for
              autosomal sequences in wild type strains may reflect  an avoidance of this
              incompatibility.  This research will investigate (1) the genetic bases of
              sexual dysfunction and (2) the mechanism and biological significance of
              suppressed recombination on the mating-type chromosome.    Our study focuses on
              several fundamental aspects of developmental and life-cycle biology, and it
              therefore has broad implications for reproductive genetics in higher organisms.
               This study will go far toward developing N. tetrasperma as an experimental
              organism for future genetic studies.
