Title       : COLLABORATIVE: Planning Manipulation with Contact Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9713034

Award Number: 9713034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jong-Shi Pang pang@mts.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie A. Hall  (Principal Investigator former)
              John C. Wierman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research studies robot motion planning for tasks  involving  rolling   and
                sliding   contact  with   friction   (generalized  manipulation  planning).  
              The goal is  to  derive  and  use  new  results    in   multi-rigid-body  
              mechanics   and   mathematical  programming to develop techniques for the
              automatic generation of  robust  feedback  control  strategies.   These 
              strategies   will  guarantee  correct execution of manipulation tasks  with 
              contact  despite   uncertainty  in  the  parameters  of   the   geometric, 
              kinematic, and dynamic models, and sensing errors.  When  correct  task 
              execution cannot be guaranteed, the secondary  goal  is  to  specify  a  set 
              of tighter, but widest possible, bounds  on  the  uncertain  parameters  and
              sensing errors,  which  if  satisfied,  would  guarantee correct execution. 
              Application domains for  the  expected  results include industrial assembly,
              grasp  acquisition  and  dexterous  manipulation, visual  serving,  medical 
              assembly  (e.g.,  hip replacement), virtual reality, and mechanical design.  To
               test  the  practicality  of the  proposed  approach  and  the  validity  of 
              the  underlying mathematical models,  a  CAD-based,  manipulation  planning
              system will be implemented.  Automatically  generated  plans  will be executed
              with real  devices  (i.e.,  an  industrial  robot  and  a planar dexterous 
              manipulation  testbed  available   at  Texas  A&M).  In  addition,  real 
              problems   and  associated  data  will  be  provided by colleagues  from 
              General  Electric,  Boeing, and the Amarillo National Resource Center  for 
              Plutonium.   The work involves a collaboration with Profs.  Nancy  Amato  and
              Jeffrey Trinkle of the Department of Computer  Science  at Texas A&M
              University.
