Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Thermozyme Biotechnology- Study of Production of
               Lipase/Esterase From Bacillus Stearothermophilus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9713644

Award Number: 9713644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-Dar Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr.
              Chung-Dar Lu of the Department of Biology, Georgia State University in Atlanta,
              GA, and Dr. Ahmed I El-Diwany, Mubarak City for Scientific Research in
              Alexandria, Egypt.  The goal of this joint research is to study the use of
              thermozyme technology for industrial applications, with focus on the following
              specific objectives: construction of genomic libraries of a thermophile,
              Bacillus stearothermophilus; generation of recombinant strains for intensive
              production of thermostable lipase/esterase; pilot plant lipase/esterase
              production; and improvement of lipase/esterase characteristics.  Scope:  This
              research project will involve scientists who have complementary experiences and
              have access to facilities that are needed for the collaboration.  The first two
              objectives of constructing a genome library on B. stearothermophilus and
              generation of recombinant strains will be addressed at Georgia State by Dr. Lu
              and a graduate student in his laboratory, where the necessary facilities exist,
              and where similar work has been done earlier.  The third objective of the
              lipase/esterase production will be carried out by Dr. El-Diwany, while the
              fourth objective of improvement of lipase/esterase characteristics will require
              interaction by the two laboratories as well as by PHARCO, a collaborating
              industrial concern in Egypt.  Successful work on this project can lead to
              improvement in the production of various enzymes that are capable of
              withstanding high temperatures without adverse effects on their useful
              properties.  Such enzymes are important and are widely used in industry.   This
              proposal meets  the INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration in
              areas of mutual benefit.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
