Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: An Anchored Comparative Map of the River Buffalo
               Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9713618

Award Number: 9713618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12540              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Womack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9713618  Womack    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative 
              project by Dr. James E. Womack, Department of  Veterinary  Pathobiology, Texas
              A&M University in College Station, TX,  and Dr. Soheir El-Nahas, Department of
              Cell Biology at the  National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The 
              objective of this joint research is to utilize a panel of  hybrid somatic
              cells, generated in the Egyptian laboratory,  to map comparative anchor loci
              developed initially for use  in the cattle gene mapping in the US laboratory. 
              These will  include comparative anchor tagged sites (CATs) primers where 
              applicable, and custom designed bovine PCR primers for  anchor loci
              recalcitrant to mapping with CATs primers.  The  goal is to build a comparative
              map of river buffalo genome,  anchored at ten centimorgan intervals to the maps
              of cattle  and other mammals including human and mice.  These maps will  permit
              "comparative candidate positional cloning" of genes  of economic interest in
              buffalo from the high resolution  maps of other species.    Scope:  This
              research project will allow two experienced  researchers to collaborate on a
              project of significant  potential to the scientific interests in the United
              States  and in Egypt.  The project has great potential for the  improvement of
              buffaloes in Egypt through the identification  of genes for economically
              important traits and markers.  The  US laboratory will be able to continue its
              pursuit of  identifying the chromosomal homology between humans and  cattle,
              since most of the CATs primers remain untested in  cattle and consequently are
              unmapped.  Thus any primers  discovered to work in buffalo by the Egyptian
              laboratory  will have a high probability of working in cattle and can  then be
              added to the cattle map.  The net result of the  collaboration to screen the
              CATs primers will be a more  efficient screen than either laboratory can
              perform alone.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting U.S.- 
              foreign collaboration in areas that have  shared benefits for  both sides. 
              This project is being supported under the US-  Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to  scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out 
              these cooperative activities.  ***
