Title       : FSML: Enhancement of Support Facilities for Visiting Scientists at Konza Prairie
               Research Natural Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9713881

Award Number: 9713881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142934             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett hartnett@lter-konza.konza.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Konza Prairie Research Natural Area (KPRNA) is a 3,487 ha  tallgrass prairie
              preserve managed as a biological  research station by the Division of Biology,
              Kansas State  University.  Over 120 projects, involving KSU researches  from 14
              Departments and 5 Colleges, and 65 visiting  researches from other
              institutions, are being conducted  on the site.  KSU research on KPRNA is
              supported by $5 M  in extramural funding from 15 government agencies and 
              private foundations.  Current facilities include a large  renovated stone ranch
              house and barn that serve as  research and educational headquartes,a small
              laboratory,  30 km of fencing, 17 km of maintained gravel roads, fire 
              management equipment, and 60 watershed treatment units  (avg. size 0.55 km2)
              maintained under different long-term  prescribed fire and gazing treatment
              combinations.  Ungulate grazers are managed within a 949 ha bison  enclosure
              and handling facility, and a 325 ha cattle  enclosure.  The replicated
              watershed-level grazing and  prescribed fire treatments provide the
              infrastructure for  over 80% of the research on the site.  The overall 
              research on KPRNA, the numbers of visiting (non-KSU)  scientists, and the
              number of small plots maintained for  their research programs have all grown
              significantly in  the last decade. Therefore, a three phase development  plan
              for KPRNA was initiated including 1) producing a  long range Master Plan, II)
              stabilizing and renovating  the existing facilities and equipment, and III) 
              constructing new laboratory, support facilities, and  living quarters for
              visiting scientists. Phases I and II  are essentially completed.    This
              project will begin Phase III and focuses on  enhancing support facilities for
              visiting scientists.  Specifically, the project to increase laboratory space 
              for visiting scientists and to support the purchase of a  special purpose
              tractor needed for maintenance of both  the long-term watershed-level
              treatments and the greatly  increasing numbers of small plots established by 
              co llaborating and individuals visiting researchers. The  expansion of
              experimental plot research on KPRNA has  resulted from an increasing conceptual
              focus on key  questions regarding 1) underlying processes and  mechanisms
              driving large-scale community and ecosystems  patterns and change, and 2)
              assessment of their  generality across grasslands and other terrestrial 
              ecosystems via cross-site studies. Concurrently, matching  funds will be used
              to install  onsite computing  facilities and T1 computer line connection to the
              KU  campus, and to construct a new building to house fire  management
              equipment.  The completion of this proposed  work will significantly enhance
              the KPRNA research  capacity, laboratory and computing support facilities for 
              visiting scientists and students, and data management and  communication
              system. These improvements will facilitate  further in collaborative
              cross-disciplinary research on  grasslands and other terrestrial systems.
