Title       : Structured Turbulence Collisionless Dynamics and Magnetic Field Generation in
               Astrophysical Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9713241

Award Number: 9713241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265619             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. McWilliams jcm@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Cowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1062,1206,1216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - J. C. McWilliams and S. Cowley    Structured Turbulence,
              Collisionless Dynamics, and Magnetic Field Generation in Anisotropic
              Astrophysical Plasmas      This research project is an investigation of some
              basic problems of plasma turbulence which are particularly relevant to
              astrophysical dynamos.  The study will use the galactic dynamo as the primary
              astrophysical example, but the results will be relevant also to protogalactic
              and accretion-disk dynamos.  In particular, the early stages of magnetic
              amplification at very small scales in large-Prandtl-number plasmas and the late
              stages of magnetic energy buildup at large scale by inverse cascade will be
              studied with the following objectives:    (1) To determine mechanisms for
              magnetic energy scale growth at scales within the viscous dissipation range of
              fluid turbulence, by ambipolar diffusion, anisotropic viscosity, or
              self-consistent nonlinear dynamics.    (2) To explore the physics of plasmas on
              scales short compared to the collisional mean free path, but when the evolution
              is slow compared to the collision frequency, and to derive fluid-like equations
              that describe this physics.    (3) To study the inverse cascade in a rotating
              disk with small-scale forcing, such that the anisotropic environment provides a
              physical mechanism for helicity generation.    These problems have not been
              thoroughly studied in the past, yet they address key processes which must occur
              in actual physical dynamos. Analytical theory, turbulent closure model
              calculations, and direct numerical solutions of high Reynolds number fluid
              equations will be used to attack these problems.  Asymptotic analysis of
              kinetic equations will be used to describe low collisionality behavior.
              Dissipation-range magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) will be explored by closure
              calculations and direct numerical solutions at high Prandtl number, including
              non-MHD effects such as partial ionization and low collisionality.  Direct
              numerical solutions of turbulent MHD in an anisotropic environment w ill be
              also be calculated, making use where possible of asymptotic reductions to
              decrease computational complexity and increase the range of resolvable scales
              while retaining the ingredients necessary for self-consistent dynamo action. 
              This theoretical study will address often overlooked questions of small- and
              large-scale dynamos and provide basic understanding of high Prandtl-number and
              anisotropic plasma turbulence.  ***
