Title       : Understanding and Modeling the Creep Behavior of Lamellar TiA1 Based Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9713731

Award Number: 9713731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Hemker hemker@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Bao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9713731  Hemker       Fully  lamellar  two  phase  TiAl  based 
              intermetallic  alloys  offer a very attractive mix of mechanical properties 
              and are  considered to be strong candidates for replacing  nickel base 
              superalloys in several structural applications  involving temperatures  of up
              to 900' C. At these  temperatures, the creep performance of these  alloys is of
               primary concern. Unfortunately, our understanding of the  processes that
              control high temperature deformation in  many  advanced  materials, including
              TiAl, is currently rather  limited.   The underlying creep mechanisms in these
              advanced  alloys are often quite different from that in pure metals;  the
              influence of steady-state creep is much smaller than it  is in pure metals, and
              transient deformation processes  (i.e..  primary and tertiary creep) have been
              found to  dominate the creep  behavior. In these cases, the Dorn  description
              of power-law creep is no  longer valid and  attempts to characterize the creep
              behavior with activation  energies and stress exponents, derived from minimum
              creep  rates, have met with very limited success.       This has  profound
              consequences for the prediction of  creep  performance, because the FEM codes
              used for creep  analysis require the input of creep laws that  characterize 
              the creep behavior of the material. Wherever possible it is  desirable to have
              these laws based on  the physical  deformation mechanisms. The widely
              referenced Dorn  description  of  power-law  creep  is  based on diffusion 
              assisted  climb in recovery processes that lead to steady  state creep.
              However, as is shown in the PI's RIA  related  research, in most intermetallic
              alloys, including TiAl , the  diffusion-assisted recovery processes which lead
              to  steady  state creep in pure metals are replaced by a gradual  evolution of
              the deformation microstructure. For this  reason, the Dorn equation cannot be
              used to model creep in  this set of alloys and it is necessary to develop an 
              alternative set of mechanism-based  creep relations for  TiAl  based lamellar
              alloys.       The  primary  goal of this work will be to derive a  fundamental
              set of creep laws that are based on observations  of microstructural evolution
              as a function of creep strain.  This  will require  a close integration  of
              mechanics and  materials and will involve work at three  specific  length 
              scales: i) the microscopic deformation mechanisms  will  be  identified  and
              characterized by TEM observations of fully  lamellar  polycrystalline specimens
              that have been crept to  various  amounts of creep strain, ii) the mesoscopic
              effects  of grain size, lamellar spacing, and lamellar orientation  will be
              separated and characterized with single crystal and  microsample creep tests,
              and iii)  the  macroscopic  creep  behavior of these alloys will be modeled
              with constitutive  relations that are based on the micro-and mesoscopic 
              measurements. The PI's experience with creep testing, TEM,  and TiAl has  been
              teamed with the co-PI's expertise in  developing continuum models of multiphase
              materials in order  to assure a bridge between the mechanics  and materials 
              issues in this study.***
