Title       : Development of Soil Filter Design Nomograms Incorporating Physicochemical and
               Biological Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9713708

Award Number: 9713708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lakshmi N. Reddi reddi@ce.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Glasgow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Existing criteria for soil filter design are based largely on particle retention
              principles, often involving comparison of particle size distributions of filter
              and the base soils, and do not account for filter clogging associated with the
              transport of colloid-sized fine particles.  This research addresses the need
              for a comprehensive understanding and methodology development for design of
              filters incorporating physicochemical and biological mechanisms.  Recent
              advances in filtration and biofilm theories will be exploited in the proposed
              research to develop design nomograms from fundamental principles. 
              Specifically, the goals of the projects are:  1) to systematically perform an
              experimental evaluation of the role of physicochemical and biological
              characteristics of pore fluid suspension on soil filter clogging, 2) to develop
              and validate a mathematical model that quantitatively predicts the extent of
              soil clogging in terms of physicochemical and biological characteristics of the
              filter media and the pore fluid suspension, and 3) to use the model in a design
              mode and generate easily usable nomograms for designing soil filters.  The
              experimental investigation will include two stages.  In the first stage,
              biological activity will be suppressed and the effect of physicochemical
              characteristics such as the filter medium properties (particle and pore size
              distributions, void ratios) and the pore fluid composition (measured in terms
              of ionic strength/pH) will be assessed systematically.  In the second stage,
              bacterial strains will be introduced and the effects of substrate
              concentrations and dissolved oxygen on biomass growth will be assessed.  The
              filter medium in the experiments will be thoroughly characterized at the end of
              testing to determine the extent of particulate and biological clogging.  The
              influent and effluent will be monitored continuously during the experiments. 
              All information for model development and validation will be generated from the
              experiments.  Finally, the study will take advantage of ongoing failure
              investigation on the Won-Ju landfill leachate collection system in Korea.  The
              mutual collaboration with the Korean team will provide the field perspective
              necessary for validation of the research and the developed design tools.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
