Title       : Impact of Asset Utilization on Replacement Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1998  
File        : a9713690

Award Number: 9713690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208592             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Hartman jch6@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Hartman  9713690   This grant provides funding for the development of an
              optimization tool to determine replacement decisions for a group of assets
              subject to a random operational environment.  Traditional models, which provide
              replacement decisions over discrete (annual) intervals, are based on expected
              operating, maintenance and salvage costs which are dependent on asset
              utilization levels determined by operational (daily) decisions. However, due to
              uncertainty associated with operations, such as fluctuating demand or budget
              levels, these expected utilization levels may not  be realized in practice,
              thus invalidating the replacement schedule.  The research will link strategic
              (replacement) and operational (utilization) decisions such that replacement
              schedules are functions of asset utilization.  This problem will be examined in
              the context of the  transportation industry, with sponsors including a railroad
              and a truck leasing firm.  A double-ended queueing model is researched to
              approximate the operations of the transportation system and determine
              utilization levels.  This model is built into a non-linear optimization model
              which determines minimum   cost purchase and sale decisions.  The research
              solution procedure for the large scale non-linear program is based on augmented
              Lagrangian techniques.     There are numerous potential applications of this
              research in industry and the military as these organizations generally rely on
              groups or fleets of assets which are subject to varying levels of utilization
              in an uncertain environment.  The analysis will merge two traditionally
              separate decisions, the static replacement problem and the dynamic operational
              problem, such that strategic   capital budgeting decisions are based on a
              measurement of actual operations.  As acquisition decisions are dependent on
              asset utilization, the model will improve the asset replacement decision  
              process which traditionally relies on static data.  This research will also
              contribute to improved solution techniques  for large scale non-linear
              optimization models and provide more investigation into double-ended queues
              which despite their numerous applications are not prominent in   research.
