Title       : Shape Grammars: A Method and Representation for Product Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a9713782

Award Number: 9713782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Cagan cagan@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George N. Stiny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding to support the theoretical and practical
              development of shape grammars to computationally model the generation and
              structure of consumer products.  The theory will provide a rich   foundation
              for the creation of grammars of form and function for this engineering
              application; the specific product grammars will provide a means to rapidly
              generate new products or recreate known products.  Initially, a grammar to
              generate coffee makers will be completed.  A manufacturing analysis of the
              coffee makers will be performed and related to the grammar rules and the
              grammar itself will be implemented.  Two to three additional grammars for new
              product classes will be generated and their cost performance and
              implementations will also be pursued.  As the grammars are completed,
              investigations into how the resulting products map onto corporate identity will
              be performed.  As well, once the manufacturing cost analyses are completed,
              explorations of the product design space generated by the grammar will be
              performed.  Theoretical advancements relating form and function through shape
              grammars will continue throughout the project.      Product design in today's
              competitive environment is pushed by fast time-to-market and one-of-a-kind
              design.  As the multitude of products emerge, a company finds the need and
              difficulty in maintaining their corporate identity across the product lines. 
              Long term there is no easy way for companies to keep up with this consumer
              demand without computational assistance.  Successful completion of this
              proposal will show that shape grammars are a computational representation that
              models important characteristics of product design in a concise and intuitively
              descriptive manner; they are also a means to use the representation to direct
              the generation of designs, limiting the scope of design to keep it
              controllable, yet allowing freedom for expression within the design process. 
              The work will extend existing theory to incorporate product characteristics,
              implement the theory in usable grammars, and pursue application of the theory
              to the design of products.  The result will be a more detailed understanding of
              how formal grammars can model the design process, rapidly generate novel design
              concepts, and give better feedback to a designer and corporation on how to
              model desired characteristics into a product through computer automation.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
