Title       : Investigation of the Physical, Chemical, and Catalytic Properties of Transition
               Metal Cations in Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9713143

Award Number: 9713143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexis T. Bell bell@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Reimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Bell - 9713143     Profs. Alexis T. Bell and Jeffrey A. Reimer will
              study the catalytic, structural and stability properties of transition-metal
              cation-exchanged zeolites. Test reactions will include N2O decomposition and
              olefin dimerization. The physico-chemical probes will involve TPD, and
              infrared, Raman, NMR, ESR, and UV-Vis spectroscopy, both ex situ and in situ,
              in order to determine cation distribution and oxidation state before and after
              reaction, and adsorbed and reactive intermediates identity during reaction.
              Other techniques such as XRD and SEM for microstructure, and Guoy balance for
              magnetic susceptibility, will also be used. Double resonance, line broadening,
              and magic-angle spinning NMR techniques will be exploited to probe the
              distribution and electronic properties of exchanged cations. The influence of
              zeolite structure, Si/Al ratio, co-exchanged cations, cation loading, and
              synthesis and reaction conditions, on catalytic, structural, and stability
              properties will be determined. In particular, the study will involve the use of
              commercial ZMS-5 with Si/Al ratios above 10, cation-exchanged with, e.g., Cu,
              Co, Ag, Ga, In, and Zn. The synthesis-structure-property-performance relations
              will be studied to provide a basis for the design and industrial application of
              transition-metal cation-exchanged zeolites. This type of catalysts is of
              relevance in the petroleum, bulk chemical,  fine chemical and environmental
              protection industries.
