Title       : Robust Scheduling and Diagnostics Using Simulation-Based Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9713878

Award Number: 9713878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Spearman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713878  Spearman   This award provides funding for the development of an
              approach to finite capacity scheduling that uses simulation-based optimization
              techniques and real-time information now available in modern manufacturing
              execution systems (MES).  Our approach will be to incorporate powerful
              simulation optimization techniques with a fast manufacturing simulator to
              develop a scheduling methodology that incorporates variability, computes
              "optimal"' lead times,   and provides sensitivity analysis.  The specific
              issues we will address in our research include:  (1) converting a "bill of
              process"' (i.e., the combination of a bill of material, the involved routings,
              and the processes) along with a set of demands into a fast "sample path"
              simulation model; (2) developing useful objective functions that use
              information found in an MES and that reflect the desires of production
              planners; (3) examine various gradient estimation and fast optimization
              methods; (4) develop methods for sensitivity analysis that provide information
              useful to a production planner to assist in making an infeasible production
              schedule feasible (e.g., adding capacity, pushing out due dates); (5) test the
              methods using the Virtual Factory Laboratory   at Georgia Tech and in the
              plants of our industrial partners.   If this research is successful it will
              improve manufacturing scheduling in a number of ways.  First, it should improve
              existing MRP II systems by computing planned lead times that consider current
              and predicted congestion levels.  As such, large existing software systems need
              only be retrofitted rather than replaced.  Second, the system will explicitly
              consider variability and randomness.  By considering these factors, appropriate
              lead time buffers can be set without extra "padding" thereby remaining
              competitive in terms of both quick response and the ability to meet  
              commitments.  Third, the developed methodology should be able to provide useful
              diagnostics for a schedule indicating which requirements are difficult  to
              attain and how they might be relaxed.  This should provide the ability to know
              how to make an infeasible schedule feasible in the most cost effective way.
