Title       : Reactions of Hydroxyl Radicals and Ozone with Volatile Organic Compounds Within
               Gas Phase Clusters: Experiment and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9713381

Award Number: 9713381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211518             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Garvey garvey@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Furlani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9713381  Garvey     The reaction of hydroxyl radical (OH) with volatile organic
              compounds (VOCs) of biogenic or anthropogenic origin is a major source of
              tropospheric ozone. The reaction of OH with VOCs can also lead to the formation
              of harmful acidic compounds. VOCs react with ozone to form a variety of
              products, including energetic biradicals and OH radicals, and ozone-alkene
              reactions can be an important nighttime source of OH.    This project addresses
              how the above reactions could be mediated by the presence of aerosol particles
              (fog, rain, cloud droplets, etc.). In this research, it will be determined how
              the gas phase chemistry changes if the radical reactions occur within a gas
              phase cluster of molecules as a model of much larger airborne aerosol
              particles.   The University at Buffalo group has experience in studying
              chemical reactions within gas phase clusters both experimentally and
              theoretically. It was observed that frequently, the chemistry occurring in
              clusters is very different from that in the gas phase. Solvating molecules
              within the cluster can stabilize a reagent or intermediate on a time scale long
              enough to react within the cluster. In these experiments, gas phase clusters
              containing nitric acid, the VOC, water, and other ligand molecules will be
              prepared via molecular beam expansion. OH will be produced via photolysis of
              nitric acid or other suitable precursors. Reaction products will be monitored
              via tandem mass spectrometry. Theoretical calculations will provide estimates
              of the energetics and lifetimes of intermediate biradicals.
