Title       : Modeling The Growth Of Crystals From Solution Via High Performance Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9713044

Award Number: 9713044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Derby derby@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,9215,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9713044  Jeffrey Derby/U. Minn.    This project will develop and
              apply novel theoretical models based on massively parallel finite elements
              techniques to describe the growth of single crystals from solution.  The
              proposed models features a self-consistent coupling of three-dimensional,
              continuum transport analyses with detailed kinetic  models for growth.  This
              goal is significant, since there have been no prior rigorous models to describe
              three-dimensional effects representative of realistic growth systems. 
              Subsequent application of this model will focus on several outstanding issues
              in solution crystal growth, including the determination of  crystal growth rate
              and habit, the effects of hydrodynamics open facet stability, the modification
              of growth habit by transport effects, the  dynamics of growth hillocks and
              spirals and related phenomena (such as the effects of anisotropic surface
              diffusion on spiral shape), the formation of step bunches, and the formation of
              liquid inclusions.    He understanding gained from successful modeling of
              solution crystal growth systems will lead to better process operation and
              design, ultimately yielding better quality crystals at higher production rates
              and lower costs.  These crystals  have important current and future
              applications in advanced optical, magnetic, and electronic devices.  In
              addition, the computational challenges of realistically modeling these systems
              are significant, and the continued development of algorithms for massively
              parallel supercomputing will be noteworthy in itself.  This work will advance a
              scientifically important and technologically relevant research topic involving
              the NSF-identified priority areas of advanced materials, advanced research
              topic involving the NSF-identified priority areas of advanced materials.
              Advanced manufacturing, and high performance computing and communication.     
              The proposed work focus on the growth of large, inorganic crystals from
              solution; however, the fundamental issues addressed here  are also applicable
              to many other processes, including the hydrothermal and flux growth of
              crystals, liquid-phase epitaxy, and industrial crystallization (including
              protein crystals and other organic crystals).  The results of this work, namely
              the powerful theoretical tools and the more complete understanding of  the
              coupling of transport and kinetics during the growth of crystalline materials,
              will undoubtedly also impact these areas.
