Title       : Computational Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9713730

Award Number: 9713730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Schmeiser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Colm A. O'Cinneide  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713730  O'Cinneide   This grant provides funding for the development of
              computational methodologies for analyzing and predicting the performance of
              complex systems, such as manufacturing facilities and computer and
              telecommunication networks.  The methodologies to be developed are based on
              theoretical models of the randomness in such systems and a theoretical
              understanding of the impact of randomness on performance.  The principal
              methodologies to be considered are (a) methods based on Fourier or Laplace
              transform inversion; (b) heavy-traffic Brownian approximations; (c) Markovian
              methods (Neuts method of phases); (d) Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods; and (e)
              decomposition and other approximate methods.  The research builds on a
              substantial body of literature in each of these areas.   This research will
              enhance the ability of engineers and managers to assess the capabilities of
              award new systems and to predict the impact of modifications on existing
              systems.  The computational methodologies to be developed are very different
              from the standard approach to these problems, namely, simulation, in which
              system performance is predicted based on a detailed and time-consuming process
              of mimicking the actual operations of the system on a computer.  By bringing
              theoretical knowledge to bear on predicting performance, computational
              methodologies make possible very rapid computer analyses which may be
              sufficient for a given situation or which may be used as a preliminary step in
              preparation for a detailed simulation study.  One specific goal will be to
              develop a methodology for the performance analysis of manufacturing systems
              that can take account of the key features already handled by existing software,
              such as variability in processing times and machine breakdowns, but with
              extensions to deal with some additional specific features:  (a)
              Constant-Work-in-Process (CONWIP) conditions; (b) simple dispatching rules such
              as Easiest Due Date (EDD); and (c) multiple job types.
