Title       : The Isotopic Composition of Iron: A Chemical Fingerprint forBiologic Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9713968

Award Number: 9713968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Beard beardb@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clark M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9713968  Beard, Johnson    Abstract    This award supports a project to develop
              a chemical method for  fingerprinting biological activity in meteorites using
              the  isotopic composition of iron (Fe).  It is supported by the Office  of
              Polar Programs, the Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  Development of a biological  chemical
              fingerprint will be useful in:    1) evaluating the recent interpretations that
              meteorite ALH84001  contains evidence of ancient biological activity on Mars,
              partly  in the form of ultra-fine-grained magnetite and sulfide iron  minerals
              that are inferred to have been formed by iron-reducing  bacteria;    2)
              screening extraterrestrial material for biological activity  (meteorites or
              samples returned from future missions to other  planets); and    3)
              establishing the time limits for the earliest life on Earth.    Biologically
              produced iron-bearing minerals are ubiquitous, and  many iron biominerals are
              produced by bacteria that reduce ferric  iron to ferrous iron, resulting in 
              formation of iron-oxides, -  sulfides, or -carbonates.  The metabolic pathway
              for iron  reduction is the same as that used by bacteria which reduce  sulfate
              to sulfide.  Bacteria reduction of sulfate can produce  large fractionations in
              sulfur-34 to sulfur-32 ratios.  By  analogy to sulfate-reducing bacteria, iron
              reducing bacteria are  expected to be capable of producing Fe isotope
              fractionations  that are on the order of those observed for sulfate reducing 
              bacteria, based on the relative mass spread of Fe and S isotopes.  This
              magnitude of fractionation is suggested by preliminary  studies of Fe isotopes
              by Dixon et al., who interpret the Fe  isotope ratio variations they measured
              in terrestrial samples to  reflect biologically-induced Fe isotope
              fractionation.    The scope of this research will be to establish a baseline
              for  the isotopic composition of inorganic iron by analysis of  inorganically
              produced Fe-bearing minerals from a variety of  physical settings .  Evaluating
              the Fe isotope fractionation  produced by biological processes will be
              conducted by analyzing  iron biominerals that were grown from isolated bacteria
              strains  in a controlled laboratory environment.  With these limits 
              established, it will be possible to use the isotopic composition  of Fe to
              evaluate if inferred iron biominerals in Martian  meteorite ALH84001 were
              produced inorganically or by biological  activity.
