Title       : Variable Weight Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines, Offset Surfaces, and
               Gouging-Free Computer Numerical Control Tool Path Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9713913

Award Number: 9713913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwun-Ion Ting kting@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding for the development of variable weight
              non-uniform rational B-splines (VW NURBS), a method for offset surface
              generation, and a technique for gouging-free tool path identification in
              computer numerically controlled (CNC) machining.  The properties of VW NURBS
              will be explored.  The results from VW NURBS will be applied to approximate
              offset curves and surfaces, in which the error can be adjusted by constructing
              weight functions of VW NURBS and by using a subdivision algorithm.  The gouging
              condition of a CNC machining tool path will be identified by using the offset
              surface in user interface.  The proposed method will determine the optimal
              cutter radius and its inclination angle to avoid any local interference in
              manufacturing free-form surfaces with a ball-end mill or a flat-end mill.     
              If successful, this research will lead to a fundamental advancement in CAD/CAM
              development.  VW NURBS is a systematic extension of NURBS, the most promising
              model used in the current commercial CAD/CAM software.  It offers a more
              general model than NURBS and can enhance the flexibility, capability, and
              efficiency of CAD/CAM systems.  In addition to CNC machining, the method of
              offset curve and surface generation can also be applied to tolerance analysis,
              mold and die making, rapid prototyping, robot path planning, and finite element
              mesh generation.  The proposed gouging identification method will allow one to
              optimize the cutter size and orientation easily, and hence, enhance the
              productivity and quality of CNC machining.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
