Title       : 3-D Characterization and Analytical Description of Desiccation Cracking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9713922

Award Number: 9713922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Miller cmiller@ce.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nazli Yesiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on desiccation cracking, and on the need to develop
              geometric information on crack geometry through the development of
              nondestructive testing techniques or application to fine grained soils that are
              susceptible to changes in properties including strength, volumetric
              relationships, and hydraulic properties.  The objective of the proposed
              research is to develop an ultrasonic nondestructive testing technique to
              determine the depth of desiccation cracks in clay soils and to relate the depth
              of cracking to various clay properties.  The investigators will formulate a
              series of predictive equations relating to the development and propagation of
              cracks, such as: depth of cracking, surface crack density, and rate of crack
              propagation as a function of plasticity and activity, mineralogy, initial water
              content, compaction conditions, and strength of soils, and wetting and drying
              cycles applied to the soils.  The crack characteristics that will be analyzed
              experimentally include soil moisture suction corresponding to crack initiation,
              depth of propagation, surficial geometry, rate of crack propagation, and
              moisture flux through cracks, with a focus on the effects of cracking on
              hydraulic properties of the soils.  The research will experimentally determine
              the modification of flow through the clay as a result of the presence of
              cracks.  The ultrasonic method will provide an innovative tool to analyze the
              depth of cracking in soils, and will be used together with previously developed
              image analysis techniques to determine 3-D characteristics of cracks. These two
              methods can be applied to analyze tension cracks, freeze/thaw cracks, or any
              other type of crack developing in soils.  The ultrasonic equipment can also be
              readily transported to the field for tests, and photographs of the desiccation
              process are the only input required for the image analysis.  The predictive
              equations will allow for determining extent of cracking using basic soil
              characterization data as opposed to complicated theoretical solutions.  Results
              of the research will apply to design and construction of engineering structures
              on soils susceptible to cracking and construction of waste containment
              facilities.  In addition, the results will apply to groundwater recharge
              problems, contaminant transport in the vadose zone, and agricultural problems. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
