Title       : Design Classification and Hybrid Variant/Generative Process Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9713718

Award Number: 9713718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $601370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana S. Nau nau@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey W. Herrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This grant provides funding to address two problem areas in the application of
              information technology to engineering.  The first area to be addressed is the
              development of techniques for automatic classification and retrieval of designs
              using detailed product design attributes that are more meaningful and accurate
              than Group Technology codes and can be computed automatically from the designs
              stored in the database.  The second area to be addressed is the development of
              a hybrid variant/generative approach to process planning that will combine the
              best characteristics of both variant and generative process planning, while
              avoiding the worst limitations of each.  When a process plan is needed for a
              new design, the hybrid approach will use the above classification scheme to
              retrieve portions or `slices` of several plans that are relevant for
              corresponding portions of the design, and then will combine these slices and
              modify them to produce a plan for the new design.       If successful, this
              work will have the following benefits.  First, it will combine, in an
              innovative way, the strengths of both variant and generative process planning. 
              Like traditional variant process planning, the proposed approach to process
              planning will construct process plans that the process engineer may need to
              improve.  However, by automatically adapting the retrieved plans to the new
              design requirements, it will minimize the need for such improvements, thus
              producing more successful implementations and applications than previous
              methods.  Second, the proposed work will develop techniques that help design
              and manufacturing engineers effectively use legacy data and adapt it to new
              problems.  Since it is estimated that practicing engineers spend more than 80
              percent of their time searching through legacy data, catalogs, and earlier
              engineering projects, this should have significant positive impact on
              engineering practice.
