Title       : Data Structures for Multivariate Statistical Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9713518

Award Number: 9713518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177486             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Runger runger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9713518  Runger   This award provides funding to develop guidelines for a data
              structure for multivariate statistical process control. A process control
              algorithm should detect a process anomaly as quickly as possible, without
              incurring excessive false alarms. However, in practice, (1) one can often
              select from among many variables (even hundreds) that are available, (2) the
              time order of the   original data is not suitable for direct input into the
              algorithm, a synchronization of variables is needed, (3) variables have
              different measurement frequencies, (4) some variables are more responsive to
              process upsets than others, (5) some variables can be computed as functions of
              the   others, and (6) a partition of selected variables is important to reduce
              complexity, improve performance, and simplify the interpretation of the control
              algorithm. A mathematical description of process data and process upsets will
              be used to develop recommendations for preprocessing the data to address these
              issues. Process data will be used to validate recommendations.   If successful,
              this project will affect the type and structure of process data that is
              collected for process control. This will include the process measurements that
              are recorded, the frequency of measurements, the time ordering of measurements,
              as well as how the measurements will be allocated (or partitioned) to
              particular control algorithms. Preliminary research has shown that a data
              structure is an important element of a process control strategy that becomes a
              critical element as the number of variables under analysis increase.
              Recommendations from this project will provide a synergy between the data
              structures and the control algorithms to increase the   usefulness,
              application, and performance of control methods. The results will also apply to
              data structures in areas such as neural networks, data mining, and signal
              processing, as well as process control.
