Title       : MOTI: A University-Industry Virtual Alliance for Radical Innovation in Flat
               Glass Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9713743

Award Number: 9713743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352900             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Dismukes John.Dismukes@utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. Frank Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca J. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. McNichols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Vonderembse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               In close collaboration with companies spanning the flat glass manufacturing
              value chain, this research team will assess changing end user requirements,
              design tools to measure the impact of this continuous-discrete dichotomy on
              manufacturing performance, and develop advanced tools that measure
              organizational culture and structure.  The objectives are target R&D efforts on
              radical innovations in manufacturing operations with the greatest potential
              impact on long range (2010) competitiveness, and to propose changes in
              organizational culture and structure needed to implement radical change. The
              flat glass manufacturing value chain were selected as partners because this
              manufacturing closely couples large-scale, continuous glass making furnaces to
              multiple post-furnace discrete-part fabrication and sub-assembly steps which
              supply end users with diverse flat glass product requirements (e.g. automotive,
              building products and flat panel display).  The team will collaborate in market
              assessment, model building and validation with company partners from the flat
              glass industry, and will work with technical and management representatives to
              ensure that the research learnings are transferable.  Modeling of the
              manufacturing system will address all process and distribution steps from raw
              materials through production of flat glass to final customer specifications,
              and will identify key research areas required to achieve radical innovation in
              manufacturing.  Modeling of organizational culture and structure will identify
              and recommend techniques for overcoming barriers to the development, design,
              and implementation of radical innovation.    An integrated study of the value
              chain for flat glass manufacturing will identify new approaches to radical
              innovation in manufacturing and supply infrastructure.  The results will
              stimulate implementation of real time monitoring and control and activity based
              costing, at the company as well as at the plant level.  The knowledge can be
              transferred throughout the glass indus try and to other mature, material
              intensive industries through participating company partners, industry
              organizations and government agencies such as the Department of Energy, Office
              of Industrial Technology (OIT).  Dissemination of research results through
              conferences, journal papers, training tools, and case studies will
              significantly impact both theory and practice of innovation.  The results will
              enhance student preparation for industrial and academic careers, and will
              stimulate further University-Industry partnerships.
