Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Chemical Finishing of Cotton Using Chitosan-Based
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9713608

Award Number: 9713608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21701              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Hudson sam_hudson@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Samuel
              M. Hudson, Department of  Textile Engineering, Chemistry, and Science at North
              Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Ahmed I. Waly, Textile
              Research Division at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.  The
              objective of this joint research is to study the feasibility of using chitin
              materials and products for finishing cotton fibers.  Chitin is an
              acetylamino-polysacharide analogous to cellulose in structure and abundance. 
              It is a naturally occurring polymer found in the cuticle of crustacea.  A
              derivative, chitosan, is obtained from chitin by deacetylation using strong
              alkaline conditions.  It is more reactive and useful than chitin by having both
              the hydroxyl and the amino-groups.  It is intended in this project to
              synthesize reactive chitosan derivatives through introduction of chlorine,
              epoxy, double bond, or methylol-containing moiety in the molecular structure of
              chitosan and modified chitosan; it is planned to establish the appropriate
              conditions for applications to cotton fabrics of these chitosan products either
              alone or in a mixture with other finishes.  Scope:  This project will involve
              two experienced researchers from two institutes for textile research, and with
              complementary expertise and facilities.  The American scientist has
              considerable experience in dealing with chitosan materials and their various
              applications in the medical profession and in other areas where toxicity would
              be a problem.  The Egyptian scientist has had experience in modifying these
              materials to add strength to these fibers especially in wet environment.  The
              successful development and utilization of these chitosan products should help
              improve the properties of the resulting fibers for general use in textiles, and
              especially for specific applications such as in medical applications as a
              biomedical polymer  useful in wound dressing, as a hemostatic agent, and in
              drug delivery systems.  This proposal meets INT objective of supporting
              U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that have benefits for both sides.  This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
