Title       : Production Strategies for Batch Processing with Random Yield
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9713727

Award Number: 9713727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tava M. Olsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Birge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Olsen  9713727   This grant provides funding for the study of batch production
              environments with random yield.  In these environments, products are produced
              in batches because either setup times or setup costs between product types are
              significant.  Furthermore, the output from production   is assumed to be highly
              variable.  The motivation for this work is from the automotive parts industry
              and particularly a plant which produces molded and painted plastic bumpers. 
              The paint line in this plant has highly unpredictable yield and changeovers
              between different paint colors   are expensive.  This research will further the
              development of (a) models that take into account random yield in a continuous
              time environment; (b) solution methods for these models that achieve computable
              error bounds on optimal values using both discrete and continuous
              approximations; (c)   characterizations of general properties of optimal
              solutions of these random yield models that provide insight into managerial
              decisions; and (d) comparisons of discrete and continuous time models in
              general with insight into fundamental model characteristics of each approach
              and their relationship to underlying situations.   The main impact of the
              research will be to improve decision making in random yield systems.  It will
              provide methods that have computable bounds and that can be applied in a
              variety of settings from machining to painting to semiconductor fabrication. 
              The methodology will   be tested on real data to ensure that it is
              implementable in real time in complex manufacturing environments.  The results
              of this research are expected to have a significant effect on  industries
              critical to U.S. competitiveness (such as the automotive parts industry) where
              product yield is highly variable.  The investigators will work with interested
              companies to ensure that the results are relevant.  The research is also
              expected to have significant academic contributions in the areas of   queueing
              theory, scheduling, and stochastic programming.
