Title       : Analytical and Experimental Investigation of Force Controlled Off-Road Wheeled
               Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1997  
File        : a9713926

Award Number: 9713926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152452             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. V. Sreenivasan sv.sreeni@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with an active control of offroad  wheeled vehicles.
              An effective control of the force  distribution in these systems, particularly
              the control of all  the wheel-terrain contact forces, is central to achieving 
              acceptable control of the motion and suspension degrees of  freedom of these
              vehicles. On uneven terrain, wheeled vehicles  possess kinematic and
              quasi-static force distribution  characteristics that are fundamentally
              different from those  that vehicles possess on even terrain. If the
              vehicle-terrain  combination are instantaneously treated as a spatial linkage 
              with closed kinematic loops, an even terrain leads to an  inherent symmetry in
              these virtual spatial linkeage. This  symmetry leads to singularities in
              kinematic and static force  distribution behavior of these vehicles. The
              literature on  conventional vehicles for even surface operation does not 
              address these singularities since these vehicles are nominally  studied as
              planar motion machines with small perturbations in  their suspension degrees of
              freedom. Motion and suspension are  generally treated as decoupled  problems.
              On uneven terrain,  the symmetry and hence the singularities are not always 
              present. Using a kinematic-geometric framework based on screw  system theory,
              an understanding of the mobility (number of  degrees of freedom) and the motion
              potential (available motion)  of wheeled vehicles on uneven terrain is
              developed. This  framework can also be used to study the force distribution 
              characteristics of these vehicles by extending the rate  kinematics/static
              force analysis duality that has been observed  in classical problems in
              robotics to these kinds of spatial  mechanisms. The kinematic-geometric
              framework is particularly  suited for studying  active off-road vehicles since
              their  system designs typically do not include intentional passive  compliances
              (lumped or distributed). An extension of the  kinematic-geometric approach to
              rigid body dynamics of complex  systems, known as spatial vector mechanics is
              used to study the  dynamic behavior of these offroad vehicles. The project 
              includes both the `analytical/numerical' and `experimental'  aspects. The
              analytical/ numerical objectives include the  development of a Spatial Vector
              Mechanics (SVM) framework that  combines Screw System Theory and Newrton-Euler
              Dynamics using  Spatial Vector Notation. The SVM framework allows the 
              investigation in an integrated manner; to develop general  kinematic synthesis
              techniques for active off-road wheeled  vehicles; to develop a modular dynamic
              simulator for performing  numerical studies of two classes of wheeled vehicles;
              and to  develop system-level force control strategies for active off  road
              vehicles. The experimental task include off-road  experiments with an
              experimental prototype known as the Force  controlled Tricycle (FCT). The FCT
              is representative of a class  of active vehicles that include two-wheel axles
              that can  actively vary their axle lengths.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
