Title       : Fundamental Research in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition of
               Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon and Nanocystalline Silicon Films from SiH4/H2/Ar
               Discharges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9713280

Award Number: 9713280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eray S. Aydil aydil@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitrios Maroudas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1062,1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9713280 Aydil  This project combines an integrated theoretical and
              experimental approach to the systematic investigation of effects of plasma
              processing conditions on the structure and properties of a-Si:H and nc-Si:H
              films during PECVD from SiH4/H2/Ar glow discharges. The project aims at
              obtaining fundamental information regarding key internal plasma variables that
              determine film properties, such as crystallinity, crystal size, hydrogen
              content, and defect density. The goal is to elucidate how deposited film
              properties are affected by the identity and flux of chemically reactive
              molecular fragments and ions arriving at the film surface. Atomic-scale
              computer simulations will be employed to study the interaction of radicals and
              molecular fragments (e.g., SiH, SiH2, SiH3, H) from the plasma with the film
              surface. Molecular-dynamics, molecular-statics, lattice-dynamics, and Monte
              Carlo simulators based on recently developed interatomic potential-energy
              functions, will be used to study plasma-surface interactions. Also, hybrid
              off-lattice kinetic Monte Carlo simulations will be used for full-scale
              dynamical simulations of the deposition process over realistic time scales for
              a range of processing conditions. Results of computer simulations will be
              compared with experimental data and the insights gained from the simulations
              used to guide new experimental studies and design new deposition strategies.
              %%% This research activity cuts across traditional boundaries between different
              disciplines including physics, chemistry, engineering, and materials science to
              address forefront issues in a field with high technological relevance. The
              nature of the research also provides an effective mechanism for educating
              students and postdoctoral scholars in addressing technologically important
              research problems using an integrated experimental and theoretical approach.
              The research will contribute basic plasma and materials science knowledge at a
              fundamental level to several aspects of advanced electronic/photonic  devices
              and integrated circuitry. ***
