Title       : Electrochemical Impedance Pattern Recognition for Detection of Microbially
               Influenced Corrosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1992  
File        : a9260330

Award Number: 9260330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Schwartz EltronCo@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eltron Research, Inc.
	      4600 Nautilus Court South
	      Boulder, CO  803013241    303/530-0263

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is              
              in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the             
              subfield of electrochemistry.  The goal of this research effort is             
              to establish the feasibility of using electrochemical impedance                
              pattern recognition for the detection of microbially influenced                
              corrosion (MIC) occurring at metal surfaces.  The approach is                  
              directed towards development of pattern recognition schemes based              
              upon the on-line acquisition of electrochemical impedance spectra              
              using fast Fourier transform electrochemical impedance                         
              spectroscopy (FFTEIS) instrumentation at the suspect corrosion                 
              site.  This will be followed by treatment of the electrochemical               
              impedance spectral data using the principal components analysis                
              (PCA) technique.  The resulting PCA transformed data will then be              
              subjected to analysis by software based pattern recognition                    
              techniques to classify the MIC corrosion site.  Because all                    
              aspects of the proposed approach can be handled by portable                    
              computer driven hardware and software, the ultimate goal of the                
              planned multi-Phase SBIR activity is the development of portable               
              diagnostic instrumentation for the on-line determination of MIC.               
              %%%                                                                            
              This Phase I project brings together disparate technologies of                 
              electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in the fast Fourier                     
              transform implementation, principal components analysis, and                   
              pattern recognition for the purpose of identifying microbially                 
              induced corrosion in contrast with abiotic corrosion.  The proof               
              of concept plan set forth for Phase I should determine the                     
              feasibility of this approach to diagnosing problems of enormous                
              economic importance.
