Title       : Self-Correction of English Grammar in Chinese-to-English Machine Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1992  
File        : a9260988

Award Number: 9260988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius T. Tou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CITAC Computer Inc
	      3009 S.W. Archer Road
	      Gainesville, FL  326081809    904/372-9000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,
Abstract    :
                   Language is the binding force of a nation and has served as               
              the communication tool for its people.  The diversification of                 
              languages among various nations in the world has created the                   
              language barrier which is one of the major causes for today's world            
              disorder.  Machine translation holds the key to solve the language             
              barrier problem.  We consider Chinese-to-English translation by                
              computer because Chinese and English are certainly two of the most             
              popular languages in the world.  In this proposal we are concerned             
              with an important aspect in Chinese-to-English by computer.                    
                   After eight years of research, Julius T. Tou invented the                 
              CITAC computer for translating Chinese sentences and text into                 
              idiomatic English.  CITAC (patent pending in US, PRC, UK), the                 
              world's first genuine Chinese translation machine, is an                       
              intelligent computer.  However, due to the radical differences                 
              between the Chinese language and the English language, the English             
              translation generated by CITAC is idiomatically correct but may be             
              grammatically wrong for reasons to be explained in the proposal.               
              To make the CITAC output of English grammatically correct, we                  
              propose to conduct research for the design of a self-correction                
              scheme for English grammar improvement.  When the propose research             
              is completed, we anticipate that CITAC will become a full-fledged              
              computer to translate Chinese sentences and text into perfect                  
              English.  Thus, the potential application of the research are to               
              make Chinese-to-English machine translation a reality, not just and            
              academic endeavor.  The success of the proposed research will beat             
              the Japanese in machine translation research and will enable the               
              United State to rule the roost in machine translation industry.//
