Title       : Ultrasonic Field-Flow Fractionation for Particle Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9260232

Award Number: 9260232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen D. Brimhall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Technical Res Associates
	      2257 South 1100 East
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841062379    801/485-4991

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,
Abstract    :
              This study is concerned with separating particles suspended in a               
              fluid by using field flow fractionation implemented with an                    
              ultrasonic acoustic force.  In field flow fractionation (FFF), the             
              fluid particle mixture is forced to flow through a thin channel.               
              A force perpendicular to the direction of flow is applied.  The                
              action of the force on the particles is a function of the nature               
              of the force, and the identity of the particles.  To accomplish a              
              particular separation of particles, one selects a force which acts             
              with differing magnitude on the particles to be separated.  As the             
              particles move down the slit, the particles acted upon more                    
              strongly by the force move to the flow cell walls (if for example,             
              the force acts towards the walls) where they slow down since the               
              flow near the walls is slower.  Those particles which were not                 
              caused to move towards the flow cell walls travel with a faster                
              velocity and begin to distance themselves from the slower moving               
              particles in the wall vicinity.  Eventually, at the cell exit, the             
              center moving particles elute first, and the slower moving                     
              particles exit later, thereby creating the separation.                         
                                                                                             
              The utility of FFF for a particular separation depends on the                  
              ability to select a force which can drive the perpendicular                    
              separation.  In this study, ultrasonic acoustic forces are used.               
              Standing waves with a frequency on the order of 1 Mhz are set up               
              across the flow cell, and the particles move by virtue of a second             
              order acoustic pressure force as given by equation (1) of the                  
              proposal.  The key advantage of using acoustic forces is that the              
              acoustic force can separate particles based on differing volume,               
              density or speed of sound in the particle medium.  The research                
              will design and conduct ultrasonic FFF flow cell, and investigate              
              the ability to separate particles based on size and density.
