Title       : Microelectronic 3D System Architecture: Interconnection of Multichip Modules
               Using Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1993   
File        : a9260036

Award Number: 9260036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg R. Olbright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Photonics Research Inc
	      2402 Clover Basin Drive
	      Longmont, CO  805037609    303/678-5225

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1503,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              We propose to interconnect multichip modules using vertical-                   
              cavity surface-emitting lasers VCSELs as optoelectronic                        
              interconnects and to design a microelectronic information                      
              processing system (MIPS). Our emphasis is on:  (1) physically                  
              realizable computing systems and methods for their design, and                 
              (2) corresponding hardware such as :  optoelectronic                           
              devices/components, integrated optics, optical switching devices               
              and optical interconnections.  The goals of this program are                   
              to(1) demonstrate the interconnection of vertically stacked                    
              planes using electrically addressed VCSELs, microoptics, and                   
              detectors; (2) using these results design a 3D MIPS comprising                 
              optoelectronically interconnected multichip modules (MCMs); and                
              (3) develop a phase II follow-up proposal to construct a                       
              prototype MIPS to prove the feasibility of near tera                           
              operation/sec (e.g. teraflop/sec) performance.  Numerous schemes               
              for the interconnection of MCMs or wafers have been proposed and               
              are under development.  The first approach, pioneered by Hughes,               
              attempts to interconnect several vertically stacked wafers with                
              metallic air-bridge interconnects.  However, recently the advent               
              of optoelectronic components has revealed a much more promising                
              and powerful alternative to all-electronic interconnects known as              
              optoelectronic interconnects.  Our revolutionary VCSEL approach                
              to optoelectronic interconnection of MCMs is unrivaled (by e.g.                
              optical modulators) for speed, functionality, integrability and                
              manufacturability.  Implementation of the proposed program goals               
              will also further the emergence of the globally enabling VCSEL                 
              technology which is projected by U.S., European and Pacific Rim                
              groups to have numerous commercial applications.
