Title       : Design and Synthesis of Linear Electrooptic Effect Smectic A* Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9260384

Award Number: 9260384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Wand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Displaytech Incorporated
	      2602 Clover Basin Drive
	      Longmont, CO  805032193    303/772-2191

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,9163,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is              
              in the general area of materials chemistry and in the subfield of              
              liquid crystals.  The thrust of this experimental activity is the              
              synthesis of new ferroelectric (chiral) smectic C* liquid crystals             
              (FLCs) which will markedly enhance the performance of electrooptic             
              and display devices based on the surface stabilized ferroelectric              
              liquid crystal (SSFLC) light valve.  FLCs have been shown to                   
              exhibit high speed, multistate electro-optic and display device                
              applications, particularly when incorporated into the SSFLC light              
              valve. The two state (digital) nature of the SSFLC device                      
              possesses certain advantages in applications such as passive                   
              multiplexed flat panel displays but does not allow for a natural               
              gray-scale effect due to the lack of intermediate optical states.              
              Another effect observed in chiral smectic liquid crystals, the                 
              electroclinic effect, is based on the smectic A* phase and affords             
              a linear analog response to applied voltage.  Currently available              
              materials are limited by their sensitivity to temperature                      
              variation, and thus, need for temperature control.  This project               
              pursues a method to achieve temperature insensitivity, thereby                 
              greatly expanding the breadth of usefulness of this effect.  The               
              new materials will be both pure chiral smectic A components and                
              mixtures of materials containing the new components with broad                 
              temperature ranges and fast electro-optic response times.                      
              Temperature insensitive electroclinic devices will fill the gap                
              requiring a relatively temperature insensitive, fast (10                       
              microseconds) linear electrooptical effect.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              In this SBIR Phase I project, Displaytech should demonstrate the               
              feasibility of the proposed approach to improving the performance              
              of electro-optic and display devices based on SSFLC technology                 
              that was developed earlier by this small business.  The results of             
              this research should provide clear guidance regarding                          
              Displaytech's proceeding with a Phase II activity.
