Title       : SGER: "Language-like" Areas for Audiovocal Communication in Bats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a0080822

Award Number: 0080822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagmeet S. Kanwal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Animal models of auditory communication are especially relevant for studies on
              auditory communication in infants who primarily engage in nonverbal
              communication.  Nonverbal communication is the only means of communication in
              animals.  An understanding of the cortical mechanisms for processing and
              integration of communicative sounds can provide insights into the cellular
              basis of human speech and how it evolved from the available neural
              circuitry.
The proposed research will explore the role of the frontal cortex
              for audiovocal social communication in bats.
	We will develop and deploy a
              behavioral assay to examine how the absence of a frontal auditory field and the
              anterior cingulate affects the perception and production of social calls,
              e.g.,
broadband noisy syllables that are emitted during aggression.  The
              behavioral assay will allow us to assess in a quantitative fashion the response
              to both normal and modified communication sounds in normal and brain-lesioned
              animals. Cortical lesions will be localized using magnetic resonance imaging
              technology and, if necessary, their functional inactivation will be confirmed
              using electrophysiological recording techniques.  The acoustic structure
              ofvocalizations in animals with lesions in the frontal cortex and
              microstimulation of these areas in normal animals will examine the role of the
              frontal cortex in regulating the spectral and syntactic structure within
              communicative vocalizations.
	This research will provide new insights on the
              relationship, if any, of the frontal cortical areas in bats with the so called
              "language areas" associated with speech sound perception and production in
              humans.

