Title       : Late Prehistoric Cultural Dynamics and the Subsistence Parameters of Whaling at
               Wales, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0080798

Award Number: 0080798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger K. Harritt anrkh@uaa.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Anchorage
	      3211 Providence Drive
	      Anchorage, AK  995084614    907/786-1410

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP-0080798 "Late Prehistoric Cultural Dynamics and the Subsistence Parameters
              of Whaling at Wales, Alaska."

ABSTRACT: The Wales archaeology project
              focuses on a community in Alaska that, during contact period, comprised a
              population of at least 500 individuals.  Historically the village was a primary
              socioeconomic center in northwest Alaska.  Wales people engaged in trade and
              warfare with Asiatic Eskimos; these activities may have drawn the large Wales
              population to the location.  This circumstance provides perhaps the best
              opportunity in western Alaska to examine the possibility of social ranking in
              late prehistoric Eskimo society.  The results of this analysis will therefore
              pertain directly to sociopolitical and socioterritorial studies of
              hunter-gatherer groups worldwide, and they will contribute substantially to
              increased understanding of developing complexity in egalitarian societies as
              they are transformed into formally ranked social groups such as those that have
              been documented in the Northwest Coast culture area. Analyses of trait
              distributions will also examine relations between the late prehistoric Eskimo
              manifestations at three sites in the Wales locality.  The sites contain faunal
              remains, which can illuminate the context in which the prehistoric human
              predation of whales was carried out against the background of simultaneous
              exploitation of various non-cetacean marine and terrestrial fauna.  Preliminary
              findings indicate that non-cetacean sea mammals played a much larger role in
              the economy of Wales than has been suggested previously, and they raise a
              number of questions concerning the carrying capacity of the local resources in
              relation to the exceedingly large number of human inhabitants of the locality. 
              Further development of the faunal database and accompanying analysis will
              illuminate how the large, concentrated population used local resources.  The
              results will contribute to an increased precision in interpretations of the
              role of mega-fauna in prehistoric Pleistocene and Holocene human subsistence
              economies.     


