Title       : Fast Dynamics in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0080035

Award Number: 0080035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei Sokolov sokolov@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this program the dynamic of polymeric systems is studied experimentally in a
              broad temperature range, from deep in a solid state up to deep in a liquid
              state.  The main subject of the program is analysis of the fast dynamics in
              different polymers.  This dynamics includes cooperative molecular motion on a
              nanometer scale.  This motion is a necessary precursor of many slower processes
              and strongly influences macroscopic properties of the material.  The main
              methods are light and neutron scattering spectroscopy.  The combination of
              these two techniques gives detailed information on the fast dynamics spectra
              and on peculiarities of the motion on a molecular level.  Different theoretical
              approaches, from Mode-Coupling Theory to model of Asymmetric Double-Well
              Potentials, are tested and used for analysis of the experimental data.  New
              model approximations that would consistently describe the data in a broad
              temperature and frequency ranges are discussed and developed.  The program is a
              starting point for broad collaboration between different groups (experimental,
              theory and computer simulations) working in the field of polymer dynamics.  The
              results of the program will bring better understanding of microscopic picture
              of the fast dynamics and its peculiarities in polymeric systems and will lead
              to development of consistent theoretical description of the dynamics in solid
              and liquid states
%%%
Molecular motion is a key for many macroscopic
              materials properties.  The proposed here research is concentrated on analysis
              of cooperative molecular motion on a molecular frequency (GHz-THz range) and
              length (nanometer) scales.  The results of the research will strongly influence
              the development of the field of polymer dynamics and dynamics of disordered
              materials and bio-polymers in general.  The knowledge received I the result of
              the program can be useful for designing of new plastics with desired
              properties, especially for high-frequency applications (optical comunications,
              computers, optical memory storage devices).  

