Title       : Signal Pathways-Mediated by the Rice Receptor-Like Kinase XA21
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0080155

Award Number: 0080155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen Y. Song wsong@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The long-term goal of this project is to gain an understanding of receptor
              serine/threonine kinase-mediated signaling in plants.  Receptor kinases,
              including receptor tyrosine kinases and receptor serine/threonine kinases, are
              major transmembrane signal transducers of many processes such as cell
              proliferation, differentiation, migration, apoptosis, and defense.  In animal
              systems, receptor tyrosine kinases appear to be predominant in cell signaling.
              In plants, almost all receptor-like kinases (RLK) identified have
              serine/threonine specificity, making plants particularly amenable to studying
              receptor serine/threonine kinase-mediated signaling. The first rice disease
              resistance gene Xa21, which encodes a RLK, was cloned.  The putative
              intracellular domain of XA21 can autophosphorylate multiple serine and
              threonine residues and interacts with seven proteins (XBs) in a yeast
              two-hybrid system.  One of the seven binding proteins, XB1, physically
              interacts with and acts as a substrate of the XA21 kinase.  XB1 consists of two
              domains: an ankyrin domain involved in interacting with XA21 and a RING finger
              motif belonging to the newly defined R-box family that may play a universal
              role in ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation.  These studies provide an
              excellent system to study mechanisms underlying initiation, propagation, and
              termination of RLK-mediated signaling.  The specific goals of this project are:
                  

1.  Investigate the mode of regulation of the XA21-mediated
              signaling
2.  Investigate the role of XBs in the XA21-mediated
              signaling

	Achieving these goals will provide insights into RLK-mediated
              signaling and will advance our understanding of plant disease resistance at the
              molecular level.  Information from these studies would provide new approaches
              for the engineering of broad-spectrum, durable disease resistance in rice and
              other crop plants, thereby reducing the dependency of crop production on
              environmentally unfriendly chemicals. 



