Title       : Narrative Valuation in Policy Judgment Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0080720

Award Number: 0080720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa Satterfield tsatterf@decisionresearch.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melissa L. Finucane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1321,9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Much natural resource policy work stresses the importance of involving lay and
              expert stakeholders in a dialogue about environmental values so as to inform
              decisions about land management. This proposal tests and develops the
              technique, narrative valuation, which is designed to address a problem basic to
              value elicitation contexts: The fact that discussions about values and land
              management are challenged by the simultaneous need to consider pragmatic and
              technical concerns (e.g. cost or inventories of threatened species) alongside
              ethical or spiritual concerns (e.g. the notion that nature has intrinsic value
              or forests inspire awe).  The researchers posit that narratives offer a viable
              means for discussing and eliciting different values because they enhance
              information processing which in turn helps people manage cognitively complex
              problems, and because they employ a storied and descriptive language
              well-suited to describing states like awe or lay expressions of ethical
              concern.  They will conduct a set of experiments meant to balance diverse
              expressions of value. Narrative valuation tools will be tested (against
              nonnarrative conditions) for their ability to address (a) the representation of
              technical and social variables; (b) the coexistence of numeric and nonnumeric
              expression of value (biological health can be measured as the number of
              returning salmon but how does one measure greater or lesser degrees of
              intrinsic value); (c) the linking of ethical values to  appropriate policy
              actions; and (d) the use of verbal versus linguistic quantifiers and
              probability estimates.  Further experiments will carefully examine problems of
              bias or persuasion potentially introduced by this method.  These include
              narrator bias, the influence of different affective tones, and/or the ability
              for narrative frames to emphasize some expressions of values at the expense of
              others.  The project is expected to support the applicability of narrative
              valuation tools and to result in several papers published in peer reviewed
              journals covering environmental ethics and values, judgment and decision
              making. 
