Title       : Social Critics and Dissident Experts: Postwar Critiques of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0080392

Award Number: 0080392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Schatzberg eschatzb@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80392 - Eric Schatzberg (University of Wisconsin - Madison)  
"Social
              Critics and Dissendent Experts:  Postwar Critiques of Technology"

This award
              supports first stage in a major study of post-World-War-II critiques of
              technology, a study that will explore both the intellectual origins of these
              critiques and their practical consequences. In the 1960s and 1970s, these
              critiques became potent social forces in the form of movements that sought to
              reshape the dominant technological order, most importantly the consumer and
              environmental movements. This project seeks to understand the origins of these
              movements in the social and cultural landscape of the 1950s.

Historians of
              the 1960s have done little to explain why movements critical of technology
              emerged suddenly after so many years of intense technological enthusiasm. This
              project will seek an explanation in two amorphous groups from the 1950s. The
              first group comprises social critics, that is, public intellectuals who
              fostered critical discourse about aspects of postwar technology from big
              science to suburbia. These social critics included prominent scientists like
              Norbert Wiener, public intellectuals like William H. Whyte, and journalists
              like Vance Packard. The second group emerged from the scientific community
              itself in the form of "dissident experts" who raised doubts about key postwar
              technologies. These were the men and women who worked in university
              laboratories and government bureaus, where they conducted research and authored
              technical reports that provided the essential evidence needed by Ralph Nader's
              movement for auto safety and Rachel Carson's critique of pesticide misuse.
              Together, the social critics and dissident experts laid the groundwork for the
              movements of the 1960s and 1970s.

This project will undertake an
              intellectual history of the social critics of the 1950s, along with a study of
              the origins and motivations of the dissident experts. The project will then
              connect these two groups with the most significant social movements critical of
              technology in the early 1960s, namely the resurgent consumer movement promoted
              by Ralph Nader and the new environmental movement inspired by Rachel Carson.
              These two movements followed similar paths; each inspired by a path-breaking
              expose that relied heavily on scientific and engineering research.

This
              project will also examine two methodological issues of importance to science
              and technology studies. The first issue concerns the role of culture in shaping
              technological change, extending the PI's earlier work on this topic, and the
              second involves the relationship between theory and practice, stressing
              practices outside the laboratory.

