Title       : Matrix Factorization Theory for Multidimensional Systems Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0080499

Award Number: 0080499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nirmal K. Bose nkb1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Parameterization of stabilizing controllers for two- dimensional systems was
              first reported in 1985 and since that time considerable progress has been made
              even for models in which some stabilizable transfer matrices do not have
              right/left coprime factorizations.  The impact of the multivariate matrix
              factorization results has recently been demonstrated in the design of
              multidimensional filter the construction of non- separable wavelets have been
              realized.  Potential applications of interest involved the analysis;
              processing, coding and compression for reconstruction of multidimensional
              multimedia signals over bandwidth constrained communication channels.

The
              research proposed here develops further the theory of multivariate
              factorization and its variants for adaptation and use in challenging
              applications in multidimensional systems problems.  Research will be undertaken
              towards the of necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of
              primitive factorization of multivariate polynomial matrices by relating the
              problem to generalization of unimodular completion for which construction
              algorithms are now available.  Attention will be directed towards actually
              constructing the factorization after its existence is guaranteed by applying
              recent tools in algorithmic algebra, particulary Grobner basis theory over
              polynomial dimensional cases, the conditions for existence and construction of
              right and left factorizations will be investigated, especially when the zero
              coprimenss constraint on the reduced minors fail to hold.

The very
              nonrestrictive conditions under which any square unimodular matrix with entries
              in a multivariate polynomial ring can be expressed as a product of elementary
              matrices derivable from Suslin's Stability Theorem provides the machinery for
              biothogonal multiband filter bank realization for perfect reconstruction using
              the ladder of such structures with the objective of popularizing their use in
              filter bank as well as wavelet construction.

The tackling of the case when
              both perfect reconstruction and linear phase constraints (or other like
              paraunitary) are enforced, is still, in general, an open problem.  The recent
              solution given for the two-band n-D case, using Grobner bases, will be studied
              to understand fully the limitations of its capability for generalization to the
              multiband n-D case with particular attention to various specializations that
              may offer complete constructive solutions.

