Title       : Significance of a Novel Light-Regulated Apyrase for Plant Growth and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0080363

Award Number: 0080363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley J. Roux sroux@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
        The objective of this research is to learn more about the functional
              significance of a novel apyrase for plant growth and development. In peas the
              expression of the mRNA for this enzyme is highest in regions undergoing rapid
              growth and development. A pea cDNA encoding the gene for the enzyme has been
              isolated and characterized. Its translated sequence includes a signal peptide,
              which targets it to the plasma membrane, and identifies it as a member of the
              family of apyrase enzymes that are typically extracellular and are called
              ectoapyrases. In animals these enzymes play a key role in terminating
              ATP/ADP-induced signal transduction, such as ATP-induced apoptosis.
       
              The biochemical function of this enzyme is to hydrolyze NTPs and NDPs, but the
              significance of this function for plant hysiology, growth and development is
              not known. The proposed research expands on two key observations that emerge
              from the PI's current apyrase project: the pea ectoapyrase complements a yeast
              mutant deficient in phosphate transport and augments phosphate uptake in
              Arabidopsis  roots, and it confers toxin resistance to yeast and to Arabidopsis
               plants, possibly by enhancing the Multi-Drug-Resistance function of an ABC
              transporter in those organisms.  These startling findings have potentially
              great significance for understanding alternate modes of phosphate nutrition and
              toxin resistance in plants, and they call attention to a previously unsuspected
              role for extracellular ATP (xATP) in the growth and development of plants. To
              better understand their implications, it will be necessary to investigate the
              molecular bases underlying them and to test whether predictions based on them
              can be validated. Toward this end three groups of experiments are proposed.
  
                   The first group of experiments is designed to better define the structural
              basis of apyrase-facilitated phosphate uptake. Although the pea ectoapyrase
              facilitates phosphate transport, it is not clear how the primary structure of
              apyrase would support this function, since it has only one evident
              membrane-spanning domain. Recent studies show that the human ectoapyrase, which
              resembles the pea enzyme in its primary structure and plasma membrane locale,
              has a tetrameric structure in the plasma membrane similar to the structure of
              known transport proteins, and thus has the structural potential for a transport
              function. The second group of experiments will further investigate how
              overexpression of apyrase in plants and in yeast confers on them resistance to
              certain toxic compounds.
In particular these experiments will test a model
              which postulates that the ability of ectoapyrase to function in toxin
              resistance is dependent on its ability to help maintain the steepness of the
              ATP gradient between the inside and outside of cells by hydrolyzing xATP.  The
              third group of experiments addresses the question of whether ATP can serve a
              signaling role in plants as it does in animals. This group develops a
              functional screen to begin testing whether there are ATP receptors on the
              plasma membrane of plants.  All proposed experiments will be greatly aided by
              the availability of apyrase antibodies, specific apyrase inhibitors, and
              transgenic plants that overexpress the enzyme or that are suppressed in its
              expression. The proposed studies will generate valuable and novel insights into
              how the hydrolysis of xATP by ectoapyrases influences diverse aspects of plant
              growth and development.


