Title       : Optimal Typology of Determiner Phrases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0080377

Award Number: 0080377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158854             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Catherine O'Connor mco@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the two years of the project, the research team will carry out several
              kinds of empirical and theoretical studies of possessive and partitive
              constructions in a sample of twelve genetically diverse languages. Possessive
              and partitive constructions are important but relatively unexamined sites for
              the consideration of crosslinguistic variation in morphosyntax, semantics, and
              pragmatics, and interactions among these. In the process of carrying out the
              descriptive groundwork, the team will construct comparable on-line corpora for
              each of the twelve languages, supplemented by the results of elicitation work
              with native speakers. The results of these empirical studies will be subjected
              to formal analyses conducted within the framework of Optimality Theory (OT).
              These OT analyses of individual languages will then be subjected to further
              theoretical consideration, providing a sound basis for a set of crosslinguistic
              generalizations. The typology of possessive and partitive constructions derived
              from this project can then provide linguistic typologists with a set of
              hypotheses, based on sound empirical work and a rigorous theoretical framework,
              that can be tested against analyses of other languages. Finally, the results of
              this project will provide substantial material for consideration by linguists
              concerned with finding parallels between clause-level and nominal-level
              morphosyntactic, semantic, and pragmatic phenomena.

The project outcomes
              will thus be of several types. The research team's empirical work will result
              in (a) a cross-linguistically diverse set of electronic corpora which will be
              made available to other researchers (pending appropriate permissions) and (b) a
              set of descriptive statements about the structural, semantic and pragmatic
              properties of possessive and partitive phrases in a diverse set of languages.
              The research team's theoretical work, made available in scholarly papers, a
              book and conference presentations, will result in detailed accounts of OT-type
              universal constraints and their relative rankings in specific languages. These
              analyses will advance knowledge both about the linguistic dimensions that are
              important in crosslinguistic generalizations concerning these structures, and
              about the typological power and predictions of the OT framework. The analyses
              will also allow comparisons with crosslinguistic work on the clause along a
              number of dimensions. The project will build capacity for the training of
              graduate students in linguistics at Boston University and Brandeis University,
              and the empirical products-the corpora-will be used as teaching materials by
              the senior personnel during and after the project.

The sample of languages
              to be studied includes Cantonese, Czech, English, Finnish, German, Icelandic,
              Korean, Malayalam, Northern Pomo, Spanish, Swedish, and Wolof. Basic
              descriptive groundwork will contain results of elicitations with native
              speakers and examples from corpora. OT theoretical analyses will center on (1)
              effects of person/animacy markedness hierarchies (Silverstein 1976, Aissen
              1999) in possessive constructions of various types within and across languages
              in our sample; (2) the semantics of determiners and their contribution to the
              "Partitive Constraint," and (3) the various factors contributing to the
              distribution of case and related phenomena within these constructions, and
              their relationship to clause-level case patterns.
