Title       : LTER: Interaction of Multiple Disturbances with Climate in Alaskan Boreal
               Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0080609

Award Number: 0080609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin terry.chapin@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn D. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Bonanza Creek Long-Term Ecological Research program focuses on improving our
              understanding of the long-term consequences of changing climate and disturbance
              regimes on boreal forests. The overall objective is to determine the major
              controls over forest dynamics, biogeochemistry, and disturbances and how these
              factors interact in the face of a changing climate. The forest dynamics theme
              addresses successional changes in biotic populations and communities following
              disturbance, emphasizing the relative importance of historical legacies,
              stochastic processes, and species effects in determining successional
              trajectories and the sensitivity of the trajectories to climate. Changes in the
              carbon cycle during succession hinge on changes in forest dynamics and other
              element cycles, but also influence nutrient availability and microenvironment
              and therefore successional changes in forest dynamics. Regional and landscape
              controls over disturbance regimes focus on processes that are responsible for
              the timing, extent, and severity of disturbances. Our research design uses
              experiments and observations at intensive sites in three successional sequences
              (floodplains, south-aspect uplands, north-aspect uplands) to document the
              processes that drive successional change. We will establish the larger context
              for these intensive studies by studying two large regions, a relatively uniform
              region in interior Alaska and along a climate gradient from the warmest to the
              coldest areas in Alaska. Through synthesis we will address three important
              ecological issues. (1) How do species characteristics and diversity influence
              biogeochemistry and disturbance regime within ecosystems and landscapes? (2)
              How can we conceptualize spatial and temporal scaling as the basis for linking
              processes and patterns from ecosystems across landscapes? (3) How do positive
              and negative feedbacks that operate within ecosystems influence the sensitivity
              of ecosystems (i.e., their sustainability) to perturbations, such as changes in
              climate and disturbance regime?




