Title       : Workshop: The Significance of Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a0080947

Award Number: 0080947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2745               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Lynch mel27@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the Science & Technology Studies Department of Cornell
              University  for a graduate student workshop on The Significance of Noise to be
              held April 8 at Cornell University. The conference will engage peers and
              colleagues in Science & Technology Studies, Psychology, Communications,
              Sociology, Anthropology, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, and other
              disciplines in untangling the term "noise," and how it can be used to gain a
              better understanding of how scientists and engineers sort meaning from chaos.
              Four graduate student papers have been selected for presentation. In addition
              papers from two outside scholars, as well as commentaries from three Cornell
              faculty members have been solicited. The workshop is organized into three
              sessions. The first two sessions will consist of two students papers each,
              running 20 to 30 minutes with a 5 minute follow-up question period for each
              speaker. After the two students in each panel have given their talks, each
              guest speakers will present his own material plus some commentary on the theme
              of the panel. The first panel is entitled Noise and the Body: Human Presence in
              the Lab, and the guest speaker will be Prof. Brian Rotman of The Ohio State
              University. Prof. Rotman's talk will be on "n01se---the man/god number nexus".
              The second panel is entitled Manufacturing Sense: Noise and Social Negotiation,
              and the guest speaker will be Prof. Harry Collins, of the Center for the Study
              of Knowledge, Expertise, and Science at Cardiff University. Prof. Collins' talk
              will be on "The Meaning of Data: Open and Closed Evidential Cultures in the
              Search for Gravitational Waves". A discussion of 45 to 60 minutes on general
              themes running through all three papers will immediately follow each panel. The
              third session will be a roundtable discussion with the two guest speakers,
              three Cornell faculty members, and questions and comments from the audience.
              The Cornell S&TS faculty members, Michael Lynch, Ronald Kline, and Trevor
              Pinch, will give 10 minute summaries of their thoughts on the workshop and the
              topic of noise, followed by 45 to 60 minutes of discussion. In addition,
              between the first two panels there will be a working lunch, at which all
              attendees can sit down and discuss the issue of noise more informally. In the
              lunch discussion, as well as throughout the day, issues raised by speakers on
              different panels, as well as questions left unanswered in general discussions,
              and crosscutting themes that deserve extra time and consideration will
              hopefully be addressed.

