Title       : UMEB: Anthropogenic Stresses on Natural Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0080288

Award Number: 0080288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel C. Skvirsky rachel.skvirsky@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kamaljit S. Bawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Kesseli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0080288
Wrubel

This program provides underrepresented minority students with
              an enriched educational and research experience, focused on the theme of human
              impacts on natural ecosystems. The goal is to provide students with research
              skills and with confidence based on their accomplishments, thus encouraging
              them to pursue careers in environmental biology.  Faculty will participate in
              workshops to facilitate effective mentoring relationships with students from
              minority groups.  After an initial student orientation including laboratory
              rotations, students will work closely with their chosen mentor.  Students will
              engage in rigorous yet supportive research settings, leading to the completion
              and presentation of an independent project.  To promote a sense of community,
              students and faculty will participate in group activities discussing the
              practice and implications of science, and exploring the theme.  

The
              consequences of human stresses on the environment remain a pressing issue
              requiring intense investigation. These consequences range from transformation
              of the land (agriculture, forestry and urbanization) and sea (trawling,
              dredging and waste dumping) to alterations of biogeochemical cycles and
              reduction of biodiversity.  The students will directly advance active research
              programs addressing these impacts.  The students joining the program will be
              drawn from urban communities with environments highly influenced by human
              activities. They will be keenly engaged in science involving their environment
              and the benefits of the research will be apparent.  This urban cohort of
              students will have a greater likelihood of continuing their studies beyond the
              program and brings a unique and important perspective to the field of
              environmental biology.



