Title       : Research on Advanced Technologies for Housing: Precast Post-tensioned Clay
               Masonry Walls for High Performance Modulur Housing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0080210

Award Number: 0080210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mervyn J. Kowalsky kowalsky@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
It is objective of this research to investigate the behavior of post-tensioned
              clay masonry walls under in-plane lateral loads. In so doing, it is envisioned
              that such walls could then be utilized to construct efficient, high performance
              housing that would achieve goals of improved performance in natural hazards,
              improved durability, reduced environmental impact, and increased
              economy.

The research described is comprised of three primary tasks: (1)
              Experimental studies, (2) Analytical Studies, and (3) Web-based technology
              dissemination. Experimental studies will consist of large-scale reversed cyclic
              as well as real-time dynamic testing of post-tensioned clay masonry walls.
              Variables to be considered in the experimental studies consist of pre-stress
              level and the effect of grouting, bonding, and confining post-tensioned walls.
              Analytical studies will be geared towards development of design and analysis
              algorithms for the full non-linear behavior of post-tensioned clay masonry
              incorporating the effects of bonding, grouting, and confinement. Analytical
              studies will be performed utilizing dynamic inelastic time history analysis and
              finite element analysis in addition to simplified displacement-based
              techniques. Web-based technology dissemination will provide the engineering
              community access to the research results in the form of test databases and
              other algorithms developed as part of the research.

