Title       : LTER III: Long-Term Ecological Research on the Luquillo Experimental Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0080538

Award Number: 0080538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1399999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jess K. Zimmerman jzimmerman@lternet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel E. Lugo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Jean Lodge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF) Long-term Ecological Research (LTER)
              program began in 1988 with the goal of integrating studies of disturbance
              regime and forest structure and dynamics with a landscape perspective. Two
              central research themes were addressed: (1) the relative importance of
              different disturbance types within the four tropical rain forest life zones of
              the LEF, and (2) the importance of the biota in restoring ecosystem
              productivity after disturbance. The long-term monitoring program initiated as
              part of the LEF-LTER was critical to the evaluation of the immediate effects of
              Hurricane Hugo, which struck Puerto Rico in 1989, and the long-term response of
              the forested ecosystems of the LEF to that severe disturbance. Monitoring of
              the effects of several less-severe storms and a subsequent hurricane (Hurricane
              Georges in 1998) has resulted in the LEF-LTER being in the position of the most
              thoroughly studies forested ecosystem subjected to repeated hurricane
              disturbance. Important strides also have been made in determining the spatial
              and temporal patterns of other natural disturbances (landslides, treefalls,
              floods, and drought).
	The LEF-LTER also has been instrumental in establishing
              the predominant importance of human disturbance in molding the structure and
              functioning of tropical ecosystems. In the LEF, legacies of human disturbance
              dating from before the 1930's appear in present times as important sources of
              variation in forest structure and species composition. Human disturbance
              affects natural disturbance regimes by making particular events more likely to
              occur (e.g., landslides near roads) or increasing their severity.
	The
              long-term experiments and measurements initiated in 1988 will remain the
              central focus of the LEF-LTER. Emphasis on the impacts of hurricanes and human
              disturbances on ecosystem dynamics of the LEF will continue. Further attention
              will be directed at deciphering interactions among the biota and their impact
              on critical ecosystem variables that determine responses to natural
              disturbances. New initiatives will expand the comprehensive analysis of
              disturbance and ecosystem response to include elevations up to the summit of
              the Luquillo Mountains.

