Title       : LTER IV: Jornada Basin: Linkages in Semi-arid Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0080412

Award Number: 0080412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura F. Huenneke lhuennek@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh C. Monger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Debra P. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kris M. Havstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Chicuahuan Desert landscapes exemplify the ecological conditions, vulnerability
              and management issues found in semi-arid regions around the globe. The goal of
              the Jornada Basin Long-Term Ecological Research program is to identify the key
              factors that control ecosystem dynamics in semi-arid landscapes, with the
              objective of understanding the causes and consequences of desertification.
              Pervious LTER work focused primarily at the scale of a single plant-interspace
              and on the redistribution of soil resources at that scale. However, the
              intrinsic nature of semi-arid regions, including the prevalence of high winds
              and short intense precipitation events in landscapes with substantial
              topographic variability, promotes the redistribution of materials at larger
              scales. The central hypothesis of the LTER phase is that landscape position and
              linkages among landscape units exert important influences on ecosystem dynamics
              and biotic patterns within sites. We propose to build on our understanding of
              resource redistribution at the plant-interspace scale in several ways. We will
              synthesize existing long-term data with new studies on linkages among landscape
              units, and we will conduct simulation modeling efforts to test the relative
              importance of within- versus between-unit processes. We will initiate or expand
              studies of landscape fluxes of water, nutrients, and organisms in order to
              evaluate key processes affecting ecosystem dynamics at this scale. We will also
              employ remote sensing to assess fluxes and processes at larger spatial scales.
              Cross-site studies will be used to test the generality of our hypotheses for
              application to management and redemption of semi-arid ecosystems and
              desertified landscapes.
