Title       : FASEB Conference / Calcium and Cell Function to be held in Copper Mountain, CO
               on July 9-14, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0080006

Award Number: 0080006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha C. Nowycky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An international conference on "Calcium and Cell Function" will be held July
              9-14, 2000 at Copper Mountain, Colorado, under the auspices of the Federation
              of the American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB). The conference will
              focus on recent advances in the molecular biology of intracellular calcium
              regulation and the numerous roles of calcium ions in regulation of cell
              function. The topics to be covered are: molecular biology of calcium entry and
              intracellular stores; regulation of intracellular calcium dynamics; decoding of
              calcium signals; calcium function in the nucleus, in mitochondria, and in
              membrane traffic; and the physiology and pathology of multicellular calcium
              signaling. The overall goal is to bring together a diverse group of scientists
              working on all phases of calcium and its role in cell function in an atmosphere
              conducive to informal exchange of ideas. The format of this conference will be
              similar to that of previous FASEB Summer Research Conferences. There will be a
              total of 8 morning and evening sessions of 3-4 speakers each and 1 keynote
              lecture. Afternoons are free to encourage informal interactions between invited
              speakers and participants. Poster presentations are an important part of such
              interactions and four 2-hour sessions are reserved for poster discussion. In
              addition, to enhance participation by junior attendees, time has been set aside
              for 4 short talks based on the best posters submitted. This is the major
              long-standing conference in North America that focuses entirely on calcium and
              covers the spectrum of calcium research rather than a single subdiscipline.
              Conferences are held every two years. Particular effort has been made to
              minimize overlap in topics and speakers with other calcium-related meetings
              such as the Gordon Conference on Calcium Signaling and the International
              Symposium on Calcium-Binding Proteins and Calcium Function in Health and
              Disease, both held in alternating, odd-numbered years. The FASEB conference is
              always oversubscribed and has received high ratings from previous participants.
              
