Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Crack Problems in Functionally Graded Materials
               Under Thermo-Mechanical Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0080462

Award Number: 0080462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon M. Keer l-keer@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5928,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0080462
Keer

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Leon Keer, Department of Civil Engineering, Northwestern
              University, Evanston, Illinois, Dr. Fazil Erdogan, Department of Mechanical
              Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania and Dr. Sami El-Borgi,
              Department of Civil Engineering, Polytechnic School of Tunisia, La Marsa,
              Tunisia.  They plan to collaborate in research on functionally graded materials
              (FGM).  The possibility of using nonhomogeneous coatings made of FGMs is
              currently being explored as an alternative to the conventional homogeneous
              ceramic coatings in high-temperature applications.  The scientists at the three
              institutions will consider a number of benchmark two-dimensional crack problems
              involving fracture of ceramic-metal FGMs under thermal and mechanical loading. 
              The objective is to study the effect of FGM nonhomogeneity parameters on the
              crack driving forces for the purpose of gaining better understanding on the
              behavior and design of graded materials.  Two approaches will be used, an
              analytical approach and a numerical approach, to allow comparison of the
              results and development of a faithful numerical predictive
              capability.

Scope:  This award will permit collaboration between Tunisian
              and US scientists who have complementary capabilities and experience.  The two
              US scientists are eminent in their fields and are highly published in areas
              related to the problem.  The Tunisian collaborator received his Ph.D. at a
              prestigious US university and has conducted research both in Tunisia and in the
              United States, with a resulting strong publication record.  Two other
              Tunisians, one a female scientist who completed her education, including a
              Ph.D., in France and the second a Ph.D. candidate in Dr. El-Borgi's department,
              will participate in this research.  They will be exposed for the first time to
              research resources and methods in the United States.  This project presents a
              viable means to increase collaboration with Tunisia, where interaction with the
              United States is limited because of the dominance of French as the foreign
              language most used by scientists.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              increasing international scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.
