Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the Boundaries of the Levantine
               Aurignacian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0080079

Award Number: 0080079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Mr. John Williams will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his work is to understand the lithic
              variability which exists in a prehistoric industry termed "Levantine
              Aurignacian." Archaeologists who work in the Near East have noted similarities
              among archaeological assemblages excavated in Israel and Jordan and which date
              between 32,000 and 17,000 years before the present. Some researchers point to
              specific tools fashioned from stone which are present in all assemblages and
              therefore have applied a single designation "Levantine Aurignacian" to all of
              these. However over the past two decades this industry has provided a source
              for lively debate because significant differences also have been noted and some
              scientists believe that this categorization serves more to obscure difference
              than emphasize meaningful similarity. Mr. Williams correctly notes that no
              single analytic system has been consistently applied to all such assemblages
              and with NSF support he will do so. He will visit museums in the United States,
              England and Israel which house carefully excavated material and obtain
              consistent comparable data. He will examine both tool types and the technology
              by which they were produced.

Archaeologists have focused on the Aurignacian
              industry because it's European version marks the appearance of anatomically
              modern humans and a large suite of associated behavioral traits in this region.
              The origins and extent of the European Aurignacian is unclear as, likewise, is
              its relationship to its Levantine counterpart. Both areal variants share a set
              of distinctive lithic forms. For this reason the poorly described Levantine
              version is of great archaeological interest and Mr. Williams is taking a
              significant first step to better characterize this industry. Because it extends
              over a wide range of environments - from deserts to well watered regions - it
              may also be possible to correlate lithic and environmental variables and gain
              insight into patterns of prehistoric human adaptation. This research will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

