Title       : Regulation of Gibberellin Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0080934

Award Number: 0080934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie M. Sponsel vsponsel@lonestar.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The gibberellin (GA) group of plant hormones controls many processes and
              developmental events in plants, such as seed germination, stem growth,
              flowering and fruit development. These processes are often not controlled by
              GAs alone, but by an interplay of GAs with other hormones. The proposed
              research will investigate whether auxin can exert a regulatory effect on GA
              biosynthesis, and thus provide one mechanism for cross-talk between these two
              types of growth promoting hormones. 
Previous work in the principal
              investigator's laboratory led to the isolation of a mutant of Arabidopsis
              thaliana (previously known as 10.3 or ga6) which had reduced stem growth,
              delayed flowering and reduced fruit size.  These symptoms could be overcome by
              treatment of mutant plants with certain GAs, leading to the hypothesis that
              biosynthesis of active GA hormone was blocked in this mutant. It has now known
              that this mutation is allelic to the transport inhibitor3 (tir3) mutation,
              which leads to an alteration in polar transport of auxin. The proposed research
              will examine whether auxins exert control at two stages in the GA biosynthetic
              pathway, namely 20-oxidation and 3b-hydroxylation.  Since the genes encoding
              these biosynthetic enzymes have been cloned, the possible effect of auxins on
              GA biosynthesis will be examined at the level of gene expression.  It is
              proposed to compare the expression of these genes in wildtype and tir3 plants
              by RNA blotting, and by using reporter gene fusions.  The altered auxin
              response 1 (axr1) mutant will also be examined to see if this mutation, which
              dramatically reduces the sensitivity of plants to auxin, also affects the
              expression of genes encoding these GA biosynthetic enzymes.  Finally, the auxin
              status of wildtype plants will be perturbed pharmacologically, and possible
              effects on GA response and expression of genes for GA biosynthetic enzymes will
              be examined.
The work will be carried out at the University of Texas at San
              Antonio. This University is one in which the majority of students are
              undergraduates from ethnic minorities.  The research program presents an
              opportunity to provide training in practical aspects of plant physiology and
              biochemistry to undergraduates from groups who are historically
              under-represented in science and technology.
 



