Title       : SGER: Molecular Simulation for Prediction of Mixture Adsorption on Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a0080915

Award Number: 0080915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59654              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Myers amyers@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT



Proposal No.:			CTS-0080915
Proposal Type:		Investigator
              Initiated- SGER
Principal Investigators:	Alan L.
              Myers
Institution:			University of Pennsylvania

SGER:  Molecular Simulation
              of Mixture Adsorption on Zeolites


With the development of modern
              high-capacity adsorbent materials, such as zeolites, adsorption has become an
              important gas-separation processes.  A number of researchers are currently
              developing molecular-scale models to characterize the effects of adsorbent
              structure and intermolecular forces on the phase equilibrium in these systems. 
              Most work to date, however, has considered the adsorption of only one gas
              species at a time.  In this project, molecular models that are quite successful
              in predicting the non-ideal thermodynamics of the adsorption of various
              molecular species in silicalite are being tested to predict two-component
              adsorption on zeolites.  The models are based on realistic intermolecular force
              models.   These models account for sorbate-sorbate interactions as well as the
              energetics of different sites within the solid lattice.

Success of this
              project, which considers both polar and nonpolar and two different zeolite
              structures, will demonstrate that these molecular models can be extended to
              non-ideal mixtures.  The results will be a major contribution to the
              fundamental conceptualization of these processes and will guide the proper
              formulation of more detailed models for design of new adsorbents and the
              optimization of gas-separation processes.

