Title       : PGE/LCP: Gender Equity Options in Science (GEOS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0080706

Award Number: 0080706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $855743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Kerr BKERR@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Robinson-Kurpius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project GEOS (Gender Equity Options in Science) extends into higher education a
              NSF project that for six years has provided career development for math/science
              talented at risk girls. GEOS will follow up the participants of this project
              who are now in college, as well as provide guidance to young women who remain
              uncertain about their SMET majors.  Career development workshops will be
              designed that encourage and mentor women in building strong career identities,
              in participating in leadership activities in their fields of interest, and in
              overcoming barriers to the attainment of their goals in math, science,
              engineering, and technology.

GEOS involves (1) a year-long series of career
              development workshops (2) an overnight faculty-student retreat, and (3) a
              national seminar for university faculty to disseminate this project and teach
              gender equity strategies for SMET college women.  This seminar will be offered
              in collaboration with the National Wakonse Fellowship for College Teaching, a
              consortium of universities committed to teaching improvement.  Each summer, the
              model of career development and faculty mentoring developed at Arizona State
              University will be taught to 80 SMET faculty and college counselors from the
              eight universities attending the GEOS Wakonse Seminar.  The staff, advisory
              board, student participants, and principle investigators will serve as
              trainers.  Each faculty participant will develop a faculty development workshop
              or intervention for women based on techniques for career development and women
              friendly science.  Reports on these projects will be collected into a summary
              of best practices to be disseminated among the 1,500 Wakonse Fellows online as
              well as available at cost to all participants.

