Title       : Maternal Control of Ascidian Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0080060

Award Number: 0080060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352463             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Smith w_smith@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0080060
Smith

Zygotic development begins with the fusion of sperm and egg. 
              While sperm provides only the male pronucleus, the egg contributes, in addition
              to the female pronucleus, the egg cytoplasm which contains molecules essential
              for proper development of the embryo. These "maternal factors" in the egg
              control numerous process include sperm recognition, cell-cycle activation, and
              determination of the primary axes and germ layers.  Ascidians, which are
              primitive members of the chordate phylum, have classically been used to study
              the role of maternal factors in early development.  In fertilized ascidian eggs
              extensive rearrangement of egg cytoplasm can be observed.  The partitioning of
              distinct cytoplasmic factors specifies many tissue types including muscle and
              endoderm.

This project will use newly developed genetic methods in ascidians
              to analyze maternal control of early development.  Ascidians are particularly
              well suited for this type of analysis.  The species to be used in this project,
              Ciona savignyi, is a hermaphrodite with the capacity for self fertilization. 
              These properties streamline procedures for identification and recovery of
              mutants.  Briefly, adult C. savignyi are first treated with the chemical
              mutagen ENU.  Sperm from the ENU-treated animals is crossed to wild-type eggs
              to generate heterozygous F1s.  The F1s are grown to maturity (10-12 weeks), and
              then sperm and eggs are collected from each and mixed to make a self-fertilized
              F2 generation. One-quarter of the F2s will be homozygous for each mutant locus
              carried by an  F1.  When the F2s reach maturity, the eggs are dissected,
              crossed with wild-type sperm, and then screened for mutant phenotypes.  If a
              potential mutant is observed, sperm from the same animal is crossed to
              wild-type eggs in order to recover the mutation.  A pilot screen has shown that
              this screen is feasible, and a number of candidate mutants are being
              characterized.  Funding from this proposal will be used to complete the pilot
              screen, perform an expanded screen, and characterize recovered mutants in order
              to better understand the nature of the mutations. 
 

