Title       : Fabrication of Nanometer-Scale Sensors on Scanning-Probe Microscope Tips
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0080393

Award Number: 0080393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Ralph ralph@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New classes of scanning sensors and probes, with minimum feature sizes of
              approximately 10 nm, will be made on the tips of scanning-probe microscopes
              using a new stencil technique, which allows the direct deposition of
              nanostructures onto non-planar surfaces. These sensors will be used to image
              the nm-scale functional properties of electronic devices and materials with
              greatly improved resolution and sensitivity, as compared with existing
              techniques. They should also allow several new forms of scanning microscopy,
              providing images of quantities not currently accessible. The new probes will be
              supplied to and optimized in cooperation with several of the leading young
              researchers pursuing scanned-probe microscopy. Examples of the types of sensors
              and the research subjects that will be investigated include: (1) magnetic field
              sensors. Single ferromagnetic nanoparticles will be deposited on the tips of
              atomic-force-microscope probes, for use in magnetic force microscopy (MFM).
              Compared to conventional MFM probes, they will provide improved spatial
              resolution and less magnetic perturbation on the sample, in local studies of
              magnetic and superconducting devices.  Giant-magnetoresistance sensors composed
              of a ferromagnetic / non-magnetic / ferromagnetic trilayer will also be made
              with 10-nm feature sizes for imaging the spatial distributions of magnetic
              fields. (2) bow-tie antennas for near-field optical microscopy. Metallic pads
              in a bow-tie configuration will be deposited at the tips of optical fibers, to
              serve as an antenna for optical photons, and thereby make a nm-scale optical
              source for use in  ear-field scanning optical microscopy. This is predicted to
              allow greatly improved optical transmission efficiency (10's of % efficiency,
              as compared to 10 -3 for aluminum-coated tapered-optical-fiber sources), thus
              permitting improved spectroscopy and time-resolved measurements. At the same
              time, these antennas should provide improved spatial resolution, on the order
              of 10 nm rather than approximately 50 nm for conventional sources. (3) scanning
              single-electron-transistor electrometers. A metal particle approximately 10 nm
              in diameter will be deposited on the tip of a scanning tip, in tunneling
              contact with 2 electrodes, to make a single-electron tunneling device that will
              serve as a sensitive electrometer. These will be employed to probe
              electric-field configurations of semiconductor and metal devices while they are
              in operation, the effects that impurities on metal surfaces have in producing
              local changes in the work function, and the microscopic origin of offset
              charges and charge noise in single-electron tunneling devices.  (4) gated
              scanning-tunneling-microscope tips. Two electrically separate metal electrodes
              will be deposited in close proximity on the same insulating tip.  One will be
              used for conventional scanning tunneling microscopy, while an independent
              voltage can be applied to the second electrode so that it acts as a gate to
              shift the local electrostatic potential of the sample under study. This will
              provide a new capability for characterizing the quantum-mechanical levels
              participating in electron tunneling, within quantum dots and single-molecule
              devices.  Other new types of sensors or probes that may be fabricated on the 10
              nm scale include scannable thermometers, heaters, and refrigerators, sources
              and detectors of microwave radiation, and electronic spin-filters for use in
              spin-resolved scanning tunneling microscopy.

