Title       : RUI: Regulation of MAP Kinase and NHE1 Activation by the G Proteins Gq and G13
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0080243

Award Number: 0080243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Provost provost@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Wallert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Na + -H + exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) is present in virtually all mammalian
              cells where it is involved in the regulation of intracellular pH (pHi) and
              cellular volume. NHE1 activity can be modulated by a wide variety of
              intracellular signaling pathways. The receptors that activate the pathways and
              the specific protein kinases involved in the regulation vary dramatically in
              different cell types. To date there has been no complete dissection of the a 1
              adrenergic signaling pathway in Chinese hamster lung (CCL39) fibroblasts. The
              overall goal of this project is to clarify the signaling pathway for the
              regulation of NHE1 in CCL39 cells. Also to clarify which intermediates are
              involved in the signaling pathway. The following aims are proposed: Specific
              Aim 1: To study the activation of MAPK and NHE1 by PE. Preliminary studies
              indicate that phenylephrine (PE) can activate both MAPK and NHE1. The time
              course and the dose response MAPK activation will be investigated.The
              relationship between the activation of MAPK and the stimulation of NHE1 will
              also be investigated. Specific activators and inhibitors of the MAPK pathway
              will be used to accomplish this task. This aim will clarify the role of MAPK as
              a potential key intermediate in the stimulation of NHE by PE. Specific Aim 2:
              To study the involvement of PKC and Ras in the PE induced activation of MAPK
              and NHE1. Preliminary studies indicate that PE stimulates both MAPK and PLD.
              Published data indicates that a 1-adrenergic receptors activate Gq. This
              activation can lead to a q stimulating PLCbeta and leads to the activation of
              PKC. Additionally, the Gq . subunit can lead to the activation of Ras. To
              discern the regulatory pathways by which PE modulates NHE1 activity, the time
              course and dose response for activation of PKC and Ras will be determined. It
              will then be determined if MAPK and NHE1 activation dependent on one or both of
              the intermediates. Transfected cells expressing the dominant/negative Ras
              and/or dominant/negative Raf-1 will be used to determine if activation of MAPK
              and NHE1 by PE functions occurs through a Ras-dependent or independent
              mechanism. Expression of these proteins will disrupt the postulated signaling
              pathways at different levels clarifying the points of convergence of the
              pathways. This aim will determine the signaling molecules involved in the PE
              activation of MAPK and NHE1 and clarify the relationship between the signaling
              pathways activated by PE. Specific Aim 3: To expand the involvement of
              undergraduates in meaningful research. The primary purpose for faculty members
              of the biology and chemistry departments at Moorhead State University (MSU) is
              to have ongoing research projects that involve undergraduates in a meaningful
              research experience. Students have been trained to perform all the procedures
              required to carryout the investigations of the signaling pathways and to
              measure NHE activity as outlined in the proposal. This research project will
              allow 8 - 10 students to be involved in research during the academic year and
              three students to work full-time during the summer months of the three years
              covered by the grant. 

