Title       : GOALI: Design of Imbedded Microstrip Antennas for Wireless Communication and
               Remote Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a0080559

Award Number: 0080559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Furse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080559
Furse

Traditional wireless communication is done in an air-to-air
              environment.  Imbedded applications require hardware that can function in an
              air-to-subsurface interface or subsurface -to- subsurface interface.  Examples
              include antennas that can be implanted in the human body for data links with
              implantable medical devices (cardiac pacemakers and defibrillators, implantable
              nerve and muscle stimulators, and hormone pumps), avalanche transmitters, and
              communication from inside tanks filled with caustic or dangerous materials.  In
              addition to the use of imbedded antennas for wireless communication, these
              antennas make excellent sensors because they are inherently sensitive to their
              environment.  They are used for remote sensing in geophysical prospecting,
              dielectric measurement, agricultural measurement, animal or human proximity
              sensing, and potentially in ice and snow monitoring for avalanche
              prediction.

In addition to the present needs for imbedded antennas, the
              expansion of MEMS and wireless communication systems, which are expected to
              play a dominant role in next generation technology, will add dramatically to
              the applications for imbedded antennas.  Ultra-small devices (small enough to
              be injected in a human vein, for instance) and the desire to communicate with
              them will inevitably lead to the need for miniaturized antennas imbedded in
              lossy environments.  Furthermore, since these antennas can act as sensors as
              well as communicators, the possibilities for monitoring and controlling MEMS
              devices are enormous, and microstrip antennas are a natural addition to MEMS
              devices.  This project anticipates a far-reaching need for a better
              understanding of microstrip antennas imbedded in lossy environments, an
              understanding that can contribute a dramatic new ability to sense and
              communicate with new frontiers in medicine, space, agriculture, and
              more.

Industrial interest in imbedded antennas is extremely high, and funded
              research projects from this laboratory are already being beta tested for
              commercial products.  These industrial projects have provided excellent
              experience in imbedded antenna design, but NSF funding is needed to
              systematically develop a complete analysis of the effects of the critical
              antenna design parameters (size, shape, feed system, substrate, superstrate,
              etc.) on performance (gain, bandwidth, radiation pattern, resonant frequency,
              impedance, etc.). This rigorous understanding is needed to clarify the effects
              empirically observed and to produce globally optimal designs.

The objectives
              of this proposal are to quantify the effects of imbedded microstrip antenna
              design parameters on performance, design "smart" imbedded patch antennas to
              adapt to changing environments, develop artificial materials for testing
              antennas in lossy environments, and continue interfacing with industry
              throughout antenna developments.

