Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Online Monitoring of Copolymerization Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0080624

Award Number: 0080624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne F. Reed wreed@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0080624
Reed

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Wayne Reed, Department of Physics, Tulane University in New
              Orleans, Louisiana and Dr. Huceste Catalgil-Giz, Faculty of Science at Istanbul
              Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey.  The two investigators plan to study
              the application of novel instrumentation and methods for absolute, online
              monitoring of polymerization reactions, recently developed by Reed and his
              co-workers, to several reaction families.  Specifically they plan to deal with
              a very important class of polymerization reactions, those involving
              copolymerization reactions.  It is planned to monitor online the reactivity
              ratios of comonomers used in copolymer reactions, at the same time absolute
              weight averages mass Mw, radius of gyration, reduced viscosity and a measure of
              polydispersity are measured.  It is expected that the methods developed from
              this project will eventually become important for the advancement of polymer
              science, for fundamental studies, optimization of processes for producing
              polymers, and for online quality control at the industrial reactor level.
              

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between Turkish and US
              scientists who have complementary capabilities and experience.  The Turkish
              investigators have excellent basic training in polymer science although they
              work under significant equipment limitations.  They are actively publishing on
              the subject of copolymerization ratios.  The US scientist is a physicist with
              instrument building skills and excellent research capabilities. The
              Tulane-Turkey interaction appears to be a logical collaboration.  This proposal
              meets the INT objective of increasing collaboration by US and foreign
              scientists in areas of mutual benefit.  This project is jointly funded by the
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Chemical and Transport
              Systems. 
