Title       : Function of Coactivators in Progestin Action in Brain & Regulation of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0080818

Award Number: 0080818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. Tetel tetel@cns.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Steroid hormones act throughout the body to regulate development and
              reproduction by binding to receptors that activate specific genes in cells. 
              The ovarian steroids, estradiol and progesterone, act in brain to mediate
              complex behaviors, such as female reproductive behavior in rodents.  Thus,
              studying the function of estradiol and progesterone in rodent reproductive
              behavior provides an excellent model to investigate how hormones work in the
              brain.  Understanding how these ovarian hormones act in brain is essential to
              understanding their role in various CNS functions.  However, the cellular and
              molecular mechanisms by which steroid receptors activate genes in brain to
              control behavior are not well understood.  Recently, a novel class of proteins,
              known as nuclear receptor coactivators, has been shown to dramatically enhance
              the ability of steroid receptors to activate genes.  While research has led to
              a much greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms of these coactivators
              in steroid receptor action in the test tube, very little is known about how
              coactivators function in brain to regulate hormone-dependent gene expression
              and behavior.  This grant will test the hypothesis that the two coactivators,
              Steroid Receptor Coactivator-1 (SRC-1) and CREB Binding Protein (CBP), are
              important in progesterone action in brain to regulate reproductive behavior. 
              We predict that decreasing SRC-1 and CBP expression in specific brain regions
              will reduce progesterone-dependent reproductive behavior in rats.   
	These
              studies will greatly enhance our understanding of how these novel coactivators
              work with steroid receptors to activate genes in brain. 

