Title       : An Integrated Curriculum for Intelligent, Microprocessor-Based Mechanical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0080475

Award Number: 0080475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499947             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Batill batill@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mihir Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Skaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Goodwine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A significant change in the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum at the University
              of
Notre Dame is proposed in response to the changes that have developed as a
              result of the pervasive use of microprocessors in complex, modern mechanical
              engineering systems.  Plans are for the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum at
              Notre Dame to provide a unique experience with microprocessors and
              microprocessor-based mechanical systems to its students to better prepare them
              for the continued proliferation of intelligent mechanical systems in the
              industrial sector.  The program also outlines the introduction of exercises at
              the sophomore and junior levels. Students will learn to program microprocessor
              devices and to employ them in a useful fashion to actuate, sense, control or
              optimize systems and processes in the context of laboratory experiments in
              solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, controls and dynamics. Support is provided
              for faculty to collaborate with industry while developing microprocessor based
              learning experiences for students. The experience from this project at Notre
              Dame will be a valuable guide for other institutions.

