Title       : The Role of Cysteine String Protein for Fast Neurotransmitter Release
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0080820

Award Number: 0080820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konrad E. Zinsmaier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulated neurotransmitter secretion mediates communication between nerve cells
              of the nervous system. A "sender" cell encodes its electrical signal into a
              chemical signal by using a neurotransmitter stored in synaptic vesicles. The
              neurotransmitter is secreted onto a "receiver" cell, which decodes the signal
              back into an electrical signal. Neurotransmitter secretion is accomplished by
              fusing the vesicle membrane with the cell membrane expelling its content.
              Little is known about the molecular machinery driving vesicle fusion. The goal
              of this proposal is to investigate these molecular mechanisms and, in
              particular, the role of cysteine-string protein (CSP). This project will test
              the hypothesis that CSP may mediate secretion by modulating Ca2+ channels, Ca2+
              channel-vesicle linkage, and/or vesicle fusion. This will be achieved by
              employing genetically manipulated motor nerve terminals of the fruit fly
              Drosophila as a model system.
The extraordinary fast and precise communication
              of nerve cells is central to understand how the nervous system works - how we
              perceive, move, feel, learn, and remember. Failure of secretion has a fatal
              influence on human life. In most cases, the abnormalities are so severe that
              embryonic development will not proceed. Even subtle defects of neurotransmitter
              secretion severely impair higher brain functions like learning and memory.  CSP
              has been recently implicated as an important factor during the treatment of
              manic depression in humans. Thus, the research being conducted has crucial
              implications on our basic knowledge of neuronal secretion and subsequently on
              human medicine to detect, to treat, and to possibly prevent neurological
              disorders.

