Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Joint US/Norwegian Studies of Ice/Ocean Interaction in
               Frozen Fjords
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0080913

Award Number: 0080913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles G. McPhee mmcphee@starband.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McPhee Res
	      450 Clover Springs Road
	      Naches, WA  989379457    509/658-2575

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heat and salt exchanges at the ice/ocean interface play a key role in the annual
              cycle of sea-ice growth and ablation. Recent observations of significant change
              in the extent and thickness of the Arctic ice cover have focused attention on
              factors that control the mass balance, and treatment of ice/ocean exchanges in
              numerical models is becoming increasingly sophisticated. Direct measurements of
              turbulent heat flux under pack ice (by covariance techniques) have shown that
              it is nearly proportional to the product of friction velocity (square root of
              the kinematic Reynolds stress) and the elevation of mixed layer temperature
              above freezing, but that the exchange coefficient is an order of magnitude
              smaller than the corresponding exchange coefficient for momentum. This implies
              that unlike momentum flux, heat flux at the interface is rate-limited by
              molecular processes in thin sublayers adjacent to the surface. At low
              temperature, the molecular diffusivity of salt in seawater is only about 0.6%
              of that for heat, thus the possibility exists for double diffusive effects,
              where the transfer rate is ultimately controlled by salt diffusion. There is
              evidence that this holds when ice is melting, according to measurements in
              relatively warm water in the marginal ice zone. 

A model developed by Yaglom
              and Kader to describe laboratory studies of heat and mass transfer over
              hydraulically rough surfaces considers the difference in diffusivities between
              scalar properties, and has been applied in several numerical ice/ocean models.
              The models do not distinguish between melting and freezing (although the YK
              studies did not consider crystalline growth at the solid/liquid interface),
              consequently, heat is diffused through the interface faster than salt is
              ejected during ice growth. The models thus predict enhanced ocean heat flux
              under thin ice, and produce a significant amount of supercooled water, which is
              generally assumed to nucleate as frazil crystals distributed in some fashion
              throughout the ocean boundary layer. Observations do not support the modeled
              response: there is little evidence of extensive frazil production under growing
              ice in the Arctic, nor do the limited data from under thin ice indicate larger
              heat flux. 

The proposed work aims to understand ice/ocean heat and mass
              exchange, particularly during freezing conditions, by collaborating with
              Norwegian and US scientists in making detailed measurements of ice/ocean
              interaction in tidally active fjords in Svalbard. Fast ice will serve as a
              laboratory for carefully controlled experiments measuring exchanges both in the
              ice cover and in the ocean boundary layer. Work proposed here deals mainly with
              the latter, including measuring momentum, heat, and salinity flux in the
              boundary layer near the ice undersurface. A specific goal is to improve
              parameterization of ice/ocean heat and mass transfer for numerical models. 

