Title       : STTR Phase II: A Microsensor for Rapid Detection of Airborne Endotoxin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0080569

Award Number: 0080569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Mileham mctco@brookings.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Microconversion Tech. Co.
	      1322 4th St
	      Brookings, SD  570062325    605/688-4618

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9107,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is expected to
              result in a biosensor based instrument that can reliably and economically
              capture and measure airborne endotoxin in-situ with better specificity than
              existing assay methods.  Airborne endotoxin has been identified as a major
              health hazard to both humans and animals in many agricultural and industrial
              settings.  Endotoxins in the environment primarily enter the body through the
              lung and are difficult to clear.  This contributes to the development of
              respiratory disorders.  Regulation of human endotoxin exposure has not been
              possible to this point since no quick, reliable system exists to measure
              airborne endotoxin in the field. Current methods of measuring airborne
              endotoxin involve collecting dust samples in a sterile filter and sending them
              to a laboratory for analysis.  The results of the analysis take weeks to
              receive and have poor specificity to endotoxin.  The proposed instrument is
              expected to provide a more accurate, specific, rapid, and reliable alternative
              to existing assays for detecting airborne endotoxin in the range of 0.01 mg/m 3
              to 20 mg/m 3.  Measuring endotoxin levels and subsequent modification of
              airflow will minimize human endotoxin exposure, and lead to improvement in the
              respiratory health of workers.

A biosensor to detect airborne endotoxin will
              have commercial applications to protect human health in areas such as livestock
              confinement and processing facilities, produce storage and processing
              facilities, cotton processing facilities, waste management facilities, and air
              quality monitoring of office buildings.  Since endotoxin also represents a
              threat to the health of livestock, particularly swine and poultry, the
              animal/veterinary sciences market is also expected to be significant.

