Title       : LTER: Sevilleta Long Term Ecological Research III: Long Term Ecological Research
               in a Biome Transition Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0080529

Award Number: 0080529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford N. Dahm cdahm@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Principal Investigator former)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Lowrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Pockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deana Pennington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Sevilleta Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) Program, established in 1988,
              conducts research on ecological processes and responses to climate dynamics in
              a biome transition zone in central New Mexico. The major research site is the
              Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge, operated by the US Fish and Wildlife
              Service (FWS). The multi-disciplinary research group comprises 34 scientists
              from 10 universities and numerous research agencies, including FWS, The Nature
              Conservancy, US Geological Survey, USDA Forest Service, USDA Agricultural
              Research Service, DOE Los Alamos National Laboratory, and DOE Sandia National
              Laboratory. The primary goal of the LTER Program is to develop and test a
              hierarchical model of controls and constraints on the movements of biotic
              assemblages at the edges of their distributions. These movements occur as a
              result of complex interactions among a large number of abiotic and biotic
              variables, at a wide range of spatial scales, and over time periods ranging
              from minutes to centuries. The Sevilleta LTER models and experiments address
              the relative roles of the major controlling variables, and allow prediction of
              changes in the structure and functioning of biome transition zones that would
              result from natural and anthropogenic perturbations. Of particular interest is
              the role of moisture availability in driving the distributional expansion and
              contraction of C3 and C4 plant species over decadal time frames, and the
              resulting changes in local and landscape level ecological processes. The
              results of these studies will provide a greater understanding of the physical
              and biological processes that govern the dynamics of the major ecosystems in
              central New Mexico, factors that lead to desertification processes, and
              contribute to improved understanding and management of the environment for
              sustainable human use and development.
