Title       : US-Sri Lanka Cooperative Research: Low-cost Fabrication of Thin Film Solar Cell
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0080571

Award Number: 0080571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarath Witanachchi witanach@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5989,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0080571
Witanachchi

Description: This proposal is to support a cooperative
              research project by Dr. Sarath Witanachchi, Department of Physics, University
              of South Florida, Tampa and Dr. M.G.M.U. Ismail, Head, Materials Technology
              Division, the Industrial Technology Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka.  They plan
              to investigate the process of producing thin film solar devices, and the
              potential of reducing the costs for possible use as an economical energy
              source.  There is a significant market for renewable energy sources, such as
              solar energy, in developing countries, especially those with no fossil fuel
              resources.   In addition environmental considerations are increasing the demand
              for clean energy.  However, the high cost of silicon solar cell production and
              lack of knowledge in new thin film photovoltaic (PV) technologies are limiting
              solar renewable energy efforts to a handful of demonstration projects in most
              developing countries.  The two scientists plan to investigate the synthesis of
              photovoltaic cells using chemical processing methods, through optimization of
              spray pyrolysis processes for the deposition of the transparent conductors and
              active semiconductor components, and development of sintering processes for the
              growth of active semiconductors, all based on glass substrates.  In addition
              they plan to examine the process limitations and the potential markets for this
              technology in developing countries and to acquire production-cost data that may
              be useful for US companies interested in setting up overseas
              operations.

Scope:  Most of the research will be carried out in Sri Lanka,
              as the technology requires inexpensive equipment.  The research allows the US
              PI to extend his knowledge in vacuum-based solar cell thin film growth
              techniques into a new area of thin film growth by chemical processing.  Dr.
              Ismail heads the materials division in Sri Lanka's largest governmental
              research laboratory, and is expected to contribute to the project through his
              expertise in materials manufacture and characterization.  The proposed project
              is innovative and is exploratory in nature, and the investigators plan to
              address all relevant scientific and engineering issues in the field.  The
              benefits of the collaboration include potential advances that may facilitate
              the establishment of production facilities in Sri Lanka, the training of
              graduate students in both countries, and the promotion of an environmentally
              friendly technology.  The PI will benefit from his exposure to the requirements
              of solar cell technology in a developing country, and the collaborating
              scientist will benefit from having access to the experience in solar-cell
              fabrication technology available at the USF.  The proposal meets INT objectives
              for supporting mutually beneficial international collaboration.  This project
              is co-funded by the Division of International Programs and by the Division of
              Chemical and Transport Systems.
