Title       : Symposium K
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a0080574

Award Number: 0080574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Pachavis pachavis@mrs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna Mirecki Millunchick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Res Society
	      506 Keystone Drive
	      Warrendale, PA  150867573    412/779-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A symposium entitled, "Morphological and Compositional Evolution of
              Heteroepitaxial Semi-conductor Thin Films", will be held April 24-27, 2000, in
              San Francisco, CA. The symposium is organized to bring together
              experimentalists and theoreticians from a wide variety of disciplines to
              address fundamentals, consider state-of-the-art knowledge in the field, and to
              assess applica-tions of morphological and compositional evolution in the
              nanoscience of semiconductor thin film growth. Examples of  topical areas
              covered by the symposium are: Surface dynamics and atomistic processes; Growth
              on Patterned, high index, and vicinal substrates; Quantum dots; In-terdiffusion
              and segregation; Band structure, electronic properties, and devices; Morphology
              and microstructure; Nitrides. Within each topic, invited speakers will present
              a critical overview of their recognized specialties. 
The symposium is
              expected to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical scientific
              is-sues in electronic/photonic materials. Along with the opportunity to assess
              the field and future di-rections, it is expected that new ties will be
              established between universities, research institu-tions, and industry. Support
              from NSF will be used to partially compensate young scientists (junior faculty,
              graduate students) for travel and accommodation expenses. The symposium is
              expected to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical scientific
              issues in elec-tronic/photonic materials. 
%%%
 Electronic/photonic materials
              have far reaching economic potential since applications range broadly across
              electronics and photonics associated with computing, communications, and
              in-formation processing. An evaluation of the progress and status of this field
              along with current as-sessments of the most important developments will be of
              great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of these materials in
              applications beneficial to society. 	 
***

