Title       : RUI: Modeling Formation of Microstructure of Intermetallic Compounds During
               Soldering.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0080176

Award Number: 0080176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Umantsev   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Xavier University
	      3700 West 103rd St
	      Chicago, IL  606553105    312/779-3300

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0080176
Umantsev
This grant supports theoretical research at an undergraduate
              institution (RUI).  Soldering involves the use of a molten filler metal to wet
              the surfaces of joints, leading to formation of metallurgical bonds between
              components.  A typical example of this type of reaction has binary tin-base
              eutectic solder joining copper components.  In order to assess accurately the
              mechanical strength of solder joints, it is necessary to understand the
              morphology of the intermetallic compound layer.  Growth and microstructural
              evolution of an intermetallic compound layer between the substrate and the
              solder is the primary concern of this theoretical research.

The present
              research will study the Cu6Sn5 compound growing between the copper-substrate
              and a molten tin-base alloy.  Experimental observations show that growth of the
              intermetallic compound from the molten solder demonstrates complex dynamical
              behavior.  The intermetallic compound layer grows from the molten solder in the
              form of scallops, as opposed to a planar interface morphology of compound
              layers grown from bimetallic solid state couples.  Solidification of the solder
              and the reaction of the solder with the substrate cause surface undulations. 
              The reasons for the scallop-type growth mode are unresolved.

The research
              will consist of two thrusts.  The first concerns the driving force for
              theinstability of intermetallic layers growing from molten solders and will try
              to resolve the physical reasons for its existence.  The second thrust will
              involve computer simulations of microstructural evolution which complement the
              analytical work.  The effect of different metals on the evolution of
              interfacial microstructures will be investigated in the liquid and solid states
              of lead-free as well as lead-tin solders.  The objective is to develop a model
              that takes into account different aspects of the soldering reaction kinetics
              and reproduces different regimes of growth of the interfacial structure.  This
              model will help predict the structure of a growing intermetallic layer and
              improve the design methodology for advanced lead-free solders where the amounts
              of solder and substrate are highly limited.
%%% 
This grant supports
              theoretical research at an undergraduate institution (RUI).  Soldering involves
              the use of a molten filler metal to wet the surfaces of joints, leading to
              formation of metallurgical bonds between components.  A typical example of this
              type of reaction has binary tin-base eutectic solder joining copper components.
               In order to assess accurately the mechanical strength of solder joints, it is
              necessary to understand the morphology of the intermetallic compound layer. 
              Growth and microstructural evolution of an intermetallic compound layer between
              the substrate and the solder is the primary concern of this theoretical
              research.
***


