Title       : The Regional Differences in Firm Entry in the Service Sector: Using the 1989-97
               Longitudinal Establishment and Enterprise Micro-data File
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0080316

Award Number: 0080316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan J. Acs Zacs@ubmail.ubalt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Armington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Baltimore
	      Charles at Mount Royal
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    301/625-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines and analyzes regional differences in the recent rapid
              growth and evolution of service-producing businesses in the U.S.  It will focus
              on the role of business entry in accounting for these regional differences. 
              Most previous broad-based regional analysis has relied on County Business
              Patterns (CBP) data, which are limited in several ways.  First, they provide
              only aggregate levels each year, and cannot track changes in a set of
              establishments over time; secondly, they lack information on firms (or
              enterprises); and thirdly, much of the data is suppressed for small or sparse
              areas for detailed industries.  The Longitudinal Establishment and Enterprise
              Microdata (LEEM) file housed at the Center for Economic Studies (CES) covers
              all establishments with employees for the years 1989-1997, by linking the
              annual microdata underlying CBP.  The service sector will be partitioned into
              five or six subsectors according to the markets they serve.  Using the 1990
              Labor Market Area (LMA) definitions to partition the U.S. into local economic
              units that are large enough to have business entry annually in most of the
              subsectors, we will prepare regional LMA level data for the services subsectors
              (including annual data on employment, firm entry and exit) from the
              LEEM.

These data will be aggregated to broad regional and national levels to
              examine how the distribution of service employment among subsectors and among
              firm types has changed.  Annual gross firm entry rates are calculated to
              measure levels of entrepreneurial activity in each subsector and region. 
              'Seasoned' entry rates will be calculated for the more limited set of new firms
              that have continued in business for at least three years.  A model accounting
              for local differences in both gross and seasoned firm entry rates will be
              formulated and tested.  Other regional data for explanatory variables and
              ratios will be constructed from publicly available county level databases.  We
              expect to explain regional diversity in startup rates as a function of (1) the
              size and quality of the pool of potential entrepreneurs, while controlling for
              (2) the capital requirements, growth, and turbulence rates of the industry, and
              (3) the population growth rate, and the overall business growth rate of the
              region.  This project's expansion of the investigators' previous research on
              business demographics using the LEEM would also serve to introduce this major
              new database for analysis of regional aspects of labor markets, economic
              development, business demography, and agglomeration. 

