Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0080021

Award Number: 0080021
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay Sampath sanjay.sampath@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert Herman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the State
              University of New York Stony Brook entitled "MRSEC-Novel Materials, Processes
              and Functional Materials by Thermal Spray" is a collaboration between SUNY
              Stony Brook, UC Santa Barbara, MIT, Idaho National Engineering Lab, Sandia
              National Lab, NIST, and Brookhaven National Lab.  The goal of the Center is
              develop the scientific base for the complex technique of thermal spray and to
              create a robust and predictive materials deposition tool.  The Center's
              research is organized into one interdisciplinary Research Group (IRG).  A major
              initiative of the group is to develop theoretical and experimental tools for
              processing and characterization of functional deposits with coupled
              mechanical/electrical and mechanical/magnetic properties.  The Center supports
              well maintained shared experimental facilities and also supports interactive
              efforts with industry and other sectors.  The Center has a strong industrial
              outreach program, which creates mutually beneficial relationships between the
              MRSEC and the industrial sector.  The program also provides opportunities for
              students to be involved in internship programs and is especially targeted to
              encourage minority students to enter the field.  The collaborations with
              National Labs are extensive and involve a significant number of faculty members
              and students.  Participants in the Center currently include 17 senior
              investigators, 3 postdoctoral associates, 6 graduate students, 8 undergraduate
              students and 1 support person.  Professor Herbert Herman directs the MRSEC.    
