Title       : Research on Advanced Technologies for Housing: Eave Icing of Residential
               Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0080219

Award Number: 0080219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. O'Rourke orourm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work is a multi-disciplinary research project on eave icing of the
              nation's low-rise residential building stock.  Specifically the goal of the
              project is to develop a fundamental understanding of eave icing while the
              objective is development of an analytical model which predicts the size of a
              ice dam at the eave of one and two family dwelling units.  The formation of
              eave ice dams is, unfortunately, a common occurrence in colder climates.  When
              ice dams become large, wetting of interior surfaces (walls and ceilings) is the
              typical result.  Eave icing is arguably the most common and costly ice and snow
              related loss for one and two family dwelling units in the United States. 
              

By its nature, the model to be developed will address both the generation
              of meltwater upslope of the eave, as well as solidification of the meltwater at
              the eave area.  This development of an analytical model will allow engineers
              and builders to deal knowledgeably and quantitatively with the problem.  That
              is, for a given roof (i.e., fixed ridge to eave distance, roof slop, roof
              R-value, etc) the analytical model would allow one to calculate the combination
              of below freezing days and roof snow deph which result in ice dam formation. 
              Conversely, for a given winter environment and roof, the model allows one to
              calculate the minimum eave overhang distance or width of continuous metal
              flashing required to avoid interior wetting.  The model will be verified and
              benchmarked through simple in-situ experimental observations on full scale
              buildings and to the extent possible by comparison to and analysis of insurance
              company loss information from prior winters.  

The project's objectives are
              compatible with those of the Partnership for Advancing Technology in Housing
              (PATH).  That is, the results, when properly used, will lead to a reduced risk
              of  property destruction, improved durability, reduced maintenance costs and in
              the long run reduced monthly cost of housing.

The multi-disciplinary project
              team is lead by a civil engineer, Professor Michael O'Rourke of Rensselaer, who
              is an expert in the area of snow effects on building structures.  The Co-PI is
              Professor Richard Smith, of Rensselaer's Mechancial Engineering Department, who
              is an expert on heat transfer and solidification.  In order to ensure
              appropriate transfer and use of this new technology, a project advisory group
              consisting of representation from the National Association of Home Builders and
              State Farm's Building Technology Research Lab has been established.
