Title       : Research on Advanced Technologies for Housing: Skill-Driven Optimization of
               Construction Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0080278

Award Number: 0080278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avi Wiezel avi.wiezel.@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra L. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Hinrichs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Although the construction industry has developed both product and process
              models, it has yet to refines its models to represent the movements of the
              human-activated end-tools. The objective of this research is to develop a model
              of the human skills required in construction operations. To accomplish this
              research objective, a methodology will be developed for collecting and
              representing construction activities. The representation will draw on movement
              representation schemes devised in dance, biomechanics, and ergonomics. 

In
              addition to serving as a cornerstone for a comprehensive construction
              product-process model, the model of the human skills will promote:

1. An
              enhanced understanding of the ergonomics of home building construction
              operations and injury prevention;
2. A classification taxonomy for home
              building construction operations, the identification of special skills and the
              identification of activities that require special body dimensions and
              dexterity;
3. The identification of groups of skills that will form the basis
              of cross training strategies among trades; 
4. The identification of
              activities that are best suited for automation or prefabrication, and 
5. The
              early identification of "locked-in" site situations where work access is
              hindered by other construction elements, equipment, or regulatory
              requirements

