Title       : Molecular Simulation of Disordered Materials Under Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0080191

Award Number: 0080191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Lacks daniel.lacks@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0080191
Lacks
This is a theoretical research grant in which molecular
              simulations will be used to investigate the effects of stress on disordered
              systems.  The novelty of the research is the use of the energy landscape as a
              framework for carrying out the simulations and analyzing the results.  The use
              of energy landscapes will lead to new insights regarding these effects and
              allow long-time phenomena to be addressed.

The investigations will focus on
              several phenomena involving disordered systems under stress.  Specifically,
              these are (1) the transport properties of flowing fluids; (2) fracture in
              glassy materials; (3) shock-induced reaction dynamics in energetic materials;
              (4) amorphous-amorphous phase transitions; and, (5) the effects of stress on
              aging in glasses.  Although these phenomena may appear to be unrelated, this
              research aims to show that they may be different manifestations of similar
              stress-induced changes in the underlying energy landscapes.

The following
              physical picture is proposed to explain the effects of stress on disordered
              systems:  The strains resulting from stress lead to changes in the potential
              energy landscape -  of particular importance are changes in local energy
              gradients and curvatures, heights of energy barriers, and relative energies of
              different local energy minima.  These changes in the energy landscape alter the
              system dynamics, which in turn modifies the system properties.  Short-time
              changes in the dynamics, associated with perturbations of the atomic
              trajectories, are due to changes in local aspects of the energy landscape
              (e.g., local gradients and curvatures, and barrier heights).  Long-time changes
              of the dynamics, associated with viscoelastic processes, are due to changes in
              nonlocal aspects of the energy landscape (e.g., relative energies of diffferent
              regions of the landscape).

The investigation will consist of calculations
              that map out the effects of strain on the potential energy landscape, along
              with simulations that probe the system dynamics.  These dynamics simulations
              will include non-equilibrium molecular and Brownian dynamics simulations to
              address short-time dynamics, and rare-event methods to address long-time
              dynamics.
%%%
This is a theoretical research grant in which molecular
              simulations will be used to investigate the effects of stress on disordered
              systems.  The novelty of the research is the use of the energy landscape as a
              framework for carrying out the simulations and analyzing the results.  The use
              of energy landscapes will lead to new insights regarding these effects and
              allow long-time phenomena to be addressed.

The investigations will focus on
              several phenomena involving disordered systems under stress.  Specifically,
              these are (1) the transport properties of flowing fluids; (2) fracture in
              glassy materials; (3) shock-induced reaction dynamics in energetic materials;
              (4) amorphous-amorphous phase transitions; and, (5) the effects of stress on
              aging in glasses.  Although these phenomena may appear to be unrelated, this
              research aims to show that they may be different manifestations of similar
              stress-induced changes in the underlying energy landscapes.
***

 

