Title       : UMEB: Environmental Endocrinology and Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0080194

Award Number: 0080194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric J. Janzen fjanzen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol M. Vleck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Vleck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugenia S. Farrar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will recruit 8 talented undergraduates per year at Iowa State
              University to careers in environmental biology by providing research training,
              intensive mentoring, and a clear view of the excitement, rewards, and
              importance of the field.  Recruiting efforts will target groups
              underrepresented in environmental biology, particularly in the midwest.  The
              program will increase participation of underrepresented groups in the field,
              aid in recruitment of underrepresented groups to the University, and produce a
              set of individuals exceptionally well prepared for continued success in
              graduate and post-graduate careers.

The project will collaborate with and
              take advantage of Iowa State University's strong institutional emphasis on and
              investment in recruiting underrepresented groups to participate in science and
              technology in general, and will add a particular focus on environmental
              biology.

The project focus is involvement of students in scientific research
              programs as full participants, from project design to presentation and
              publication of the results, all carried out in the context of one-on-one
              mentoring and strong guidance by University faculty.  Each student's research
              experience will be bolstered by a set of program elements, including rotations
              through laboratories working on related projects, annual workshops involving
              the whole group in training and participation in environmental science in the
              field, an academic seminar that will provide tools for increasing success in
              environmental biology, and annual symposia, invited speakers, and participation
              in meetings of professional scientific groups to produce breadth, depth, and a
              sense of membership in the community of environmental science.

The research
              foci will be those of three groups of faculty, all involving vertebrate
              environmental endocrinology and physiology in "the land between the rivers,"
              the midwest ecosystems of Iowa and its surroundings.  Each of these research
              areas focuses on native species, including species of conservation importance,
              in a region heavily modified by humans, and of great importance to both human
              ecology and natural biodiversity.  Each studies the effects of environmental
              stresses using animal physiology and development as measurement variables, and
              includes study of endocrine pathways by which environmental effects may be
              mediated.  Each project is diverse enough to provide the necessary scope to
              ensure student independence, and to give students ownership of their research
              project.  Their common elements will enable students associated with any
              project to understand and contribute to others, and mean that a common plan for
              training and enrichment can be equally valuable to all.

