Title       : History of Information Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0080689

Award Number: 0080689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47818              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Kline rrk1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-0080689 - Ronald R. Kline (Cornell University) - "History of Information
              Theory"

As one of the cluster of innovations in computing, microelectronics,
              communications, and control announced to the general public in the late 1940s,
              information theory forms part of the foundation for inventions in information
              technology which social commentators now herald as the primary cause of a
              so-called Information Revolution. Although scholars have challenged the
              technological determinism of such claims by investigating the social
              construction and use of communication systems, computers, and computer science,
              a scholarly book-length history of information theory does not exist. This
              award supports a PI as he investigates the intellectual, social, and cultural
              history of the creation of information theory in the United States and Britain
              by Norbert Wiener, Claude Shannon, Dennis Gabor, Donald MacKay, and others, the
              widespread interest in applying the theory to biology and the social sciences
              in the 1950s, its application to communications engineering and information
              processing in the 1960s and 1970s, and its links to discourses in economics and
              sociology about an information economy and an information society from the
              1970s to the present.

The PI is particularly interested in the interrelated
              themes of boundary-work, the relationship between science and technology, and
              the role of users of scientific and engineering knowledge as agents of
              scientific and technological change. He is exploring the concept of
              boundary-work in regard to competition among scientific and engineering
              disciplines, such as communications engineering, mathematics, physics,
              economics, and sociology (instead of the division between science and
              non-science). In doing so, he is investigating boundary-work as a closure
              mechanism in scientific and engineering disputes, studying how contemporaries
              perceived the relationship between science and technology (instead of asking
              what the relationship was), and extending recent work on users in science and
              technology studies from everyday consumers to the realm of scientists and
              engineers.

The PI's larger goal is to write a scholarly book about the
              development of the information theory in the United States (as the result of a
              series of negotiations among scientists, engineers, and mathematicians) and the
              connections between these actions and the later discourses on an Information
              Society. His immediate goal, however, is (with the support of this award) to
              finish the archival and journal research on this project and conduct interviews
              with key figures in information theory for the proposed book.

