Title       : The Empirical Analysis of Local Interaction Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0080826

Award Number: 0080826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giorgio Topa giorgio.topa@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project's common theme is the empirical evaluation of economic
              models in which agents' decisions and outcomes are affected by other agents'
              behavior directly, rather than being mediated by markets. A common assumption
              in these models is that individuals interact locally with a set of neighbors
              defined by a social or economic distance metric. The proposed research is
              concerned with analyzing models of local social interactions in the context of
              job search and urban unemployment.

The primary objectives of the project are
              threefold.  First, the conditions under which one can identify the model
              parameters, or at least place bounds on the magnitude of the local
              interactions, are explored. Second, the project studies whether identification
              can still be attained when the researcher only has access to spatially
              aggregated data, and determines how the estimates change as one moves to
              different levels of aggregation (e.g., block groups, Census tracts, Community
              Areas). Third, this project aims at studying the dynamic properties of local
              interaction models: in particular, determining how long it takes to reach the
              stationary distribution, measuring the persistence of clusters generated by
              these models, and computing Impulse Response Functions in time and in space to
              exogenous shocks. The secondary objective of the project is to develop
              empirical methodologies in order to estimate and test the validity of such
              models.  In particular, the identification analysis will guide the choice of
              the specific estimation strategy to be employed.

The proposed research uses
              Bureau of Census data, augmented by other sources, on several large U.S.
              cities. Spatial correlation patterns in the data are analyzed using a
              non-parametric estimator of Auto-Correlation Functions. When possible, point
              estimates of the structural parameters are provided via a Simulated  Method of
              Moments methodology.  Other non-parametric estimation methods are also used to
              compute bounds for the structural parameters or for the local interaction
              effects.

