Title       : Advanced Measurement Techniques for Emerging Technologies in Thermal Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0080453

Award Number: 0080453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499728             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hahn dwhahn@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob N. Chung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhuomin Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Seraphine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The emergence of significant new technology thrusts in engineering, such as
              microscale systems,
biotechnologies and bioengineering, and environmental
              monitoring, provides engineering educators with a unique opportunity to impact
              and shape future directions in engineering curricula. A goal of this proposed
              innovative curriculum is to meet these identified needs that arise from the
              recent curriculum shifts toward new technology areas and disciplines. For
              example, exciting new areas such as micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and
              biotechnology require modern engineering tools that are often fundamentally
              different from skills currently taught in many existing engineering programs.
              In response to such potential shortcomings in engineering education, this
              program directly addresses the need for new, integrated approaches to provide
              the necessary knowledge and skills to the next generation of
              engineers.


The proposed curriculum includes several key components. (1) A
              significant demonstration/hands-on component will be integrated with
              traditional classroom teaching. Course content will be coupled with actual
              industrial needs and applications to better support emerging technologies. (2)
              Assessment and feedback is an important component, and will be sought from both
              student and industrial practitioners.  Program assessment activities will be
              formulated in cooperation with Dr. Seraphine, a co-principal investigator from
              the Department of Education Psychology. (3) A substantial continuing education
              program that is targeted to practicing engineers will be included. One specific
              approach that will be used to foster interactions with industry is the hosting
              of workshops during the summer

