Title       : Activation of Methyl-substituted Benzenes in Anaerobic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0080160

Award Number: 0080160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred M. Spormann spormann@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microbial enzymes, specifically those of anaerobic microbes, are receiving
              significant attention because they provide an invaluable source for diverse
              natural catalysts. Of particular interest are those enzymes that catalyze the
              transformation of relatively unreactive organic compounds. Methyl-substituted
              benzenes, such as toluene, xylenes, and trimethylbenzenes, are relatively
              stable and represent important drinking water contaminants that are released
              into the environment from leaking underground gasoline storage tanks and
              surface spills.  Several diverse, anaerobic, toluene--mineralizing microbes
              have been isolated and studied in more detail to gain insight into the
              mechanism of anaerobic activation of toluene. These studies showed that the
              initial reaction of anaerobic toluene metabolism is the addition of the toluene
              methyl group to fumarate to form benzylsuccinate. Benzylsuccinate synthase
              (BSS), which catalyzes this reaction, is emerging as a prototype of a new class
              of enzymes for activation of methylbenzenes. Recent studies strongly suggest
              that BSS is a radical enzyme, which carries an essential glycyl radical. Using
              spectroscopic as well as biochemical and genetic studies, this project will
              investigate the involvement of a radical in the BSS reaction and examine the
              mode of BSS activation.

This project will further our understanding of the
              pathways used by microbes to degrade highly stable organic compounds that
              represent important contaminants of drinking water.  This information should
              help in developing effective biological means of removing these contaminants
              from water.

