Title       : Conflicts in the Use of Geographic Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0080447

Award Number: 0080447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harlan J. Onsrud onsrud@spatial.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The use of geographic information technologies is pervasive throughout business,
              government, industry and the scientific community in the United States. 
              Conflicts are arising on a daily basis for those using geographic information
              systems and their affiliated databases, for those implementing such systems,
              and for those designing the next generations of spatial information
              technologies.  Balancing among competing interests and resolving conflicts
              involved in the use of these technologies are growing problems for numerous
              parties within society.  Among the problem domains of greatest concern are
              those involving personal information privacy, intellectual property rights in
              geographic information, liability in the use of geographic data sets, public
              access to government geographic data sets, public goods aspects of geographic
              information in libraries, and sales of geographic information by government
              agencies. This research involves a pilot study that will evidence the extent to
              which conflicts are perceived to exist by those using and creating geographic
              information systems and by those who are the subjects contained within such
              systems.  Researchers will develop and pilot web-based questionnaires to
              determine whether and to what extent interest and value choices differ among
              sampled groups of system developers, users, and data subjects within each of
              the major problem domains. Where significant differences are evidenced as
              existing among affected parties, researchers will develop conflict scenarios
              patterned after experiences witnessed in practice.  The full range of
              geographic information conflict issues within each of the major problem domains
              will be fully explored and documented.  The scenarios and the problems drawn
              from practice will set the methodological and substantive stage for follow on
              research in which potential solutions may be sought.  Eventually, preferences
              for resolving specific conflicts will be determined and guiding principles will
              be suggested.  Gathered data and scenarios developed during the pilot, as well
              as suggested principles to be developed and explored in future research, will
              form the foundation for broad-ranging moral and ethical discussions within the
              geographic information science community. 
