Title       : Role of Hormones in the Control of Insect Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0080894

Award Number: 0080894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Truman jwt@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To shed their old skin at the end of a molt, insects display the ecdysis
              sequence, a complex behavioral sequence that involves at least three discrete
              behavioral phases.   Previous work in the moth, Manduca sexta, indicated that
              this behavioral sequence is organized by a circuitry of neuromodulatory neurons
              that control the duration of each behavioral phase and the transition from one
              phase to the next.  One of the key neuromodulators is the neuropeptide eclosion
              hormone (EH), that controls the transition from the first to the second
              behavioral phase.  EH target neurons, identified by their increased levels of
              the intracellular messenger cyclic GMP after EH release,  include the
              modulatory neurons that produce the peptides needed for the last two behavioral
              phases.   Initially, electrophysiological studies will focus on these cells and
              determine the relationship of their activity both to EH release and to the
              onset of the appropriate behavioral programs.   Since there are defined
              environmental stimuli that are known to stimulate or suppress the transition
              from one behavior to the next, studies will be done to determine if and where
              these stimuli affect the neurons in the neuromodulatory circuit.   New studies
              on the fruitfly,  Drosophila, will then genetically dissect the neuromodulatory
              circuit that is involved in the last two phases of the sequence.
The proper
              functioning of the brain requires the regulated release of neuromodulators such
              as neuropeptides and amines.  Since these modulators play a crucial role in
              determining behavioral states, a key to understanding behavioral organization
              lies in understanding how modulatory systems are organized and how behaviorally
              important stimuli act on them to control neuromodulator release.  The ecdysis
              system has become a premiere system for  studying the organization of
              neuromodulatory circuits and how they relate to complex behavior. 

