Title       : Plants, Edgar Anderson, and Evolutionary Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0080295

Award Number: 0080295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim J. Kleinman kkleinma@swbell.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80295 - Kim J. Kleinman (Missouri Botantical Garden) 
"Plants, Edgar
              Anderson, and Evolutionary Theory"

This post-doctoral fellowship supports an
              ongoing biographical project on Missouri Botanical Garden geneticist Edgar
              Anderson (1897-1969). Anderson was an important contributor to the
              mid-20th-century discussions among such evolutionary scientists as Theodosius
              Dobzhansky, Ernst Mayr, George Gaylord Simpson, and G. Ledyard Stebbins. He and
              Mayr shared the prestigious Jesup Lectures in 1941. Yet, with the exception of
              Vassiliki Betty Smocovitis's work on Stebbins, the contribution of botanists to
              the Evolutionary Synthesis has not been sufficiently examined.

This award
              provides the opportunity to develop both existing and projected work into the
              outline of a full-length biography of Anderson, and to develop other
              publications about Anderson and his science.

A major obstacle to Anderson
              scholarship is that he destroyed his correspondence. It has been only partially
              reconstructed at the Missouri Botanical Garden archives. Hugh lltis, a major
              theorist on the origin of maize and one of Anderson's students, not only has
              contributed to that effort but has recently commented that "his correspondence
              is one of the four or five focal points around which you can reconstruct the
              Evolutionary Synthesis." So, this award supports for travel to the American
              Philosophical Society, Pioneer Hybrid Corn Company, the University of
              California-Berkeley, the University of Missouri, Cornell, Harvard University,
              the University of Chicago, and Michigan State University among other archives
              to make possible the assembly of much useful material on Anderson in the
              archived collections of collaborators, colleagues, students, and teachers. The
              aim would be to construct as full an Anderson archive as possible at the
              Missouri Botanical Garden.

Finally, the retraining component provides for a
              sustained grounding in an important element of Anderson's science,
              biosystematics. Under the guidance of Missouri Botanical Garden botanist Peter
              Hoch and his colleagues, the PI is combining field and laboratory work with a
              study of current literature to see how Anderson's ideas have been elaborated.

