Title       : Current Instability and Gunn Effect in Two-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0080509

Award Number: 0080509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Shur shurm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080509
Shur

The purpose of the proposed project is to study the non-linear
              transport phenomena in short - channel Field Effect Transistors.  Recently
              Dyakonov and Shur have discovered that flow of the electron fluid in
              two-dimensional channel should be unstable.  This instability results in plasma
              wave generation in a terahertz frequency range.  As a consequence, the novel
              terahertz devices (oscillator, detector, mixer) were proposed, and a terahertz
              FET detector has been demonstrated.

A strong non-linear regime of this
              instability in a ballistic field effect transistor will be studied.  The
              stationary non-linear oscillations resulting from development of the
              instability will be investigated.  The shape, amplitude, and velocity of the
              shock waves caused by the instability will be calculated taking into account
              the viscosity of the electron fluid due to electron-electron scattering and the
              external friction related to the scattering by phonons and impurities.  The
              analytical results will be compared with the numerical calculation.  This
              theory will also describe a non-linear regime of operation of a terahertz
              radiation detector based on the short-channel field effect transistor.  This
              instability will also be studied in the case of small electron densities when
              the electron-electron collisions can be neglected (collisionless plasma).  The
              conditions of the instability for collisionless plasma will be found.  The
              linear regime of the instability will be also considered.  The resonant
              frequencies of oscillations and the increment of instability will be
              calculated.

Another topic of their study is a so-called "runaway" effect in
              two-dimensional systems, which leads to the negative differential resistance. 
              Their preliminary estimates show that, in contrast to a three dimensional case,
              such runaway takes place even for deformation optical and acoustic phonon
              scattering.  It should lead to a negative differential mobility in 2D systems
              based on silicon (germanium).  One of the main tasks of the project is to
              investigate a possibility of the Gunn generation in 2D Si (Ge) MOS structures. 
              The consequences of the negative differential in the two-dimensional FET
              channel will be studied.  This case should differ substantially from the
              conventional three-dimensional Gunn effect since diffusion non-exponential law
              governs the charge relaxation in two-dimensional FET channel.  The role of
              electron-electron interactions for 2D "runaway" will also be investigated.


