Title       : Kinetic, Association, and Structural Properties of Dehydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0080258

Award Number: 0080258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard O. Spivey ospivey@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Howard Spivey
MCB 0080258

Compelling experimental evidence has accumulated
              indicating that the previously considered soluble enzymes are often associated
              with other enzymes in the same cell compartment or associated with membrane or
              cytoskeletal components, i.e., they are not independently positioned in a
              soluble phase of a cellular compartment (e.g., cytoplasm, mitochondria, nucleus
              or other organelle).  In some cases, these interactions have been shown to be
              critical to cell survival even in the absence of the enzyme activity.  Also in
              many cases, enzyme concentrations in vivo exceed those of their substrates, and
              thus the majority of a substrate would be expected to be enzyme bound. 
              Furthermore, evidence in vitro and in vivo indicates that some metabolites can
              be directly transferred from the enzyme producing it to the enzyme utilizing it
              - a process called substrate channeling.  The potential physiological
              advantages of these enzyme associations and substrate channeling are numerous
              and significant.  For example, they allow local enzyme reactions to proceed
              independently of the substrate concentrations elsewhere in the same cellular
              compartment.  Thus, a better understanding of these process and implications
              (e.g., micro-compartmentation of metabolism) is essential for better
              understanding of cell function.  These studies focus on the channeling of NADH
              between dehydrogenase enzymes. This research project will pursue the following
              objectives: 1) Obtain direct spectroscopic evidence of the NADH channeling
              complex and elucidate the kinetic mechanisms; 2) Correlate the NADH channeling
              properties with molecular structures of the enzymes using molecular modeling
              and site directed mutagenesis methods; and 3) Test the physiological
              significance of NADH channeling by expression of enzyme mutants in yeast that
              lack surface components essential for association and channeling, but have
              significant enzymatic activity. 


