Title       : Specification of the Zebrafish Ventral Neural Tube
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0080087

Award Number: 0080087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marnie E. Halpern halpern@ciwemb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0080087
Halpern

Analyses of mutations that affect early development of the
              zebrafish embryo indicate that specialized cells that lie at the ventral
              midline of the neural tube, comprising the floor plate, are specified earlier
              than previously thought.  Moreover, recent work has implicated the
              TGF-b-related signal nodal encoded by the zebrafish cyclops gene in floor plate
              induction.  Dr. Halpern's previous work demonstrated that Cyclops signaling in
              the early organizer region of the gastrula is critical for restoration of the
              floor plate and ventral brain in the cyclops mutant central nervous system
              (CNS), which normally lacks these cells.  The goal of this project is to study
              how nodal signaling effects changes in cell behavior and cell fate that lead to
              floor plate differentiation. One approach is to define in greater detail the
              spatial and temporal requirements for ventral neural tube rescue in cyclops
              mutant embryos.  A simple paradigm has also been devised to study the response
              to signaling at the single cell level, taking advantage of the finding that the
              One-eyed pinhead protein is a critical cofactor for responsiveness of cells to
              nodal signals. Using this assay, she will assess directly whether Nodal-related
              factors are floor plate inducing signals by monitoring the properties of
              inducing and responding cells. A related goal is to explore further the role of
              hedgehog genes in specification of the ventral neural tube. Although Sonic
              hedgehog is thought to be the floor plate inducing signal in vertebrate
              embryos, mutations of the zebrafish orthologue do not affect development of the
              CNS ventral midline. Through the generation of mutations, we aim to determine
              whether the hedgehog-related protein Tiggy-winkle, either alone or in
              combination with Sonic hedgehog, functions in determination of floor plate in
              the zebrafish. Through these studies she will gain a greater understanding of
              the early-acting mechanisms that pattern the developing nervous system.



