Title       : The Institutional Dimensions of Global Environmental Change International
               Program Office
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0080786

Award Number: 0080786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oran R. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
              Syma A. Ebbin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia M. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research on the complex interactions among human and natural components of the
              integrated Earth system have highlighted the need to understand both individual
              and collective perceptions and actions of human beings, because people operate
              both as individuals and as members of groups and institutions.  Institutions
              figure prominently both as causes of large-scale environmental changes and
              through direct response and through establishment of the frameworks of
              responses to changing environmental conditions.  This award provides renewed
              support for the International Project Office (IPO) of the Institutional
              Dimensions of Global Environmental Change (IDGEC) project.  IDGEC is one of
              four major core projects of the International Human Dimensions Programme on
              Global Environmental Change Programme (IHDP), which is an international
              collaborative research program overseen by the International Council of
              Scientific Unions (ICSU), with cooperation from the International Social
              Science Council (ISSC).  IDGEC seeks to understand the roles that institutions
              play in causing and confronting a range of environmental changes.  IDGEC
              provides a framework for a series of collaborative research activities
              conducted by social scientists from a broad range of nations.  That framework
              focuses on three major sets of issues:  (1) Causality (How much of the variance
              in the condition of ecosystems is attributable to human institutions?); (2)
              Performance (Why are some institutional responses to environmental problems
              more successful than others?); and (3) Design (How should institutions be
              structured to maximize their performance?).  The IDGEC-IPO plays a critical
              role in the success of this research project by catalyzing and coordinating a
              global network of scientists pursuing a common research agenda.  Through
              continued support for the IPO, the infrastructure for the conduct of current
              and future international collaborations focusing on this important set of
              problems will be strengthened, and the U.S. will give a positive signal to
              other nations regarding the value and utility of major international
              collaborative efforts.

