Title       : GOALI: Organizational Competitiveness: Exploring the Roles of Organizational
               Culture and Human Resource Management in Multinational Corporations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0080703

Award Number: 0080703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nakiye A. Boyacigiller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Moorhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The Organizational Competitiveness project aims to explore the roles played by
              organizational culture and human resource management practices in fostering
              competitiveness in multinational corporations pursuing global strategies. The
              researchers seek to further theory and practice around the following questions:
              1) How does organizational culture influence company performance in
              multinational firms? How important is the strength of organizational culture
              relative to its content? 2) Do human resource management policies and practices
              influence company performance in multinational firms? If so, what policies and
              practices are the most critical levers of performance, and how do they
              influence success? 3) What is the relationship between organizational culture
              and effective human resource management systems, on the one hand; and global
              mindset and boundary spanning on the other? What are the effects of these
              relationships in successful global companies?
	The sample for this study
              consists of 11 companies (35 research sites) headquartered in 8 countries
              across the US, Asia-Pacific, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East.
              Semi-structured face-to-face interviews with line and HRM executives and a
              written survey questionnaire fille dout by a random stratified sample of
              employees are the primary research methods, along with archival research.
              Finally, a survey will be administered to industry analysts to assess outside
              experts' opinions on the current and expected long-term capability of each
              company in the sample. 
Contributions from the research will include a
              theoretical model of how organizational culture and HRM practices influence the
              performance of MNCs, and of the roles played by global mindset and boundary
              spanning structures and processes in implementing global strategy. In addition,
              the program will develop practical tools to measure factors in the model, as
              well as providing feedback to participating firms. The breadth and global scope
              of the sample will provide a comprehensive view of the impacts of
              organizational culture, the prevalence of global mindset and boundary spanning,
              as well as an unusually rich comparative assessment of global strategies.

