Title       : Innovation and Organization Change in New Millennium Universities: Forecast
               Budget
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0080704

Award Number: 0080704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Smith peter_smith@monterey.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              dianne cyr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Graham Rodwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive, Bldg. 86C
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	This project proposes to investigate organizational change and innovation in
              higher education, particularly as regards applications of technology. More
              specifically, the study focuses attention on: 1) how organizational culture
              supports institutional innovation; 2) curriculum innovation; 3) the impact of
              information technology on the educational processes; 4) strategic partnerships
              in higher education; and 5) applications and relevance in research in
              educational institutions.
     The investigation will be undertaken in a
              collaborative network that includes nine partnering institutions. Comparisons
              will be made between three categories of institutions (three in each category):
              established universities that are aiming to transform themselves in light of
              new technology; start-up universities that have flexibility to operate
              differently from inception; and corporate/new learning institutions that are
              supported by corporate funds and methodologies. 
     Data will be collected
              on-site at each institution via interviews, surveys and archival information.
              The multi-institution, comparative nature of this collaborative inquiry is
              expected to enable participating institutions to form a much broader and deeper
              perspective on the impacts of technology and the ranges of organizational
              response, while providing the opportunity for partners both to learn from one
              another, and to develop an ongoing network for information exchange. In
              addition, the study will provide information on how various groups, including
              governments (Canadian and US), private industry and universities can partner
              together around innovation. As relatively little empirical research on IT
              impacts on higher education institutional change has been performed, this study
              is particularly interesting, and offers a broad perspective on technology's
              potential and impact in higher education. This preliminary study is expected to
              provide the groundwork for subsequent further and more detailed study.

