Title       : Mobility Costs and the Dynamics of Labor Market Adjustment to External Shocks:
               Theory and Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a0080731

Award Number: 0080731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shubham Chaudhuri sc301@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John McLaren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen V. Cameron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The effects of a wide variety of policy changes and economic shocks depend
              crucially on the ease with which labor can be reallocated from one industry or
              geographic location to another. This is particularly true of the distributional
              effects of changes in the economic environment. For example:
(i) The
              distributional consequences of eliminating the Multifibre Arrangement, which
              has protected the U.S. textiles and apparel industry from international trade,
              depend crucially on how easily the workers in that sector can find employment
              in other sectors.
(ii) The effects of a cut in income taxes in one state
              depend on how easy it is for workers in other states to move in response.
              
(iii) The effects of immigration into a particular region of the country
              depend on how fluid labor is between that region and others, a question of
              particular importance to states such as California, Florida and Texas. 
(iv)
              The effects of privatization and rationalization of the public-sector workforce
              in post-communist and less developed countries depends on the ease with which
              the workers thus released can integrate themselves into other sectors of the
              economy. 
(v) The costs of labor mobility determine the extent to which the
              effects of regional labor demand shocks is mitigated by inter-regional labor
              flows.
Surprisingly, given the wide range of issues in which the costs of
              labor mobility play a critical role, there is very little direct evidence on
              the magnitude of these costs, and how, they vary across categories of workers,
              sectors, and regions. This project aims to fill that gap. An integrated
              framework, which combines a fully-specified theoretical model within which to
              think about the economic implications of mobility costs with an estimation
              strategy that derives directly from the model, is used to generate estimates of
              intersectoral and geographic moving costs for various worker categories. These
              estimates are used to answer questions such as: Are skilled workers more mobile
              geographically, but less mobile across industries, than unskilled? What are the
              costs in terms of reduced mobility of being a homeowner? Has technical change
              made it easier for skilled workers to switch industries?  The estimates are
              then used to conduct a number of specific policy simulations, among them a
              study of the desirability of gradualism in implementing trade liberalization in
              the U.S. and an analysis of the impact of immigration on local labor markets. 
              Time-series data on wages and gross labor flows across region-cum-industry
              cells, constructed from 28 years of the March Current Population Survey files,
              provide the main basis for estimation. These data are supplemented with data
              from other sources in carrying out the program of policy analysis.

