Title       : Chaos and Markov Based Approaches to Time Series Modeling of Power System
               Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0080359

Award Number: 0080359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Kostelich kostelich@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Heydt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project relates to research in advanced concepts in power system load and
              component modeling.  The proposed project encompasses two distinct approaches
              to the modeling of irregularly time varying power system loads and elements to
              capture information from measurements (time series recorded data) so that those
              elements can be modeled accurately.  The goal is to develop models directly
              from operating system data, thereby permitting continuously updated models
              without specialized tests and disruptive operating conditions.  The models
              shall be used in control system design and for accurate dynamic
              simulations.
The first modeling approach is based chaotic dynamics.  The
              objective is to design a system of local linear approximations to the dynamics
              of a chaotic process that can be updated in real time as more observations
              become available or when the underlying process is subject to a slow drift. 
              The second modeling approach is based on the concept of random iterations.  It
              is a statistical approach that can work well when noise, approximation errors,
              or rapid time variability of system parameters make the first approach
              unreliable.  Random iterations are well suited to explain chaotic series
              exhibiting statistical regularity in terms of stability of time averages.  They
              can be used to make predictions about average future behavior with specified
              levels of accuracy and confidence and make predictions based on large data sets
              more feasible.
An educational component of the proposed work is the
              development of Web-based resources for interdisciplinary graduate courses
              involving applications of nonlinear dynamics and statistics to contemporary
              engineering problems.



