Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Syntactic and Psycholinguistic Investigations of
               Odawa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0080659

Award Number: 0080659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernanda Ferreira fernanda@eyelab.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Formal linguists and psycholinguists start with the standard assumption that all
              human brains operate according to the same principles, and that all human
              language and human sentence processing must adhere to these principles,
              regardless of the surface characteristics of any given language. Yet the vast
              majority of psycholinguistic research (on both production and comprehension)
              that has been conducted has focused on a tiny number of the world's languages.
              With only a few exceptions, all of the languages have been typologically
              homogeneous and therefore syntactically similar. The proposed research seeks
              primarily to extend psycholinguistic research to the Odawa language, a Native
              American language closely related to Ojibwa and other Algonquian languages and
              spoken in southern Ontario, Canada. Odawa is typologically and syntactically
              very different from any language ever investigated by psycholinguists and thus
              offers a totally new perspective on the various current and competing theories
              of human sentence processing.

Odawa is often referred to as a
              nonconfigurational language due to its extremely free word order in independent
              clauses. Any transitive sentence consisting of two noun phrase arguments and a
              verb can occur grammatically in any of the six possible word orders. Yet this
              word order is not facilitated by a rich, conventional case system of the sort
              observed in languages that exhibit certain degrees of word order freedom and
              which have been studied by psycholinguists (e.g., German, Japanese). This
              degree of word order freedom is something that is not taken into consideration
              in any current model of sentence production or comprehension.

The Student
              Investigator has the unprecedented opportunity to combine his training in
              formal syntax, psycholinguistics, and the Odawa language to perform a large
              number of production and comprehension experiments in the town of Wikwemikong,
              Ontario, Canada, where approximately 50% of the 7,000 residents are still
              native speakers of the language. The production experiments will be conducted
              to assess baseline preferences for various structural alternatives, and to
              determine whether the preferences can be changed with various priming
              manipulations. The comprehension experiments will seek to establish temporary
              ambiguities and then observe the manner and time course of participants'
              recovery from such ambiguities. Critically, the syntax of Odawa allows key
              assumptions made by current theories of sentence processing to be critically
              examined.
