Title       : Functional Analysis of Maize Genes for Sucrose Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0080282

Award Number: 0080282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Koch kek@gnv.ifas.ufL.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,1158,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Sucrose is literally "the life-blood of plants"  and moves from photosynthetic
              leaves to growing cells and tissues.  The most rapidly growing organs are those
              that  have a high capacity for sucrose metabolism.
Sucrose and/or its
              metabolic products can also affect expression of many genes.  Control of
              sucrose metabolism can thus have profound physiological and developmental
              consequences for the plant  at multiple levels.  There are only two known paths
              for sucrose cleavage, catalyzed by either invertases or the reversible sucrose
              synthase reaction, respectively.  Dissection of the processes involved has been
              difficult due to multiple genes, diverse functions of their protein products,
              and sensitivity of the genes to environmental, metabolic, and developmental
              signals.  New materials from our lab and elsewhere now put us in an excellent
              position to dissect roles and regulation of specific genes for sucrose
              metabolism in maize.  The combination of mutants, physiology, and relevance of
              maize as a grain model make this an ideal species for this research project. 
              The proposed studies involve analysis of i) "knock-out" mutants deficient in
              only one of the sucrose synthase genes (sus1), ii) a newly identified gene for
              a third sucrose synthase (Sus3), and iii) transgenic maize plants expressing an
              invertase gene (Ivr2-GUS) designed to generate a blue color when the gene is
              induced.  We will use these tools in combination with specific developmental,
              genetic, and physiological perturbations made possible using distinctive
              features of the maize plant. The proposed work will provide a previously
              unavailable means of addressing the roles and regulation of genes for sucrose
              metabolism.
