Title       : A Quasi-Experimental Comparison of Face-to-Face and Internet Delivery in
               Citizens' Consensus Conferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0080810

Award Number: 0080810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick W. Hamlett hamlett@social.chass.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn R. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Macoubrie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The competence of citizens to participate fully in democratic governance remains
              a controversial issue in political theory, particularly with regard to policy
              issues involving sci-ence and technology. In this context, two promising new
              approaches have emerged to foster citi-zen participation and engagement: the
              citizen's "consensus conference," originally developed in Denmark, and
              Internet-based public deliberation. Because of their relatively short
              histories, however, little research has been conducted on either deliberative
              mode.  To refine and promote ways to increase citizen participation in the
              formation of science and technology policy, an interdisciplinary team of four
              faculty working in the rhetoric of science and technology, small group
              communication, and political science will conduct two consensus conferences on
              a scientifically and/or technically complex policy issue of concern to the
              citizens of North Carolina. In keeping with the Danish model, conferences will
              include demographically diverse panels of 15 citizens each who meet one weekend
              per month for three months to deliberate and ultimately generate
              recommendations concerning a current policy is-sue. Citizen panelists will
              receive information about that issue from a range of content-area ex-perts,
              experts on social implications of science and technology, and representatives
              of special interest groups. However, the panelist group itself will be
              responsible for forming policy rec-ommendations. These recommendations will
              then be reported to the media and relevant policy-making bodies in an initial
              press event and through wide dissemination of a final report.

Using a mix of
              qualitative and quantitative methods, the team will investigate four
              compo-nents of successful consensual deliberation - learning and reasoning
              (cognitive components) and trust and confidence (affective components) - in
              face-to-face and Internet settings. The team will seek to determine first how
              these four components characterize the tradi-tional face-to-face conference and
              then track how they might change in a conference held strictly over the
              Internet.  In so doing, project investigators will expand the Danish consensus
              conference model by beginning to examine the comparative effective-ness of the
              Internet as a deliberative tool. This new medium will be used both as a way to
              ex-plore improving the cost-effectiveness and wider adoptability of the Danish
              model in the U.S., as well as a counterpoint against which to compare the
              relative roles of the cognitive and affective components of successful
              consensus formation. Project results will be disseminated to a wide variety of
              audiences to 1) promote the practice of public consensual deliberation; 2)
              ad-vance basic research; and 3) inform the public about these processes'
              implications for their po-tential role in policy deliberation and
              formation.


