Title       : Conference on Future Directions in Distributed Parameter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0080784

Award Number: 0080784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph C. Smith rsmith@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Demetriou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080784
Smith

The Conference on Future Directions in Distributed Parameter
              Systems 
will provide a forum that illustrates past accomplishments in
              distributed 
parameter systems and indicates open questions, challenges, and
              future 
research directions.  The organizers have contacted and received
              tentative 
acceptance from 14 plenary speakers who will address the state of
              the art 
and future research directions in their respective fields.  The
              plenary 
speakers will also be asked to write 10-15 page chapters, summarizing
              the 
perspectives and recommendations made in their addresses, which will be
              
published within a year after the conference.  Secondly, younger scientists
              
will be invited to present contributed talks that focus on specific
              
applications modeled by distributed parameter systems. This will provide
              
the younger scientists with exposure to the perspectives provided by the
              
plenary speakers and a mechanism for disseminating their own research.  
The
              conference is scheduled for October 5-7, 2000 at North Carolina State
              
University.

Significant advances in both theoretical and computational
              resources have 
recently facilitated the development and implementation of
              distributed 
parameter models and control designs that incorporate the full
              spatial and 
temporal behavior of complex physical systems. Because
              distributed 
parameter methods are based on the physical mechanisms that
              produce the 
system dynamics, the approach provides advanced capabilities with
              regard 
to system design and control. The Conference on Future Directions in
              
Distributed Parameter Systems, which is scheduled for October 5-7, 2000 
at
              North Carolina State University, will provide a forum that illustrates 
past
              accomplishments in this field and indicates open questions, 
challenges, and
              future research directions.  The organizers have contacted 
and received
              tentative acceptances from 14 internationally recognized 
scientists who will
              address the state of the art and future research 
directions in their
              respective fields.  The plenary speakers will also be 
asked to write 10-15
              page chapters summarizing the perspectives and 
recommendations made in their
              addresses.  These will be published within 
a year after the conference. 
              Secondly, younger scientists will be invited to 
present contributed talks
              that focus on specific applications modeled by 
distributed parameter systems.
               This will provide the younger scientists 
with exposure to the perspectives
              provided by the plenary speakers and a 
mechanism for disseminating their own
              research.

