Title       : US-Namibia Cooperative Research: Potential of Hyperspectral Remote Sensing for
               Geological Mapping and Resource Evaluation in Arid Regions When Used in the
               Damaran Terrane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0080679

Award Number: 0080679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42287              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Duke eduke@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin J. Paterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510800   Deep Mineral Deposits                   
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080679
Duke & Paterson

This award supports a three-year collaborative
              research project among Drs. Edward Duke and Colin Paterson, of the Department
              of Geology and Geological Engineering at the South Dakota School of Mines and
              Technology, and Drs. Volker Petzel and Herbert Roesener, of the Geological
              Survey of Namibia.  The project will also include the participation of a US
              graduate student and a Namibian graduate student.

The South Dakota School of
              Mines and Technology has been developing field-based and remotely-sensed
              spectroscopic methods for mapping variations in the distribution and
              composition of metamorphic minerals.  While the methods are currently only
              suitable for use in areas with minimal vegetative cover, they still provide an
              unprecedented opportunity to conduct basic research on geological processes in
              understudied parts of the world.  Using state-of-the-art satellite, airborne,
              and ground-based remote sensing techniques and instrumentation in combination
              with field-based studies, the investigators will map variations in mineralogy,
              metamorphic conditions, and fluid flow in parts of the Damaran terrane in
              Namibia.  Because of its minimal vegetative cover, this terrane provides
              excellent exposure of a variety of rock types.  It also has a wide range of
              metamorphic conditions and many hydrothermal ore deposits.  The project
              combines the US researchers' expertise in petrology, mineral deposits, and
              geological remote sensing applications, with the Namibian investigators'
              knowledge about their regional geology and ore deposits.  This project
              complements the work of the Geological Survey of Namibia to map the Damaran
              stratigraphy and geochronology.  The project results are expected to identify
              the geological environment in which new mineral resources may be identified,
              and they will be used to develop a database for mineral occurrences in Namibia.
               These results are expected to provide significant new information on the
              geology and ore deposits of the orogenic belt, thereby advancing our
              understanding and knowledge about Earth's system.  Additionally, this project
              will help establish an important scientific and logistical framework for
              utilizing the new hyperspectral sensors to evaluate natural resources in
              Subsaharan Africa.

The Division of International Programs and the Division
              of Earth Sciences are jointly providing funding for this project.

