Title       : Collaborative Research: Applying Constraint Satisfaction Models to Legal
               Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0080424

Award Number: 0080424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Simon dsimon@law.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Read  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
SES-0080424
Simon, Dan
Read, Stephen
University of Southern
              California

Theories of human reasoning are heavily influenced by a number of
              assumptions derived from formal accounts of deductive logic. A central
              assumption of these models is that the flow of inferences is unidirectional.
              The syllogistic, unidirectional nature of the reasoning processes rules out
              "reverse" inferences in which a person's conclusions might lead to a change in
              the evaluation of the premises and evidence. Violations of this assumption are
              viewed as signs of the frailty of human reasoning. In this project, we explore
              an alternative conception of reasoning and decision-making, one based on a
              theoretical paradigm called constraint satisfaction mechanisms. Our preliminary
              research has shown that reasoning entails bi-directional influences among the
              participating pieces of evidence, premises and conclusions, and that the
              changes occur mostly without awareness.  

This project is a novel attempt to
              introduce this emerging model of cognition to decision making, particularly in
              the legal domain. First, we intend to apply it to the issue of evidence
              integration in the fact-finding phase. We will examine whether the process of
              evidence integration leads to changes in the evaluation of the individual
              pieces of evidence. In particular, we will examine cognitive effects on
              judgments of defendants' mental states, a determination that is crucial to
              adjudication in tort and criminal law (mens rea). Other studies will examine
              why decision makers encounter problems with ignoring inadmissible evidence.
              

The making of a decision can be a difficult and daunting task, as is often
              manifested both before and after the decision is made, yet at the time of
              making the decision people generally feel confident, even overconfident.  In
              the second part of the project we intend to explore this relationship among
              pre-decisional conflict, confident decisions, and post-decisional regret.  This
              issue is especially pertinent to the legal domain, since a central feature of
              legal culture is that decisions are taken very seriously.  Contract law, for
              example, is based on a concept of reliance, and a failure to fulfill an
              obligation is considered a breach.  There is even less flexibility when it
              comes to adjudication, wherein decisions announced by judges and jurors are
              treated as virtually immutable.  Given the weightiness of the issues and the
              closeness of the vying positions often involved in legal transactions and
              disputes, it is important that we gain a better understanding of these
              seemingly paradoxical phenomena of conflict, confidence and regret.


