Title       : A Molecular Gas Study of the Initial and Final Stages of the Ultraluminous
               Infrared Galaxy Phenomenon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a0080881

Award Number: 0080881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron Evans aevans@mail.astro.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0080881
EVANS

Ultraluminous infrared galaxies (ULIGs) are observed to be
              closely interacting/ merging galaxies. Both circumnuclear star formation and
              active galactic nuclear (AGN) activity in ULIGs are believed to be fueled by
              molecular gas, and the strong ultraviolet-to-optical radiation generated by
              both processes is absorbed by dust and re-emitted at infrared wavelengths.
              Optically bright QSOs may be an evolutionary end product of the ULIG phase. 
              The appearance of optically bright QSOs may be the result after outflows and
              supernovae have cleared much of the dust responsible for obscuring the QSO
              nucleus.

Two projects will be carried out that will provide potential clues
              to the early and final stages of ULIG phenomenon. The first is a study of the
              molecular gas properties of ULIG progenitors. Specifically, an observational
              survey of the Carbon monoxide (CO) (1 to 0 transition) line radiation of ULIGs,
              whose nuclei are still widely separated, is being undertaken in order to
              determine the relative molecular gas content of the progenitor galaxies. The CO
              data are being compared with ground-based and space-based optical to
              near-infrared images of these ULIGs to verify the location of the molecular gas
              relative to the stellar nuclei. Preliminary analysis of five ULIGs with nuclear
              separations of about 5 parsecs shows that ULIGs with warm, Seyfert-like
              infrared flux ratios have CO associated with only the AGN, whereas ULIGs with
              cool, starburst-like flux ratios has CO associated with both nuclei. Such a
              dichotomy may indicate the manner in which mergers with different primary power
              sources become ultraluminous early in the merger process.

The second project
              is a search for molecular gas remnants of an early ULIG phase in a sample of
              QSOs. The sample consists of a family of 17 infrared excess QSOs believed to
              represent the transition stage between the heavily obscured ULIGs and the
              classic, optical QSOs. The sample has been previously imaged at optical/near
              infrared wavelengths. These studies have shown evidence of unresolved bright
              nuclei with underlying spiral arms and tidal tails, as well as luminous young
              star clusters. The CO observations of these QSOs will provide the statistical
              sample needed for a direct comparison of their molecular gas properties to
              those of ULIGs, as well as to the population of gas-rich, high redshift ULIGs
              and QSOs recently detected in CO.

The results of the research will help
              astronomers understand the differences between galaxies and QSOs.

Both of
              these projects will make use of observational data taken at the Owens Valley
              Millimeter Array that is operated by Caltech.  This project and the Owens
              Valley Millimeter Array are supported by funds from the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences.  

***

