Title       : US-West Africa Workshop: Niger River Aquatic and Riparian Vertebrate
               Conservation, Bamako, Mali, January 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0080699

Award Number: 0080699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Pezold pezold@ulm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-1010

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5928,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0080699
Pezold

This award supports ten US and four African participants in
              the US-West Africa Workshop on Niger River Aquatic and Riparian Vertebrate
              Conservation, to be held in Bamako, Mali, January 2001.  Overall, approximately
              40 scientists, policy makers, and NGO representatives from the United States,
              Mali, Benin, Niger, Guinea, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, and the European Union will
              participate.  The co-organizers are Professor Frank L. Pezold, with the Museum
              of Natural History at Northeast Louisiana University, and Professor Mohamed
              Miaga, of the Department of Biology at the University of Mali.  The
              participants, with their backgrounds in systematics, ecology, genetics, and
              behavior, will bring diverse perspectives to conservation questions and issues
              for the Niger River basin.  The goals of the workshop are to establish
              collaborative associations that will stimulate multinational basic ecological
              and systematic research, and facilitate effective integration of vertebrate
              conservation initiatives in the Niger River basin. 

The Niger River and its
              surrounding area is a center of diversity.  The river contains at least 243
              fish species, representing 36 families (14 of which are endemic to the African
              continent).  Additionally, the Niger River basin's floodplain wetlands provide
              habitat for both sedentary and migratory populations of semi-aquatic and
              terrestrial birds, bats, rodents, crocodilians, frogs, toads, and snakes, as
              well as migrating elephants.  But little is known about the distribution and
              ecology of most of the fish species, and even for many of the larger riparian
              and terrestrial vertebrates basic information on their biology and ecology is
              scarce.  The riparian and aquatic ecosystems supported by the Niger River are
              now being threatened by the increasing desertification of the Sahel, by the
              competing needs of wildlife and human populations, and by pollution. 
              Conservation initiatives which are soundly based on scientific findings are
              needed to help alleviate the pressure on these threatened ecosystems.  The
              workshop setting will enable the participants to identify mutual areas of
              research interest, and begin to establish long-term collaborations on the basic
              ecology and systematics of West African vertebrates.  Also, they will begin to
              develop a shared international electronic database of species distributions,
              frequencies, and accessory ecological information, and they will start to
              create national reference collections. 

This workshop is being jointly
              funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Environmental Biology.

