Title       : Control of Hormogonium Differentiation in the Symbiotic Cyanobacterium Nostoc
               Punctiforme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0080805

Award Number: 0080805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Meeks jcmeeks@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0080805
Meeks

The nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme
              exemplifies filamentous cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) whose vegetative cells
              have four developmental alternatives and are the most complex of all bacteria.
              Depending on the environmental conditions vegetative cells can: grow and divide
              to continue the vegetative growth cycle, transiently differentiate into motile
              filaments called hormogonia, transiently differentiate into resting cells
              called akinetes, or terminally differentiate into heterocysts, the sites of
              nitrogen fixation. This project focuses on identifying the regulatory
              mechanisms involved in hormogonium differentiation and behavior. Motile
              hormogonium filaments serve in the colonization of new habitats and as the
              infective units in establishment of symbiotic associations with plants and
              fungi by the Nostoc. Cyanobacteria are important producers of reduced carbon
              and nitrogen for other organisms in maintaining steady state environmental
              conditions. In symbiotic associations with lichens for example, nitrogen-fixing
              cyanobacteria contribute to the consumption of atmospheric carbon dioxide in
              poor soils and lessen the extent of global warming. This project has two
              overall objectives. 1. Determine the extent of differential gene expression
              during hormogonium differentiation, using two dimensional protein gel
              electrophoresis to identify differentially synthesized proteins, determine the
              amino acid sequence of selected proteins and use the N. punctiforme genome data
              base to identify the corresponding genes that encode the proteins.  2.
              Characterization of a set of genes, whose synthesized proteins may function in
              the production of a metabolic compound that represses hormogonium
              differentiation. Specific focus will be on the activity of the hypothetical
              transcriptional repressor of the genes. The results of this study will be of
              value in addressing questions of the hierarchy, integration and evolution of
              regulatory pathways in developmental biology using 

