Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research -- Paleontological Survey of the Lake Rukwa
               Basin, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0080804

Award Number: 0080804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Sherwood rjsherwood@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Kingston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Historically, Tanzania has served as a major source for evidence into the
              evolution of humankind.  In the relatively unexplored southwestern portion of
              the country, the Rukwa Basin presents favorable conditions for the preservation
              and recovery of primate fossil remains.  The current project will be a survey
              and reconnaissance of this area to collect paleontological, and geological,
              samples relevant to human evolution from this relatively unexamined area.
              

The Rukwa Basin is a northwest trending rift roughly 300km by 50km. 
              Geologic surveys have identified four major stratigraphic units with the most
              relevant being the Lake Bed deposits dated roughly 10 -- 0.1 million years ago.
               The objectives of the project are as follows 1) survey of the Rukwa Basin; 2)
              collection of hominin fossils; 3) collection of other fossils, and geological
              specimens, relevant to dating of the area, or reconstruction of the
              paleoenvironment.

Human origin studies have thrived in the past few decades
              from a variety of advances in analytical approach, or from the application of
              technology including medical imaging techniques such as computed tomography
              (CT).  Few advances, however, have as dramatic and immediate an impact as the
              announcement of new fossil finds.  The past decade alone has seen one new genus
              and several new species of early hominin described.  Equally important are
              reports expanding the known geographic distribution of some species (e.g.,
              Australopithecus boisei in Ethiopia; Homo rudolfensis in Malawi).  The proposed
              survey of the Rukwa basin hopes to add to the early hominin database by
              discovering new fossils and/or increasing the understanding of the ecological
              circumstances of human evolution.

