Title       : Hurricane Engineering: A New Curriculum for a Planet at Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0080524

Award Number: 0080524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc L. Levitan levitan@hurricane.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijay P. Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Moe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dante Fratta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Wolshon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emir Jose Macari  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to develop curricular materials for the newly emerging field of
              Hurricane Engineering.  It will develop and implement several new courses,
              create a new civil engineering minor in the field at Louisiana State
              University, and broadly disseminate this information via publication of the
              first textbook on Hurricane Engineering and through a web-based program.

A
              multi-disciplinary project team with expertise in many aspects of Hurricane
              Engineering has been formed.   It consists of 23 faculty from civil,
              environmental, chemical, and mechanical engineering, coastal science, landscape
              architecture, and environmental studies.  The lead units are the Louisiana
              State University Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and the LSU
              Hurricane Center, with participation from other LSU departments, Southern
              University, and the University of Missouri-Rolla.   The team will develop the
              first textbook in the field, as well as web-based educational materials and
              modules.  The materials will address planning, analysis, design, response, and
              recovery of civil engineering systems and infrastructure. The scope ranges from
              individual buildings to levees to entire transportation networks.  LSU will use
              these materials to create three new civil engineering courses, which will form
              the basis of a new civil engineering minor in Hurricane Engineering.  A course,
              Hurricanes and the Built Environment, will be developed for non-engineering
              majors.  This course will be a core component of a new degree in Disaster
              Science, Mitigation, and Management, being developed by the LS U Hurricane
              Center for the College of Arts and Sciences.  

