Title       : Biosynthesis, Structure, Function and Regulation of Nitrous Oxide Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0080547

Award Number: 0080547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dooley dmdooley@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1158,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The project addresses basic questions regarding the mechanism of assembly of
              the novel copper sites in the enzyme nitrous oxide reductase, and their roles
              in catalysis.  Proteins encoded by the nos cluster genes nosD,F,Y,L, which are
              required for the biosynthesis of nitrous oxide reductase, will be purified and
              characterized.  The investigator's hypothesis is that one or more of the Nos
              proteins are involved in the assembly of the novel copper cluster that is the
              catalytic site in nitrous oxide reductase.  Over-expression methods for nitrous
              oxide reductase and other nos proteins have been developed.  Site-directed
              mutagenesis, together with spectroscopic and kinetics methods, will be used to
              probe the structure, bonding, and reactivity of the electron-transfer (CuA) and
              catalytic sites.  Structural studies (by NMR or x-ray crystallography) of the
              proteins are planned.  The results should be applicable to several major themes
              in modern biochemistry such as metalloprotein structure and function, the
              assembly of metal ion clusters in proteins, and the recognition and activation
              of kinetically-inert small molecules in metabolic pathways.  

The enzyme
              that is the focus of the research is the terminal enzyme in the denitrification
              pathway of bacteria.  The denitrification pathway is a part of the global
              nitrogen cycle and balances the cycle by returning fixed nitrogen to the
              atmosphere.  Global agricultural productivity and water quality are directly
              affected by the biological processes of nitrogen fixation, assimilation by
              organisms, and denitrification.  Furthermore, under some circumstances
              denitrification may release nitrous oxide to the atmosphere, thereby
              contributing to ozone depletion and global warming.  Consequently, it is very
              important to understand exactly how organisms carry out denitrification, and
              how to control this process.  

