Title       : STTR Phase II: Optic Fiber Sensors for the Detection of Pathogenic
               Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a0080372

Award Number: 0080372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Van Tassell vantassellr@lunainnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Luna Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 11704
	      Blacksburg, VA  240621704    540/953-4267

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project
              addresses the need for rapid, reliable instrumentation for the detection of
              pathogenic microorganisms in food and environmental screening. The proposed
              system is based on MEMS-based, optical fiber, extrinsic Fabry-Perot (EFPI)
              biosensors.  During Phase I, Luna Innovations (formerly F&S, Inc.) optimized
              the EFPI sensing platform for refractive index measurements, applied affinity
              films to measure kinetic binding with specific antibodies and non-hazardous
              proteins, and integrated the sensors with an inexpensive signal conditioning
              system for a complete detection combination. The newly developed system is
              capable of cost effective, robust, operationally simple detection. It is easily
              adapted to incorporate microfluidics or other sampling system interfaces
              thereby offering improvements in refractive index measurements, as well as
              biosensing capabilities. During Phase II, this sensing system will be
              incorporated with microfluidic sampling systems and used to demonstrate
              simple
detection of proteinacious targets of Escherichi coli and Vibrio
              cholerae, and will later be expanded for other high priority pathogens found in
              raw and processed food products, contaminated water and soil, and biological
              warfare agents.

Anticipated Benefits/Potential Commercial Applications of
              the Research or Development:  The prototype system has already generated
              tremendous interest from many companies involved in refractive index
              measurements for process control, target screening within the food industry,
              and other biological research applications.  The EFPI as a refractometer has
              found applications within the beverage industry for milk processing, and the
              petroleum and chemical industry for distillation processes and concentration
              monitoring. As a biosensor, the EFPI will find widespread application in
              multibillion dollar annual markets in food, environmental, medical, and
              industrial applications.

