Title       : Investigation and Mitigation of the Electrical Effects of Crystal Defects on SiC
               and GaN Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0080719

Award Number: 0080719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Skromme skromme@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Dudley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project will investigate the performance-limiting effects of crystal
              defects on the electrical properties of p-n and Schottky diode junctions made
              in two important wide-gap semiconductor materials, silicon carbide (SiC) and
              gallium nitride (GaN).  These materials are both currently of great interest
              for high power, high temperature, high frequency electronic applications.  GaN
              is also of interest for short wavelength optoelectronic applications.  A major
              problem in these new materials is the effects of crystal defects on breakdown
              voltage, leakage currents, and other nonidealities of devices fabricated from
              them.  The objective is therefore to systematically study the effects of
              various defect classes on electrical properties of junctions in each material,
              so that the most important defects can be identified and targeted for
              elimination.  The defects will be studied using current-voltage and
              capacitance-voltage measurements, deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS),
              electron beam induced current (EBIC) imaging, electroluminescence under forward
              and reverse bias, and thermal imaging.  The nature of the crystalline defects
              will be determined using synchrotron white-beam X-ray topography (SWBXT),
              optical microscopy & selective etching, scanning electron microscopy, atomic
              force microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).  Very small
              devices containing at most one defect will be studied to isolate the effects of
              specific defect types.  Several methods of passivating the effects of defects
              will also be investigated.  Industrial collaborations are planned with Motorola
              and Epitronics.  A Ph.D. student will be educated, and information on wide gap
              materials and devices will be made widely available to other universities and
              the general public over the Internet.
