Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: John Herschel's Southern Hemisphere Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a0080570

Award Number: 0080570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5794               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Crowe crowe.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation improvement research project will analyze the scientific,
              cultural and political context of the nineteenth-century astronomical
              expedition made by John Herschel to Cape Town, South Africa. In particular this
              research project will focus on the reduction, publication, distribution and
              reception of those southern hemisphere observations, known as the Cape Results.
              What is the relevance of Herschel's voyage to history and to the science of
              astronomy? An analysis of the publication, distribution, and reception of the
              results of Herschel's southern hemisphere astronomical observations will
              further inform our understanding of what science meant to different individuals
              and groups in the nineteenth century. This project will situate Herschel's
              voyage and astronomical observations within the expansionist ambitions of the
              early nineteenth-century British Empire. Additionally, this research will
              consider the relevance of Herschel's observations to current observational
              astronomy. Many of his southern hemisphere observations would later go into his
              1864 General Catalogue, the predecessor to the New General Catalog of nebulae
              and star clusters, which is still used today. Funding will support travel to
              archives around Cambridge and London for three months. 

