Title       : Viscoelastic Properties of Liquid Crystal Polymers and Polymer Networks in
               Nematic Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0080114

Award Number: 0080114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander M. Jamieson amj@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the effect of macromolecular structure on the viscoelastic
              behavior of liquid polymers (LCPs) and LCP networks in low molar mass nematic
              solvents.  Previous research on the properties of dilute nematic solutions of
              LCPs of varying architectures uncovered a variety of novel viscometric
              phenomena, such as LCP-induced transitions between flow-aligning and
              flow-tumbling states.  To explain these observations quantitatively, it is
              necessary to introduce a new viscous dissipation mechanism, not present in
              isotropic solutions, which derives from a mechanical coupling between director
              rotation and LCP backbone configuration.  First, further studies of side-chain
              LCPs in nematic solution, including conoscopic optical analysis of the rate of
              director rotation, as well as direct determinations of chain dimensions and the
              relaxation molecular theory.  Second, we seek to confirm the theoretical
              expectation that, for LCP networks swollen by a nematic solvent, there is a
              mechanical coupling between the distortional elasticity of the solvent, and the
              entropic elasticity of the LCP network.  Third, new dynamical phenomena at
              higher LCP concentrations will be explored: e.g. the onset of chain
              entanglement elasticity and the coupling of the flow to the order parameters of
              LCP and solvent may lead to field- or stress-induced structural
              transitions.
%%%
These studies will explore new phenomena in the viscoelastic
              behavior of nematic materials containing polymers, and will generate
              information pertinent to the design of novel materials for device applications,
              based on solutions or gels of LCPs in nematic solvents.

