Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Cherokee Language Sound Description and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0080023

Award Number: 0080023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42254              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia Haag haag@mail.nhn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although the Cherokee language, an isolated member of the Iroquoian family, has
              more speakers (10,000 to 12,000) and more documentation than many other
              endangered languages of North America, it remains remarkably understudied
              linguistically.  This project will provide a thorough description and analysis
              of the Cherokee sound system:  the goal is to establish the phoneme inventory
              and describe the tone system and other intonational phenomena through acoustic
              analysis of consonants, vowels, and pitch distinctions.   The full project,
              which is expected to take three years,  will consist of four stages: 
              constructing the body of elicitation data (words and sentences); making
              recordings of 20 speakers producing the speech samples; phonetically analyzing
              the recordings (with special emphasis on pitch traces); and writing reports
              based on this data. The current project, which will take one year, will consist
              of the first two stages: constructing the elicitation data and recording the
              speech samples.

This work is important both practically and theoretically. 
              Both major Cherokee political entities, the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma and the
              North Carolina Band of Cherokee, are engaged in language preservation and
              pedagogy, and require reliable phonological analysis to further these goals. 
              Several institutions of higher learning in Oklahoma offer college-level credit
              in the Cherokee language, and have a similarly urgent need for an accurate
              description of the phonology of the language, both for classroom use and for
              the design of instructional materials including audiotapes and CD ROM aids. 
              Socially, because Cherokee consists of a large number of distinct dialects, an
              accurate phonological description is necessary to both distinguish dialects and
              to provide a cogent basis for the acceptance of all dialects as full-fledged
              members of the language.

Theoretically, Cherokee phonology has long
              presented several conundrums.  One still-unsolved problem is the status of
              pitch and tone in the language.  Another problem is that of word and morpheme
              boundaries and their relationship to prosodic categories.  Yet another problem
              is the role of intonational processes with respect to syntactic processes, and
              how these may be different still from discourse functions.  This study will
              provide a large corpus of data that will be drawn from a diverse sample of
              speakers and provide detailed acoustic information.  Using an
              autosegmental-metrical model, the researchers will identify the associations of
              the tone tier with other linguistic levels.

This study provides research
              opportunities for undergraduate assistants in the fieldwork phase.  It also
              includes a large proportion of Cherokee persons in major components of the
              research, including senior personnel, research assistants, and of course, the
              language consultants themselves.
