Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: Infrastructure to Support Research on Mixed
               Wired/Wireless Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0080119

Award Number: 0080119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $990002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Towsley towsley@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aura Ganz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micah A. Adler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis L. Goeckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prashant Shenoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1088,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0080119
Towsley, Donald F.
University of Massachusetts

CISE Research
              Infrastructure:  Infrastructure to Support Research on Mixed Wired/Wireless
              Information

The goal of this project is research and development of control
              strategies, and services required by application suites executing over mixed
              wired/wireless networks.  The future of networking will introduce a setting
              where individuals and embedded processes will communicate among themselves and
              with multimedia information servers over a network made up of diverse network
              technologies, including ad-hoc and cell-based wireless, and wired segments.
              This network will seamlessly provide a diverse range of information-based
              services.  This reflects a fundamental shift in the way users will compute and
              communicate in the future, moving from today's wire-based network where users
              are immobile and know where to obtain services to an environment in which users
              are mobile, may be connected through wireless, perhaps even in an ad-hoc
              manner, and request and receive services in a transparent manner. 

The
              project will produce the fundamental advances required in the areas of coding
              and modulation, access protocols, routing, quality of service, operating
              systems (OS), database systems, security, and performance evaluation, that will
              be needed to produce this next generation network.  These advances will occur
              as the result of an integrated, collaborative, and multidisciplinary effort
              spanning a wide range of disciplines in computer science and electrical
              engineering at the University of Massachusetts.

