Title       : Characterization of a Transferrable Pathogenicity Island in Streptomyces spp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0080326

Award Number: 0080326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary Loria RL21@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Horizontal gene transfer is an important mechanism for evolution of microbial
              pathogenicity of animals and plants. The specific genetic processes that lead
              to clustering and transfer of genes involved in pathogenicity of eucaryotic
              hosts are not well defined. Knowledge about these processes will allow us to
              determine how gene flow results in the emergence of new pathogens.  This
              research addresses the role of horizontal gene transfer in the evolution of
              plant pathogenicity in the filamentous, Gram-positive genus Streptomyces.
              Horizontal transfer of a region containing a phytotoxin biosynthetic gene
              cluster txtAB and an independent virulence gene, nec1, and other virulence
              genes between pathogenic Streptomyces species appears to have resulted in the
              evolution of new pathogenic species in agricultural systems. There are several
              characteristics of these horizontally transferred regions that indicate
              association with a pathogenicity island (PAIS). PAIS are known to be important
              in the evolution of microbial pathogenicity, but have never been described in
              Gram-positive plant pathogens. Simultaneous transfer of both the nec1 and the
              txtAB regions from the recently described plant pathogen, S. turgidiscabies to
              S. lividans and several other nonpathogenic species has occurred in mating
              experiments. The recipient S. lividans strain has a pathogenicity phenotype.
              Preliminary data suggest that the putative PAIS may have been transferred on a
              giant plasmid. The specific objectives of the proposal are to: 1) Characterize
              the PAI and border regions in S. turgidiscabies; 2) Compare the genetic
              organization of the PAI and border regions in S. turgidiscabies to the PAIs in
              S. acidiscabies and S. scabies; and 3) Characterize the mechanism of transfer
              of the PAI from S. turgidiscabies into S. lividans. The work plan begins with
              an analysis of the transmissible PAI in S. turgidiscabies strain Car 8.  The
              PAI is likely to be greater than 60 kb in size and contains the nec1 region,
              the txtAB region and other genes that are necessary for or facilitate
              pathogenicity. Large portions of the PAIs in the three species are identical in
              sequence, however, sequence deletions or insertions may be of biological
              significance and will be characterized. Border regions of the PAIs will shed
              light on the mechanism of transfer and target sequences. Analysis of the PAI
              sequences will reveal candidate pathogenicity and virulence ORFs as well as
              information about the kinds of recombination events that have occurred during
              the evolutionary history of the islands. This work will compliment research on
              evolution and mechanisms of pathogenicity in Gram-negative animal and plant
              pathogens and Gram-positive animal pathogens going on in other laboratories.

