Title       : Microlayer Polymeric Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0080013

Award Number: 0080013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Baer exb6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Hiltner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this award, co-funded by The Polymers Program of the Division of Materials
              Research and the Mechanics & Structures of Materials Program of the Division
              for Civil and Mechanical Systems, novel layer-multiplying technology will be
              used to coextrude polymer sheet or film with hundreds or thousands of
              alternating layers of two or more materials.  Layer thicknesses from the
              macroscale (tens of microns) to the microscale (several microns) and finally to
              the nanoscale (tens of nanometers) will be created.  Motivated by the need for
              new processing technologies to develop the engineered microstructures of the
              future, a microlayer facility was created at CWRU.  This facility includes a
              two-component process that produces sheet or film with alternating layers of
              polymer A and polymer B.  A second system adds a third "tie" layer (polymer C)
              at the interface between each layer of A and B.  A research program to explore
              the possibilities for new materials systems that can be realized with this
              versatile process is proposed.  The proposed research intends to build on the
              most promising aspects of prior research and to innovate in new areas of
              opportunity.  The specific aims focus on: (1) expanding the flexibility of the
              coextrusion process to create new anisotropic structures, (2) incorporating an
              inorganic component in novel ways to produce materials with designed electronic
              properties, (3) creating microlayered and nanolayered materials having enhanced
              barrier properties, and (4) probing the nature of polymer adhesion as related
              to fundamental aspects of polymer blending and alloying.
%%%
Ultimately,
              "microprocessing", as exemplified by microlayer and nanolayer coextrusion, can
              be the basis for creating "smart skins", film and sheet materials with
              radiation of specific wavelengths and additionally possess barrier
              characteristics or unusual electronic properties seems possible.  The graduate
              and undergraduate students who participate in the research will have the
              opportunity to use a unique coextrusion process to design and realize materials
              systems that were not possible previously.  Through written and oral
              communications, the results of this versatile technology will be translated to
              the field-at-large including the industrial sector.

