Title       : Development of an Accelerated Dual BS/MS Program in Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0080452

Award Number: 0080452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Christensen christen@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Horch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to the need for providing advanced engineering education in a
              shorter time period than is generally possible by traditional curricula, the
              PIs propose to create an accelerated educational track to attract the brightest
              students into bioengineering.   They propose to get them involved in a research
              project at an early stage, and provide them with an intensive four-year
              educational program built around a cohort environment. Upon completion of the
              program, the students will receive dual BS and MS degrees in
              bioengineering.

A key element of this program is to have students begin work
              on an individual Masters thesis project early in their careers (i.e., starting
              in the equivalent of their sophomore year). This project provides a framework
              upon which to motivate the students in their classroom activities (a concept of
              just-in-time learning) and to guide them in their selection of elective
              courses. To equip the students with the skills needed to pursue a Masters-level
              project, the seminar/discussion course sequence will involve engineering,
              clinical, industrial and scientific input to aid the student in the selection,
              design and conduct of a Masters research project. A portion of the seminar
              course is also devoted to oral and written presentations of each student's
              research progress.  Another essential feature of this accelerated plan is the
              integrated and concentrated nature of the coursework.

