Title       : Functionalization Chemistry of Fullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0080942

Award Number: 0080942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves F. Rubin rubin@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Yves Rubin, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
              University of California, Los Angeles, is studying the functionalization
              chemistry of fullerenes with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and of the Solid-State Chemistry
              Program in the Division of Materials Research. Atoms are incorporated inside
              fullerenes through a chemical functionalization approach using rational organic
              mechanisms for breaking bonds within fullerene derivatives. Insertion of atoms
              or small molecules inside the resultant open fullerenes is followed by closure
              reactions, regenerating the fullerenes with their entrapped species. In
              addition to providing preparative access to endohedral fullerenes, Professor
              Rubin's studies are providing fundamental information about the chemical
              reactivity of fullerenes, leading to advances in the synthesis of
              functionalized fullerenes expected to display interesting materials properties,
              such as electroluminescence and ferromagnetism.

Fullerenes possess a unique
              combination of structural, topological, and electronic features. Of particular
              significance in the discovery and elucidation of the unusual physical and
              chemical properties of the fullerenes has been the development of techniques
              for their chemical modification and for the incorporation of atoms and small
              molecules within the fullerene shell. With the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and the
              Solid-State Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor
              Yves Rubin, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University
              of California, Los Angeles, is developing new chemical methods to achieve these
              modifications. By the discovery of selective reactions capable of creating and
              of repairing holes in the fullerenes, Professor Rubin is able to prepare
              fullerenes containing a variety of species. These studies provide new
              methodologies for the selective chemical modification of the fullerenes and
              offer promise for the preparation of materials displaying important and useful
              physical properties.
