Title       : Virtual Experiments for Biomedical Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a0080527

Award Number: 0080527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Cinar cinar@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha W. Evens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjeev G. Shroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren V. Sherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Arzbaecher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PIs state that quantitative modeling, analysis, and design which are of
              critical importance to engineers must be supported by project-based experience
              with realistic biological models and open-ended problems.

The proposed
              approach of integrating mathematical simulations with didactic teaching
              material to create "virtual experiments" addresses this need. Novel simulation
              tools will be developed and incorporated into teaching material in biomedical
              engineering. These tools are a collection of mathematical models of biological
              systems and/or processes and will be implemented as computer programs with a
              unified and user-friendly development and operating environment. Students will
              be able to perform "virtual experiments" using these tools and carry out
              engineering design studies where the focus is to design and test a man-made
              device that either interacts with or mimics a biological system. In addition,
              these tools will be useful for expanding the career perspectives of
              undergraduate students in biomedical engineering. Summer programs that include
              lectures, participation in the development of virtual experiments and
              biomedical engineering research will be offered to undergraduate students of
              Chicago State University to facilitate the transition of minority students to
              Ph.D. programs in biomedical fields and thereby increase the number of
              underrepresented minority scientists in leadership roles in the nation's
              biomedical research endeavors.  The University of Pittsburgh and the University
              of Cincinnati are also collaborating institutions.

The objectives of the
              simulation-based modules to be developed focus on case studies in: 1)
              cardiovascular system and blood flow, 2) pharmacokinetic models and dynamics of
              glucose-insulin interaction, 3) cardiac biomechanics, and 4) electrical
              activity in the heart and pacemakers.

