Title       : Dissertation Research: "Science, Magic & Orthodoxy in Baroque Rome: Athanasius
               Kircher and the Study of Occult Traditions"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0080717

Award Number: 0080717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula Findlen pfindlen@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the eyes of his contemporaries, Athanasius Kircher, S.J. (1602-1680) was one
              of the leading Catholic natural philosophers in Europe during the period
              between Galileo and Newton. With the coming of the Enlightenment, his star
              darkened-as did the repute of the bookish methods and arcane subjects that
              characterized his studies. In recent decades, however, the perspective has
              again transformed. Historians have made striking revaluation in the history of
              occult traditions, early modern Catholicism (in particular with respect to the
              Jesuits) and the post-Renaissance development of humanist scholarship. In
              addition, recent work in the history of science has dissolved the traditional,
              narrowly confined narrative of the scientific revolution and expanded the field
              of early modern science to encompass a wider body of ideas and practices. This
              dissertation project will investigate the significance of the study the cluster
              of intellectual traditions including natural magic, alchemy, astrology and
              kabbalah-known as the occult sciences in the middle of the seventeenth century,
              as reflected in Kircher's works and career. The researcher will use Kircher's
              work to demonstrate that the occult sciences presented early modern thinkers
              with a large and diverse collection of ideas from which it was possible to
              construct different interpretations, and that Catholic orthodoxy provided its
              adherents with more room for intellectual maneuvering than is commonly
              appreciated. By placing Kircher's views on occult topics in relation to the
              views of his intellectual opponents, the researcher seeks to delineate the
              range of meanings that adhered to different occult sciences and to identify the
              larger intellectual and religious issues at stake when early modern writers
              marked out positions on occult matters. By charting the changing reactions to
              Kircher's work by European scholars over the course of his long career, the
              researcher intends to address the much-vexed question of the demise of occult
              sciences as an important area of scientific inquiry at the end of the
              seventeenth-century. Support from this grant will allow the researcher to carry
              out primary source research in European archives and libraries for nine months
              during the academic year 2000--2001.
