Title       : Factors that Control Eye Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0080197

Award Number: 0080197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Reh tomreh@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0080197
REH

The Neurons and Photoreceptors in eyes are organized in regular
              arrays.  The regular arrays of neurons in ten retina of the eye are like the
              pixels of a computer screen or video camera; they allow information to be
              arranged spatially in the nervous system, which is critical for the operation
              of the visual system.  It is not known how these arrays arise during
              development.  Imagining how difficult it would be for a video camera to
              assemble itself gives some idea of the fundamental mystery of this process. 
              The purpose of the proposed experiments is to determine the cellular and
              molecular mechanisms that pattern the first neurons in vertebrate retina. 
              These first neurons develop as a patterned array that spreads from the central
              to peripheral retina as a wave front of differentiation.  It is proposed to
              further study the process of pattern formation in the retina by addressing the
              following questions: 1.  Is the recently identified proneural Cath5 gene
              involved in the control of the spacing of the retinal ganglion cells at the
              front of differentiation?  2.  Does the growth factor FGF regulate expression
              of the proneural gene Cath5? 3.  Does FGF-15 control the onset of ganglion cell
              differentiation? 4.  Does Cath5 co-ordinate ganglion cell differentiation? 
              These studies will provide fundamental about the mechanisms by which patterned
              arrays of neurons are established in the vertebrate central nervous
              system.

It has been said that the human nervous system is the most
              complicated system in the Universe.  The current understanding of this complex
              machine is still fragmentary; however, it has recently been recognized that
              those who study the nervous system are studying a "moving target"-the nervous
              system is a machine that has constructed itself, and is constantly changing. 
              It would be as if a computer was constantly rewiring part of its circuitry
              every day to adapt to the changing world.  The proposed research will help to
              understand how such a complex system arises during the development of every
              person, and how this complexity is maintained and refined throughout a
              lifetime.

