Title       : A Clearinghouse on Natural Hazards Research and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0080977

Award Number: 0080977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1721124            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Mileti dennis.mileti@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Fran Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS 00-80977
A Clearinghouse on Natural Hazards Research and
              Applications

Mileti, Dennis S.
University of Colorado, Boulder

This
              award supports continuation of support for the Natural Hazards Research and
              Applications Information Center at the University of Colorado in Boulder for
              the two-year period from October 2000 through September 2002. The Center's
              basic function, to serve as a bridge between the hazards research and
              practitioner communities in the United States, will not change. The Center will
              monitor and disseminate hazards research information to multiple users:
              administrators, practitioners, policy makers, engineers, and scientists of all
              disciplines. The Center will publish and distribute the Natural Hazards
              Observer to over 15,000 subscribers six times a year; operate an electronic
              newsletter, Disaster Research; and disseminate information via the World Wide
              Web and traditional hard copy publications. In addition, the Center will
              continue co-sponsorship of the Natural Hazards Review journal with the American
              Society of Civil Engineers and seek outside funding to produce and distribute
              issues of the Natural Hazards Informera publication series designed to
              synthesize state-of-the-art hazards knowledge so that it can be easily applied
              by practitioners. The Center will continue to build its library database, and
              information will be provided on a day-to-day basis in response to inquiries.
              The Center will sponsor an annual, national and international workshop
              involving users and producers of hazards research each year. It will also
              support social science research following disasters by funding researchers
              throughout the nation to carry out quick response studies of specific hazard
              events. The Center's in-house research program, which is largely funded with
              separate research grants, will focus on conducting research recommended in
              Disasters by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States
              (Mileti, 1999) which presents the results of the Center's five-year research
              project  taking stock of what is known and not known about natural hazards and
              examining the relationship of hazards to a sustainable society. In particular,
              the Center's research will address the issue of what, exactly, sustainable
              recovery from disasters entails.

Facilitating and ensuring links among the
              highly diverse group of academicians and practitioners involved in sustainable
              hazards management remains the greatest challenge for, and the most significant
              result of, Center activities.

The Center is co-funded by the National
              Science Foundation, Federal Emergency Management Agency, National Aeronautics
              and Space Administration, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey,
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and the U.S.
              Department of Transportation.

