Title       : Optimal Bidding Strategies in Transmission Limited Electric Power Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0080279

Award Number: 0080279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Overbye overbye@ece.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian A. Hiskens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The electricity industry in the United States and throughout the world is
              undergoing radical restructuring.  These changes require new analysis
              techniques, both for market participants and for regulators.  The goal of this
              proposal is to investigate appropriate analysis concepts.

The underlying
              transmission system plays a significant role in all market structures.  Under
              certain conditions, transmission congestion can subdivide even relatively large
              power pools, constraining the generation dispatch.  Tools are needed to help
              market participants devise optimal bidding strategies. Conversely, regulators
              must be vigilant against anti-competitive acts.

Investigation of a market
              solution algorithm that bridges the gap between and economic analysis is
              proposed.  Ultimately, such an algorithm will facilitate analysis of the impact
              of underlying engineering constraints on the market. A complete model of the
              transmission system will be embedded in the market simulation. The starting
              point is an Optimal Power Flow that maximizes the social welfare of the
              electricity market.

The research will determine the best algorithm for
              individual welfare optimization.  One promising approach is to formulate the
              problem as a nested optimization: an individual must maximize welfare subject
              to the fact that their price and dispatch are determined by the pool operator,
              who is, in turn, attempting to maximize overall social welfare.  This algorithm
              motivates an iterative approach to obtaining Nash equilibria.

The algorithm
              for finding Nash equilibria describes a dynamic process that involves switched
              algebraic constraints.  The insights that are provided by this dynamical
              systems view of market behavior should facilitate a systematic definition of
              market power.



