Title       : Collaborative Research: Congressional Committee Jurisdictions, Gatekeeping, and
               Agenda Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0080061

Award Number: 0080061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109389             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Scott Adler E.Scott.Adler@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Studies of congressional structure frequently focus on the powers and authority
              of standing committees in the House and Senate.  From a theoretical
              perspective, committees are either the foundation and core of the policy
              process in congress as in a distributive model of legislative structure, or are
              seen as the vital workhorse in providing information and policy proposals to
              parent bodies like the party or chamber as described in partisan and
              informational models.  From a more empirical standpoint, recent observers of
              Congress have disagreed about the contemporary status of legislative committees
              vis-a-vis other congressional actors, particularly chamber and party
              leaders.

Despite the claims of some of the field's best scholars as to
              current strengths or weaknesses of committees in the congressional decision
              making process, we still have few means by which to measure the power and
              authority of committees, particularly if we seek to understand the changes in
              influence of specific panels over time.  This project rectifies this
              shortcoming by gathering new data on bill introductions and referrals.  This
              allows the investigators to more accurately define committee jurisdictions,
              better test theories of jurisdictional change,  understand the process and
              prevalence of committee issue gatekeeping, and discover the effects of
              individual and committee agendas on the overall work of each chamber of 
              Congress.

The researchers collect information on all bills introduced in
              Congress from 1947-2000.  Grounded in current research on congressional
              organization and policy decision making, the investigators describe how data on
              bill introductions and referrals can answer a wide range of questions
              concerning committee authority and policy agenda setting.  For example,
              information on bill referrals provides a more complete delineation of "common
              law" committee jurisdictions by moving scholars beyond simply those issues on
              which a panel is active (holding hearings), to additional consideration of
              those matters on which it has referral authority by may remain inactive (no
              hearings).  Similarly, information on "non-decisionmaking" in committees allows
              the researchers for the first time to truly test models of committee
              gatekeeping across panels and over changes in procedural rules and
              structures.

By integrating data on policy "inputs" (bill introductions) with
              existing information on policy demand (public opinion and media cues) and
              governmental outputs (enactments and budget authorizations), they are able to
              study the dynamics of committee authority and influence over the legislative
              agenda with a more comprehensive depiction of congressional decision making. 
              The dataset will be of great value to numerous other scholars interested in
              this topic.



