Title       : Switched Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0080631

Award Number: 0080631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127010             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Stephen Morse morse@sysc.eng.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this research is to develop methods for synthesizing
              and analyzing logic-based switching control systems. By a logic-based switching
              controller is meant a controller whose subsystems include not only familiar
              dynamical components {integrators, summers, gains, etc.} but logic-driven
              elements as well. An important category of such systems are those consisting of
              a continuous-time process to be controlled, a family of fixed-gain or
              variable-gain candidate controllers, and an "event-driven switching logic"
              called a supervisor whose job is to determine in real time which controller
              should be applied to the process. Examples of supervisory control systems
              include reconfigurable systems, fault correction systems, and certain types of
              parameter-adaptive systems. We propose first to refine and extend the concept
              of supervisory control introduced in our earlier work and second to use
              supervisory control as a motivating vehicle for the study of basic issues in
              the newly emerging field of hybrid dynamical systems.

The supervisory
              control systems we propose to study fall in the category of adaptive control
              systems. Adaptive control has been under study for many years. Yet despite the
              numerous advances which have been made, there are major unresolved issues
              inhibiting the transfer of concepts into practice: Why, for example, is it
              still so difficult to explain to a non-expert why a particular algorithm is
              able to functions correctly in the face of unmodelled process dynamics and L
              bounded noise? How much unmodelled dynamics can a given algorithm tolerate
              before loop-stability is lost? How do we choose an adaptive control algorithm's
              many design parameters to achieve good disturbance rejection, transient
              response, etc.? A major goal of this research is to answer these questions-and
              in so doing to make adaptive control much more accessible to practitioners. We
              will investigate techniques enabling us to much more clearly and concisely
              quantify unmodelled dynamics norm bounds, disturbance-to-controlled output
              gains and so on. Our ultimate objective is to lay bare the ideas needed to
              develop a bona fide computer-aided adaptive control design methodology which
              relies much more on design principals then on trial and error
              techniques.

Towards this end we will seek to derive new switching algorithms
              for supervisory control systems which are more amenable to analysis than those
              which currently exist. We will continue our study of the stability of switched
              dynamical systems, and we will attempt to draw conclusions about the
              input-output properties of such systems in terms of the input output properties
              of the constituant dynamical systems being switched. We will explore the
              connection between the stability of switched dynamical systems and the
              properties of the associated Lie algebras generated by the vector fields of the
              constituient dynamical systems being switched. We will study the problem of
              `covering' a continuum of candidate controllers designed so that at least one
              is able to regulate a process P whose uncertain model lies in an associated
              continuum of candidate process models M, with a finite set of candidate
              controllers C chosen so that for each model in M there is at least one
              satisfactory controller in C. Using the preceding, we will seek to develop a
              provably correct apporoach to supervisory control for uncertain nonlinear
              processes which exploits to the extent possible, established non-adaptive
              control design techniques and which takes into account both unmodelled dynamics
              and exogeneous noise.

