Title       : UMEB: Human Impacts on Ecosystems of the Colorado Plateau
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0080156

Award Number: 0080156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee C. Drickamer Lee.Drickamer@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy C. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               0080156
Drickamer

Northern Arizona University is combining ongoing Colorado
              Plateau research
initiatives and a diverse student population to create an
              Undergraduate
Mentoring in Environmental Biology program. Seventeen faculty
              mentors are
committed to work with seven community collaborators to recruit,
              train and
promote talented students for careers in environmental biology.
              Strong
emphasis is placed on recruitment of Native Americans and
              Hispanic
Americans. Selected students gain support and training through
              stipends,
coursework, advising and mentoring. This program provides
              students
opportunities to participate in cutting-edge research related to
              human
impacts on ecosystems of the Colorado Plateau. Students work closely
              with
faculty mentors to pose hypotheses, design experiments, complete
              research
projects, and disseminate results thorough oral presentations and
              published
works. Cohorts of UMEB seniors share their training with incoming
              cohorts
and also act as mentors themselves to high school students involved in
              the
GLOBE program and other NAU outreach activities. 

What are the impacts
              of climate change on the carbon balance of Colorado
Plateau ecosystems?  How
              does livestock management influence productivity
and diversity of Southwestern
              grasslands?  Do mycorrhizae function
differently in traditional Native
              American maize and high-input maize?
Research on these questions and many more
              are being advanced by UMEB
students and their faculty mentors. Another
              important outcome of this
program is that it increases the number of Native
              American and Hispanic
American environmental biologists. These professionals
              will be particularly well
qualified to contribute expertise towards
              ameliorating many of the complex
environmental problems on the Colorado
              Plateau and throughout the nation. 


