Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0080034

Award Number: 0080034
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11026560           (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony K. Cheetham cheetham@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9181,9196,AMPP,BIOT,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at University of
              California, Santa Barbara is focused on classes of material that are both
              chemically and structurally complex with a significant portion of the effort
              related to interfaces, including those between organic and inorganic materials.
               IRG 1, Biomaterial Microstructures, has evolved from the Complex Fluids IRG of
              the previous MRSEC, and carries out the enabling science for the development of
              biomaterial microstructure and solution aggregates that perform biological or
              biomimetic functions and serve as model systems for hybrid devices.  IRG 2,
              Solution Synthesis of Inorganics at Molecular and Atomic Interfaces studies the
              roles of structure-directing molecules and surfaces in the hierarchical
              organization of inorganics synthesized from solution at low temperatures.  IRG
              3, Mesoscopic Macromolecular Structures,  develops the principles for synthesis
              and processing of novel macromolecular structures that are heterogeneous on a
              mesoscopic scale and exploit these structures to control properties for
              electronic, optical and biotechnological applications.  IRG 4, Strongly
              Non-equilibrium Phenomena in Complex Materials, applies atomic-scale
              microscopies and advanced scientific computing to bear on a diverse, but
              closely related, set of problems concerning deformation, failure, and
              structural reorganization of complex materials.  The Center includes
              significant shared facilities located in a new Materials Research Laboratory
              building recently completed to house the Center.

The educational activities
              include development of evaluation methods to measure the degree of success that
              their outreach programs are having.  Outreach projects include Santa Barbara
              City College Materials Interns; Research Interns in Science and Engineering;
              Research Experience for Teachers; and UCSB Scienceline, an internet link with
              Santa Barbara County science teachers and students, impacting both
              under-represented minority and female students at the college, and pre-college
              levels.  Last year, these programs reached 28 undergraduates (12 women; 2
              under-represented minorities) and 5800 pre-college students (3000 women; 4000
              under-represented minorities).   This is an interdisciplinary MRSEC with 31
              faculty members, 15 post-doctoral associates and 24 graduate students from
              programs in Materials Science and Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Physics,
              Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, Geology, Mechanical  Engineering, Molecular,
              Cellular and Developmental Biology and Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry. 
              Professor Anthony Cheetham directs the MRSEC. 





