Title       : Immunoglobulin Genes and Gene Expression in the Earliest Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0080098

Award Number: 0080098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Hsu hsue@hscbklyn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Antigen receptor diversity, the basis of adaptive immunity, is in part generated
              by a mechanism of somatic recombination that brings together the different gene
              segments that are expressed in lymphocytes. In tetrapods gene segments are
              rearranged from an array of tandemly duplicated genes to form the
              antigen-binding portion of the Ig heavy (H) and light (L) chains.  There is one
              H chain locus and one to three L chain loci, but only one H and L chain
              combination is used to form the receptor that is expressed on the B lymphocyte
              cell surface. A completed and functional rearrangement is required for
              expression, but the mechanisms that restrict expression to one allele are not
              well defined.
In higher vertebrates rearrangement thus creates a diverse
              antibody repertoire and plays an intrinsic part of the regulation of Ig gene
              expression. However, this role is one that evolved since its incipience in the
              ancestral jawed vertebrate. In representatives of the earliest vertebrates, the
              sharks and skates, there are hundreds of H and L chain loci ("clusters"), each
              consisting of a few gene segments. Each cluster potentially can function
              independently. Moreover in many clusters the gene segments are already
              recombined in the germline and do not need to undergo rearrangement to be
              utilized in lymphocytes.
        The proposed research will exploit these
              exceptional features in shark Ig gene organization to ask the questions: (i)
              When multiple Ig loci are available, is clonal receptor expression still
              achieved? (ii) Are the germline-rearranged genes preferentially expressed in
              differentiating cells because the recombination step is not needed? (iii) What
              elements control Ig expression when rearrangement is not required? (iv) Do the
              germline-rearranged genes compensate by diversifying by other mechanisms?  To
              address these questions we will 

--determine how many kinds of H and L
              chains are expressed per lymphocyte.  In particular, the ontogenetic expression
              of shark germline-joined and non-joined genes will be compared.
--examine
              somatic hypermutation in shark L chain genes. Results from prior
support have
              shown that one germline-joined L chain type exhibits an
unusual pattern of
              somatic changes.

--investigate the mechanism that rearranges the Ig genes in
              germ cells.  Preliminary results suggest that these events are the result of
              on-going recombinase-like activity. Experiments are proposed to assay for
              recombinase activity in shark gonads.

        It is hoped that the research
              will shed some light on the regulation of Ig gene expression and the
              rearrangement process, giving insight as to how the adaptive immune systems of
              higher vertebrates evolved specific, clonal recognition of pathogenic
              non-self.

