Title       : Creating Multidisciplinary Curricular Paradigms: Bioprocessing and Chemical
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0080484

Award Number: 0080484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Peretti peretti@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deanna P. Dannels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Spontak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Anson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Daubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemical Engineering at NC State University proposes a
              cross-disciplinary, multi-functional, lab-integrated series of courses in
              bioprocessing as the crown in a chemical engineering option focused on
              biotechnology.  The proposed curricular innovation integrates several elements
              of cooperative learning, teaming, communication, and basic technology skills
              known to be desirable in the workforce, i.e. GMP, GLP, and process validation. 
              Novel features of the proposed curriculum include: active involvement and
              participation of faculty and students from 9 departments and 3 Colleges;
              in-depth integration of experiments, computer simulation, and cooperative
              learning lectures; active participation by representatives of local
              pharmaceutical and bioprocessing companies in structuring, designing, and
              teaching the courses; integration of essential employment-related information
              into the curriculum; and focus on communications and teaming. The proposed
              curricular paradigm is a shift away from conventional department-based,
              lecture-style courses. The proposed 3-course sequence, if successful as gauged
              by proposed assessment tools, can be applied to the microelectronics,
              nanotechnology, and polymers portions of our curriculum. The protocols
              developed for implementation and assessment can be used by any engineering
              program to integrate cooperative learning, multidisciplinary teaming, and
              communication into their curriculum.


