Title       : Mechanisms of Avian Same-Different Concept Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0080816

Award Number: 0080816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Cook Robert.Cook@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ultimate goal of this research is to understand how small complex systems,
              like birds, learn about how the world operates (i.e., relations between objects
              and events) and use this knowledge to flexibly respond to new situations. The
              specific objective of the current research is to examine how pigeons learn to
              respond to the general and specific properties of same and different relations
              between various types of visual stimuli and their arrangement. Recognizing
              difference and similarity is among the oldest and most fundamental of
              psychological discriminations, with important implications for our
              understanding of perception, conceptual behavior, intelligence-related
              behaviors, and their general mediation by language. Pigeons are ideal for such
              comparative cognitive studies because they evolved small, powerful, central
              nervous systems capable of exceptional visual perception and complex
              discrimination learning capacities. 

This research will immediately impact
              our understanding of the psychological mechanisms by which complex animals,
              including humans, learn to use concepts. This research is part of the general
              effort to understand how the brain generates rule-governed behavior, the
              long-term outcome of which will have implications for educational system. In
              addition, understanding the mechanisms of how small biological systems work
              could be key to the practical engineering of similar "smart" systems for a
              variety of purposes (e.g., compact visual prostheses for the blind, autonomous
              robots for search and rescue, efficient information transmission algorithms).
              This comparative research is also part of a larger scientific enterprise by
              many scientists to understand the evolution and mechanisms of cognition and
              behavior by investigating the distribution of behavioral similarities and
              differences among a wide variety of animal species. 

