Title       : Failure Diagnosis of Modular and Decentralized Discrete Event Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0080406

Award Number: 0080406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephane Lafortune stephane@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Demosthenis Teneketzis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The increasingly stringent requirements on performance and reliability of
              complex technological systems have necessitated the development of systematic
              methods for timely and accurate diagnosis of system faults.  For several years,
              we have been developing a methodology for centralized failure diagnosis using a
              discrete event systems (DES) approach.  This methodology has been successfully
              applied in industry.

We propose to build on our previous results on
              centralized and decentralized failure diagnosis of DES in order to develop a
              comprehensive methodology for failure diagnosis of large-scale complex systems
              with modular and distributed architectures where intermittent failures may
              occur.  Our primary focus is the on-line diagnosis of the system, i.e., while
              it is operating, as opposed to off-line testing of a system when it is not
              under operation.  Our research will include:
(Pl) diagnosis of intermittent
              failures in the context of centralized architectures;
(P2) dealing with
              communication delays in the context of coordinated decentralized
              architectures;
(P3) development of new techniques for decentralized failure
              diagnosis with communication among local diagnostic modules at different sites;
              and (P4) development of new techniques exploiting the modularity of the system
              structure in failure diagnosis.  These problems are based on feedback received
              from industrial applications of our methodology and aim at extending its
              applicability.  Problems (PI) and (P2) will be directly based on our prior work
              on centralized and coordinated decentralized architectures for failure
              diagnosis.  Problems (P3) and (P4) aim at extending the scope of our
              methodology in new directions.  In Problem (P3) we intend to exploit
              communication among sites to enhance diagnostic capabilities in systems with
              decentralized information.  In Problem (P4) we intend to exploit system
              structure to achieve computational savings in failure diagnosis of modular
              systems.

The insight gained from our generic formal approach to the
              above-mentioned problems will provide the guidelines for the design of ad hoc
              diagnostic protocols that will have reduced complexity and still perform well. 
              Therefore the research described in this proposal will have a significant
              impact on the systematic design of failure diagnosis protocols for a wide
              variety of complex engineering and computing systems.

