Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Synthesis and Study of Interactions of Organic
               Ligands with Various DNA Structures Through Spectroscopic and DNA Sequencing
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a0080391

Award Number: 0080391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary B. Schuster gary.schuster@cos.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080391
Schuster

Description:  This award is for US-India Cooperative
              Research: Synthesis and Study of Interactions of Organic Ligands with Various
              DNA Structures through Spectroscopic and DNA Sequencing Techniques.  Professor
              Gary Schuster of the Georgia Institute of Technology and Indian collaborator
              Danaboyina Ramaiah of the Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Trivandrum will
              conduct experimental research on the synthesis of a variety of acridine,
              quinone and perylene derivatives and their interactions with select DNA
              structures such as hairpins, base bulges, triplexes and G-quadruplexes.  These
              studies are expected to provide greater understanding of DNA structures,
              structure-property relationships and develop effective molecular probes for the
              recognition of nucleic acid structures.

Scope:  The Georgia Tech group is
              well regarded for its expertise in photochemical and spectroscopic studies of
              organic compounds, particularly for interactions of photochemically active
              compounds with DNA.  The photochemistry center in Trivandrum is highly regarded
              and among the most productive research centers in India.  This collaboration
              uses the strengths of both groups to further the understanding of DNA
              photo-cleavage reactions.  The project is based on a significant collection of
              preliminary results obtained at Trivandrum and is likely to lead to advances in
              fundamental knowledge. It may also lead to practical biological and
              health-related applications in the future.  This award is supported jointly
              with the Government of India's Department of Science and Technology.  

