Title       : Aerotactic Signal Transduction in Halophilic Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0080125

Award Number: 0080125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maqsudul Alam alam@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Signal transduction in the Archaeon Halobacterium salinarum provides a paradigm
              for studying cellular responses to multiple environmental stimuli. Central to
              these responses is a family of 13 signaling molecules, first discovered in this
              laboratory. The project will focus on aerophilic transducer HtrVIII and
              aerophobic transducer HemAT- Hs . The long-term goal of this research is to
              provide a detailed molecular description of the aerotactic signal transduction
              system in the halophilic archaeon H. salinarum. Unlike bacterial aerotaxis
              transducers, HtrVIII has 209 N-terminal residues that form six putative
              transmembrane helices and are homologous to the oxygen-sensing eukaryotic
              cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COXI). The C-terminal domain of HtrVIII is
              homologous to the signaling and methylation domain of bacterial chemotaxis
              transducers. It is logical to expect that oxygen binds to a chromophore
              associated with the six-transmembrane helices and induces conformational
              changes in the C-terminal domain HtrVIII. This hypothesis will be tested by
              making mutations within this region. Random mutagenesis in the transmembrane
              region and site-specific mutagenesis to replace His residues will be used to
              generate mutants to screen for altered aerotaxis. Heme-containing proteins such
              as hemoglobin and myoglobin play an essential role in oxygen transport and
              storage. Recently, this laboratory the first myoglobin-like, heme-containing
              protein (termed HemAT- Hs ) in the archaeon H. salinarum. HemAT- Hs exhibits
              two striking features: a) the amino-termini (residues 1 to 184) display limited
              homology to myoglobin; and b) residues 222 to 489 are 30% identical to the
              cytoplasmic signaling domain of Tsr, an MCP from E. coli . HemAT- Hs exhibits
              spectral properties similar to those of myoglobin and triggers aerophobic
              responses. The goals of this research are to identify: the position of the
              proximal histidine that is crucial for heme-binding, the functional length of
              the heme-binding sensing domain, the diatomic oxygen-bound signaling state of
              the sensing and its activation of the C-terminal signaling domain. This
              research will provide insight into aerotaxis mechanisms used by the Archaea and
              open new directions for future research into the strategies used by many motile
              microorganisms to seek environments with concentrations of oxygen optimal to
              meet their metabolic needs.
