Title       : Geographical Studies in Early Medieval Europe: The Manuscript Transmission of
               Latin Geographical Texts and Commentaries, ca. 800-1100
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0080229

Award Number: 0080229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalia Lozovsky lozovsky@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              00-80229 - Natalia Lozovsky (University of Colorado at Boulder) - "Geographical
              Studies in Early Modern Europe:  The Manuscript Transmission of Latin
              Geographical Texts and Commentaries, ca. 800 - 1100"

Objectives:  The
              traditional story represents the early Middle Ages in the Latin West as a
              period of scientific decline. Contrary to traditional assumptions, geography
              occupied an important place in medieval thought and education and developed
              following its own rules and norms, like all early medieval sciences. Parallel
              evidence of such disciplines as astronomy and calendric computation reinforces
              the case for reconsidering our picture of science in the period immediately
              preceding what the traditional story has termed "the Renaissance of the twelfth
              century."

This project will investigate the vigorous geographical tradition
              of the early Middle Ages, which survived in numerous manuscripts transmitting
              authoritative classical geographical texts written by Martianus Capella,
              Macrobius, Pomponius Mela, Pliny, and Solinus. Often accompanied by
              commentaries and diagrams that clarified their meaning and expanded their
              ideas, these texts provide unique evidence about both intellectual and social
              parameters of medieval geography. The project will analyze the content,
              methods, and functions of early medieval geographical knowledge and demonstrate
              how a reconstruction of this historical variety of scientific knowledge
              enriches and changes our picture of scientific development.

Using the
              results of the primary research as a foundation, the project will also aim at
              creating a conceptual framework appropriate for the study of medieval science
              and potentially applicable to pre-modern sciences in general.

Methods:  The
              project is based on the study of medieval Latin manuscripts preserved in the
              libraries of Europe. The principal objects of research will be scholarly
              explanations of the classical texts as well as the variations in the text
              transmitted in different manuscripts. All these reveal how the understanding of
              classical tradition developed at different times and places. Therefore, at the
              first stage the method will be close reading of Latin manuscripts, which aims
              at: 1) identification of variations in the text from one manuscript copy to
              another; 2) identification and transcription of interlinear and marginal
              explanations and diagrams.

At the second stage, the project will test the
              methods and conceptual apparatus used by scholars in other historical
              disciplines for their applicability to medieval material.

Significance:  The
              analysis of this important and previously neglected category of sources will
              provide our study of early sciences with a primary research foundation and a
              conceptual framework, both largely missing at present. Thus not only will the
              project open a new perspective on the development and meaning of geography in
              the early Middle Ages, but, in a broader sense, it will be a new contribution
              to the history of pre-modern sciences, since medieval geography may serve as a
              useful model in other areas of study.

