Title       : Analysis and Design of Multivariable Extremum Seeking Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0080832

Award Number: 0080832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario A. Rotea rotea@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0080832
Rotea

Several control engineering problems require the determination
              of parameters that optimize a system level cost function in real time.
              Real-time optimization is necessary to seek optimal control parameters in many
              application areas such as vibration and noise attenuation, flow separation,
              combustion control, and control of flying formations. In these problems the
              control architectures that improve system operation (e.g., minimize a noise or
              vibration figure, minimize flow separation in an airfoil, minimize the unsteady
              pressure fluctuation in a combustion chamber) are known in advance.  On the
              other hand, the optimal control parameters are not known in advance and must be
              determined.

Off-line calculation of the optimal parameters is impractical
              when no reliable model is available to predict the variation of the cost
              function with time, the optimization parameters, or the system's operating
              conditions.  It is generally possible, however, to make real-time measurements
              of the cost function through the addition of sensors and data processing.  This
              additional hardware and software opens up the possibility of calculating
              optimal parameters by 'experimenting with the system' in order to determine the
              parameter setting that leads to a cost function improvement. The practical
              implementation of this idea requires an iterative algorithm that seeks the
              optimal parameters in real time.

The main objective of this project is the
              development of new iterative algorithms for the real-time optimization of a
              measurable cost function.  Iterative 'extremum-seeking algorithms' that make
              use of function evaluations only, to estimate optimal parameters, will be
              considered. The challenge is to derive algorithms that (I) track fast
              variations in the optimal parameters, (II) are insensitive to the noise present
              in the measurements of the cost function, and (III) exhibit monotonic
              improvement of the cost function during the course of the optimization.

The
              focus shall be on 'gradient-based iterative algorithms' for which the necessary
              gradient information is not available and it must be estimated from the
              measurements of the cost function.  Analysis of the algorithm performance, and
              sensitivity to modeling assumptions, will be carried out using methods and
              tools from the theory of nonlinear uncertain dynamical systems.  Performance
              and sensitivity (or robustness) bounds will be obtained from the combination of
              traditional differential equations methods (averaging techniques) with recent
              tools from uncertain dynamical systems analysis.  The bounds will later be used
              to synthesize algorithms that optimize criteria (I)-(III) above from available
              prior information.

If successful, the proposed research will advance the
              state-of-the-art of real-time gradient-based optimization algorithms.  A novel
              framework for analysis that takes into account fast variations in optimal
              parameters and measurement noise will be developed.  New systematic procedures
              to design extremum-seeking algorithms that work in uncertain noisy environments
              will be created.  These design procedures would allow engineers to implement
              extremum-seeking algorithms with minimal development effort.   
***   

