Title       : Structure, Function and Transcriptional Regulation of a Copper-Specific
               Metallothionein in Callinectes sapidus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0080075

Award Number: 0080075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Brouwer Marius.Brouwer@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT 
Proposal MCB-0080075
PI: Marius Brouwer

Organisms are dependent
              on trace metals such as iron and copper for various functions. However, when
              these metals are in excess they may have toxic effects. The goal of this
              research project is to further our understanding of the molecular strategies
              used by organisms to convert potentially toxic copper into a biologically
              useful form, while avoiding its toxic side effects. Many organisms use
              metal-specific proteins, called metallothioneins, for detoxification of toxic
              metals, such as cadmium and mercury, and for detoxification of excess essential
              metals, such as copper. This project uses the blue crab, an organism that has a
              very active copper metabolism associated with the synthesis and degradation of
              hemocyanin, a copper-dependent protein used by the animal to carry oxygen from
              the gills to the tissues.  Earlier work has found that crabs have
              metallothioneins that are controlled by zinc, as in vertebrates, but also have
              a copper-specific metallothionein whose synthesis is controlled by copper and
              not by zinc. This research project has three objectives. First, the hypothesis
              that the copper-specific metallothionein can provide copper that is required
              for the biosynthesis of hemocyanin will be examined. These studies may reveal a
              novel biological function for this new member of the metallothionein family.
              Secondly, since understanding of the function of a protein at the molecular
              level requires knowledge of its structure, the three-dimensional structure of
              the metallothionein protein will be determined. These studies will provide the
              first structure of a copper-metallothionein of a higher organism. Thirdly, the
              transcriptional control of the copper-metallothionein gene will be studied.
              This work may result in the first demonstration of a copper-sensing
              transcription factor in a higher organism, and may provide the foundation upon
              which further studies on copper sensing and signaling in higher organisms may
              be based.


