Title       : Women's Bodies: The Gendered Construction of Science Across time and Cultures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0080696

Award Number: 0080696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rima D. Apple rdapple@consci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80696 - Rima D. Apple (University of Wisconsin - Madison) 
"Women's
              Bodies:  The Gendered Construction of Science across Time and Cultures"

At
              the end of the 20th century, the history of bio-medical sciences, particularly
              its gendered contours, has attracted increasing attention from scholars of the
              history of science, the history of medicine, and women's history. This is an
              age of dramatic developments in bio-medical science and its history has become
              even more important as we seek to document the ways in which this new
              scientific knowledge has been produced. This award provides partial support for
              a workshop conference, "Women's Bodies: The Gendered Construction of Science
              across Time and Cultures," which is intended to bridge scholarship generally
              separated by geography and discipline. Senior and younger scholars from the
              United States, Australia, and New Zealand will engage in an intensive
              cross-national and cross-cultural program that will highlight the history of
              the production of bio-medical knowledge, in particular beginning an
              international dialog to examine the critical role of gender in the evolution of
              science research and theory.

The workshops, to be held at the University of
              Melbourne, Australia on 3 June 2001, are designed to extend and strengthen
              international dialog on the history and significance of gender in the
              production of scientific knowledge by bringing together a small group of senior
              and younger scholars and graduate students in order to facilitate an intensive
              cross-cultural conversation. This award supports the travel and conference per
              diem costs of four United States scholars who will be involved in the
              leadership of the workshops. In highlighting the significance of the gendered
              development of critical science, "Women's Bodies: The Gendered Construction of
              Science across Time and Cultures" will foster creative and distinctive new
              avenues of international collaborative research. Moreover, the establishment of
              closer working relationships among the workshop presenters and attendees will
              serve as a cornerstone for an open-invitation international conference that
              will follow on 4-6 June 2001. In addition, conference organizers are preparing
              to offer each workshop presenter from the United States a visiting research
              award that will enable speakers to extend their stays in Melbourne, conducting
              research in Australian materials and continuing collaborative efforts initiated
              during the conference.

The workshop conference is distinctive in women's
              health history for its emphasis on the history of the production of scientific
              knowledge. Previous conferences on allied areas have ignored this critical
              foundational knowledge. Also, though some of the earlier conferences were
              international in scope, they did not incorporate scholarship and scholars from
              Australia and New Zealand. The proposed auxiliary activities -- the University
              of Melbourne-affiliated visiting researcher awards for United States
              participants, the subsequent public conference, and an integrative book -- will
              enrich and deepen the development of collaborative, international relationships
              fostered by the workshops of "Women's Bodies: The Gendered Construction of
              Science across Time and Cultures."

