Title       : Simulating Strategic Behavior in Multiple Power Markets by Complementarity and
               MPEC Methods: Energy, Capacity, Ancillary Services, Green Power, and Emissions
               Allowance Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0080577

Award Number: 0080577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin F. Hobbs bhobbs@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The exercise of market power by electric generators could cause substantial
              inefficiencies and price inequities.  Because market power in one market can
              affect other markets, distorting both, we will consider linkages among markets
              for different commodities, such as ancillary services, energy, and transmission
              services.  In this research, mixed complementary (MC) models will be developed
              to consider strategic behavior in multiple markets.  These models will be
              designed so that they can be solved for systems with thousands of generators
              and transmission interfaces.  Some models will be formulated as MPECs
              (mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints) to represent games in
              which a dominant firm anticipates reactions of other firms.  

MC and MPEC
              models will be formulated of markets for transmission services with strategic
              interactions, and situations in which power producers can exercise market power
              in more than one market simultaneously.  Other markets considered will include
              capacity, reserves, and green power.  Small versions of the developed models
              will be solved to identify whether market interactions are important, and if
              their simultaneous consideration significantly alter prices, economic
              efficiency, market shares, generation mixes, or other outcomes.

The MC
              models will be analyzed to determine whether solutions exist and are
              unique.

The two highest priority applications identified will be modeled
              using generator, demand, and transmission data from power markets in the US or
              UK.  The potential impact of market power upon market outcomes will be
              analyzed.

