Title       : Understanding Values: A Comparative Study of Values in Environmental Policy
               Making in China, India, Japan, and the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0080846

Award Number: 0080846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Bauer jbauer@cceia.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yukiko Kada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shen Mingming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Finan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shiv Visvanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ma Zhong  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Coun on Ethics
	      170 E. 64th St.
	      New York, NY  100217478    212/838-4120

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1331,1371,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support to a collaborative team of researchers in the United
              States, China, India and Japan, to complete fieldwork, data analysis and
              comparative analysis, and preliminary reports of results from a multisite,
              multiyear investigation of values and their role in environmental policy making
              in localities in each country.  By examining values in the context of real
              world environmental struggles, the project aims to understand the relationships
              between public values and policy, to determine the circumstances in which local
              values matter, and to assess the way globalization influences the authority and
              capacity of local actors to guide and manage environmentally sustainable
              growth.  The project aims to assist in the production of more workable and
              equitable domestic and international environmental policy solutions.  The
              project uses an innovative methodology for comparative analysis of the role of
              environmental values in such economically and culturally diverse societies. 
              This assessment of values is one distilled from local empirical fieldwork and
              integrated into an international comparative study.  The Carnegie Council is
              directing the project in conjunction with prominent collaborating institutions
              in Asia and the United States:  the Beijing Environment and Development
              Institute (PRC), the National Institute for Environmental Sciences and the Lake
              Biwa Museum (Japan), the Center for the Study of Developing Societies (India),
              and the Bureau for Applied Research in Anthropology at the University of
              Arizona.  Fieldwork to generate empirical data at local and national levels is
              being designed, conducted, and analyzed by leading scholars in each country
              with input from local policy practitioners. A research protocol for the project
              has been carefully constructed providing the rigor needed for valid comparative
              analysis, while at the same time allowing teams the latitude to employ the
              methodological tools that they deem appropriate to their respective societies. 
              Two types of cases serve as the focus of the fieldwork:  industrial pollution
              and resource use.  The fieldwork consists of participant observation,
              open-ended interviews, focus groups, workshops, policy and expert panels, and
              analysis of media reports, educational materials and policy documents. With
              initial matching grants from the United States-Japan Foundation and the Henry
              Luce Foundation, the research teams in China, India, Japan and the United
              States began conducting preliminary on-site investigations of their cases in
              August 1998 and to date most cases are well underway.  The project creates an
              important opportunity to support the exchange among Asian and American research
              communities who have previously had little contact.  The comparative dimension
              provides a map of the role of values in environmental policy across
              politically, economically and culturally diverse societies.  It also enables
              participating researchers to learn about each other's value discourses and
              styles of research, which in turn infuses their own studies with new
              perspectives and creates momentum for further social science initiatives
              relating to values and sustainable public policy. 
