Title       : The Impact of the New Deal on Local Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0080324

Award Number: 0080324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shawn E. Kantor skantor@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Price V. Fishback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Horrace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The New Deal not only provided employment for millions of unemployed workers,
              but it also added significantly to the nation's infrastructure. Policy makers
              today, faced with the simultaneous problems of aging infrastructure and the
              public's demand for welfare reform, often cite New Deal-type work relief
              projects as a model for an effective solution. Despite numerous studies of the
              politics of the New Deal, there are surprisingly few micro-level analyses of
              how New Deal expenditures affected local economic development in the 1930s. To
              help fill this gap, this project studies the impact of the New Deal on a
              variety of measures of economic activity, including real estate wealth, housing
              values, retail sales, manufacturing activity, agricultural development, as well
              as demographic changes attributable to the New Deal.

The research is a
              continuation of work that was begun under NSF grant number SBR-9708098. A major
              objective of the research is to use the geographic variation in spending across
              U.S. counties to perform a series of studies that simultaneously examine the
              impact of the New Deal on local economic activity, both in the county where the
              monies were spent and in nearby counties, and the political and economic
              factors that influenced the distribution of New Deal funds. Because the New
              Deal was instituted during a period of extremely high unemployment, it seems
              reasonable to expect that the federal government's spending would have
              bolstered economic activity in many areas. Yet, recent work on the impact of
              public infrastructure on economic growth does not unambiguously support
              conclusions that more spending on public infrastructure leads to substantial
              increases in economic growth. It is also possible that New Deal spending
              crowded out the efforts of the private sector and state and local governments.
              Using a series of measures of economic activity, our goal is to assess the
              impact of the New Deal on local economies.

Since the project examines the
              impact of the New Deal in relatively small geographic areas, it is important to
              allow for spillovers from New Deal spending in neighboring counties. That is,
              one could envision situations in which spending in one county either enhanced
              or hindered growth in neighboring areas. Moreover, the spillovers are not
              necessarily confined to the direct effects of New Deal spending. Economic
              growth in neighboring counties often influences economic growth in the county
              of interest. In addition, there may be immeasurable economic shocks in one
              county that might spill over into neighboring counties.
Measuring the impact
              of the New Deal on local economies is complicated further because in most cases
              we probably cannot treat New Deal spending as purely exogenous. New Deal
              expenditures might have been related to economic activity in conflicting ways.
              Given the stated goals of the New Deal, we might anticipate that the New
              Dealers distributed more resources to areas with lower incomes or to areas with
              higher unemployment or slower growth. On the other hand, many of the New Deal
              programs required that the state or local government have the resources to seek
              help for projects from the federal government or go even further and provide
              matching funds to help finance the projects. Thus New Deal spending might have
              been positively influenced by measures of economic activity.  To deal with the
              spillover effects and simultaneity issues this project develops a generalized
              three stage least squares models that incorporates both the simultaneous
              relationship between New Deal spending and economic activity and the spatial
              correlation inherent in the deterministic and random components of the
              empirical model.


