Title       : Programs for Women in Science and Engineering: Types, Characteristics, and
               Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0080638

Award Number: 0080638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Fox mary.fox@hts.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Efforts to open pathways for women (and other underrepresented groups) in
              science and engineering frequently take the form of programs or sets of
              activities thought to have beneficial effects on the attraction, retention, and
              development of the targeted group.  Such programmatic efforts are being planned
              and undertaken by NSF and by colleges and universities.

With this grant, the
              investigator will conduct a systematic and empirical (quantitative and
              qualitative) assessment of the basic types, characteristics, and outcomes of
              programs.  In the study of women in science and engineering, programs represent
              a critical site for analysis.  This is because programs embody conceptions both
              of what is "wrong" and at issue, and what can be done to improve the
              participation and performance of women, and because a central claim of programs
              is that they have a positive effect upon outcomes.

With a method involving
              survey questionnaires to university (registrar) administrators and to program
              directors, and site visits to a subset of the universe of programs for
              undergraduate women in science and engineering, the study addresses four focal
              research questions: (1) What are the range and complexity in programs'
              definitions of the problem/issue of women in science and engineering? (2) What
              are the patterns in solutions posed? (3) To what extent do solutions posed
              reflect definitions of the problem?  (4) What is the relationship between
              various types-and characteristics-of programs and outcomes (proportion degrees
              awarded to women and women's attrition levels) within their institutions?

A
              major objective is to help inform practice and policy in future efforts to
              tackle issues of women's participation and performance in science and
              engineering, by facilitating the intelligent devising of programmatic
              initiatives for gender equity.  The study will do this by: (1) developing a
              useful typology that captures the elements and components of existing programs;
              (2) determining the statistical relationships between various types and
              characteristics of programs and outcomes; and (3) identifying generalizable
              aspects of model programs that seem to work particularly well.  The study will
              also provide further understanding of programs as organizational phenomena, and
              point to both the potential for and limits of programs in relationship to the
              institutional environments in which they exist.  

It is intended and likely
              that the knowledge resulting from the study will improve our understanding of
              what is "at issue" about the condition of women in science and engineering, and
              of what can be done to plan future programs that effectively support women's
              participation and performance in science and engineering.

