Title       : Moral Imagination, Invention and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0080400

Award Number: 0080400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Gorman meg3c@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garrick E. Louis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Woodhouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia H. Werhane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to integrate ethical and social dimensions of
              engineering, science and technology into the core of engineering education and
              practice. To achieve these goals, this proposal will develop a permanent
              graduate option in Ethics, Policy and Systems Engineering at the University of
              Virginia (UVa).  This option will include strong links to the Science and
              Technology Studies (STS) graduate program at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
              (RPI).  Graduate students in this option, in collaboration with faculty, will
              develop case studies for use in undergraduate engineering and STS classes.
              These cases will complement existing cases that focus on the role of moral
              imagination in the design of complex technological systems. All of these cases
              will be placed on the Web, and at least two will be put in experimental
              multimedia formats that will make it easier for instructors to utilize them
              nationwide. The project will also conduct an evaluation of the option and the
              cases that will serve as a model for evaluations of similar efforts.  To create
              the case studies, students will conduct research that combines systems
              engineering, ethics and STS. This research will be done in greater depth than
              necessary for the case studies, resulting in scholarly monographs and graduate
              theses.  At the end of the three-year funding period, the project team will
              publish a report describing the process of developing this option so that
              others can benefit from the lessons learned and the program can serve as
              proof-of-concept that ethics, STS and engineering education can be integrated
              at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
