Title       : Understanding Crime and Community: A National Neighborhood Crime Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0080091

Award Number: 0080091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth D. Peterson peterson.5@sociology.osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren J. Krivo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI = Peterson
SES 0080091


Wilson and others have suggested that
              macro-social changes have a significant effect on crime and other social
              problems.  This research evaluates this claim by analyzing neighborhood
              variation in crime within cities. The project also probes the impact of racial
              difference in communities by examining neighborhoods that are racially variant,
              but similarly situated in economic status. Crime data for neighborhoods in 75
              cities with populations over 100,000 are collected. These crime data are
              combined with socio-demographic data for cities and tracts from census and
              other published sources to construct a contextual data set of neighborhoods
              characteristics with city variables appended to each neighborhood unit. These
              data are used to conduct multi-level analyses evaluating the direct and
              indirect effects (through neighborhood conditions) of city labor market
              structure, socioeconomic inequality, and population change on neighborhood
              crime. Further, the analyses assess whether and how city contextual factors
              condition the influence of neighborhood social disorganization, structural
              disadvantage, and socioeconomic inequality on crime. Finally, the research
              examines the extent to which neighborhood conditions (particularly economic
              status) have similar influences on crime in predominantly black and white
              neighborhoods.  The research will determine whether and how a number of
              important city-level factors influence neighborhood crime by empirically
              evaluating the multifaceted influences of the macro-structural context on local
              community crime using cutting-edge statistical procedures. The project will
              also demonstrate whether the influences of socioeconomic conditions on crime
              are (or are not) invariant across areas with varying racial compositions, and
              whether the answers to these two issues are the same for different types of
              criminal behavior. The knowledge gained from addressing these questions will
              help explicate the determinants of neighborhood crime, and provide a foundation
              to inform public debate about the differential consequences of
              de-industrialization. 

