Title       : Role of Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase-Activating Polypeptide (PACAP) in the
               Activation of Hypophysiotropic CRH Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0080793

Award Number: 0080793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Legradi GLegradi@lifespan.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Med Ctr Hosp I
	      
	      Boston, MA  02111    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The stress response of mammals is a complex response to stimuli such as severe
              environmental change that might otherwise be deleterious to the whole organism.
               The appropriate response requires the interplay of the nervous system and
              production of certain hormones that prepare the animal to adapt physiologically
              to the stressful challenge.  Certain peptide neurohormones and
              neurotransmitters in the key brain region of the hypothalamus are critically
              involved in stress-activation, but the fine regulation of these basic
              mechanisms is poorly understood.  This project is designed to uncover the
              specific role of a recently discovered neuropeptide, PACAP (pituitary adenylate
              cyclase-activating polypeptide), in stress-activation in the hypothalamus. 
              Neuropeptides are small, protein-like molecules that serve specific functions
              in the brain, and help establish or maintain communication between nerve cells
              (neurons).  PACAP is an intriguing molecule presumed to have important
              functions in adaptive functions such as stress-activation.  Biochemical,
              molecular, anatomical and immunocyctochemical methods are used in this research
              to determine where, when and how PACAP regulates the gene expression and the
              release of a key hormone, CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone) from a
              population of cells in the hypothalamus.
   Results will be important not only
              for neuroendocrinology, but also potentially for many systems where PACAP may
              have a novel role as a co-transmitter with classical neurotransmitters like
              catecholamines.  This project will also have an impact on the development of
              the career of a young investigator.


