Title       : Photoperiodic Effects on Immune Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0080745

Award Number: 0080745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy J. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to document the effects of photoperiod (day length)
              on immune function.  Dr. Nelson's previous studies have indicated that high
              energetic demands can compromise immune function.  Field studies also suggest
              that immune function, assessed indirectly, is compromised when energy
              requirements are high, especially during the winter. The proposed research
              examines how animals predict the onset of winter with photoperiodic
              information, and use this information to bolster immune function prior to the
              immunosuppressive effects of winter.  The proposed studies will directly assess
              immune function among individuals under various energetic challenges or in
              different reproductive states. Both cell-mediated and humoral immunity will be
              examined.  In some experiments, the effects of natural energetic stressors on
              immune function will be examined, whereas in other experiments, pharmacological
              manipulation of metabolic fuel availability will test the role of these
              metabolic fuels on immune function. 
     The significance of this work lies
              in its potential contribution to understanding how natural stressors influence
              immune function, and to determining the effects of certain hormones, leptin and
              melatonin, in mediating these effects.  Many people experience compromised
              immune function when exposed to stressors.  By studying how rodents naturally
              cope with seasonally-recurring stressors,  physiological coping mechanisms
              might be discovered that could help in the development of treatments aimed at
              preventing immunosuppression during stress among people. The development of
              such therapies (e.g., melatonin treatment regimens or gene therapy) would
              benefit people who function under energetically-demanding conditions (such as
              military, firefighters, or medical doctors) who are at risk for many
              stress-related illnesses.  From an evolutionary perspective, these studies also
              provide a mechanistic link between life history strategies and reproductive and
              survival costs.

