Title       : A Spin Interference Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0080458

Award Number: 0080458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour Shayegan shayegan@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Spin Interference Device
Abstract
	Spintronics is an emerging area in solid
              state science and engineering.  Its broad goal is to utilize carriers' spin in
              metals and semiconductors to realize novel electronic devices.  In such
              devices, of key importance are the creation, manipulation, and detection of
              spin and spin-currents.  An example is the spin-FET (field-effect transistor),
              a switching device whose operation is based on the injection of spin-polarized
              carriers into the channel, manipulation (rotation via precession) of their spin
              via an external electric field (gate bias), and the spin-sensitive detection of
              the carriers at the drain.  If successful, such manipulation of spins can also
              have impact on another emerging, and perhaps even more exotic, field of quantum
              computing, as spin is the leading candidate for the quantum bit of information
              in the proposed quantum computers. 
The goal of this project is demonstrate
              the realization of a spin device which is somewhat similar to the spin-FET but
              has the simplifying advantage that it does not require the injection or
              detection of spin-polarized carriers.  The device is essentially an
              Aharanov-Bohm ring made of a two-dimensional (2D) carrier system with a strong
              and tunable spin-orbit interaction. Its operation relies on the interference
              between the clockwise and counter-clockwise travelling spin wave functions. 
              The interference, and therefore the conductance of the ring, can be modulated
              by a gate electrode which tunes the spin-orbit interaction.
	The project
              combines state-of-the art nanotechnology and careful transport measurements. It
              also requires a high-quality 2D carrier system with tunable spin-orbit
              interaction.  The 2D holes in modulation-doped GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures
              provide a nearly ideal system for this project; they have very high
              low-temperature mobility, of the order of 106 cm2/Vs, and the tunability of
              their spin-orbit interaction has recently been demonstrated.


