Title       : The Interrelationship of State-Mandated Accountability Standards, Organizational
               Learning, and Continuous Improvement in United States High Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0080304

Award Number: 0080304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen R. Seashore klouis@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra M. Ingram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Mauriel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PIs propose to address the question of how external demands and internal
              processes combine to produce sustained improvement in productivity in three
              school districts in Minnesota, North Carolina and Iowa. Five high schools will
              form the core of an intensive longitudinal case study. Two are in a state with
              a long history of strong state mandates for accountability for student
              achievement; two are in a state identified as having weak state mandates; the
              fifth in a state with no state-mandated accountability. All districts, however,
              are strongly supportive of improved school practices to increase student
              achievement. Once schools are identified and school baseline data is gathered,
              researchers will document each school's context and history of standards
              adoption and conduct longitudinal process improvement efforts via interviews,
              focus groups and previously developed survey instruments. Longitudinal analysis
              will be used to draw preliminary conclusions regarding the research questions
              and to provide a rich case history to support interpretation; quantitative data
              will be used to relate school culture and practices to performance on state and
              district achievement tests. 
	In light of nationwide interest in school
              accountability, it seems especially important to gather well-grounded empirical
              data on school practices and the factors affecting them, and to test their
              impact on student performance, the more so as little published research
              examines the way in which school culture and practices might affect the impact
              of state-imposed standards on student achievement. The PIs responded to
              questions regarding their instruments and construct validity, and also provided
              additional discussion of their qualitative methodology. 

