Title       : SWENET - The Network Community for Software Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0080502

Award Number: 0080502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lutz mjl@cs.rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. Mengel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Michael McCracken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a project to produce and organize high-quality materials supporting
              software engineering education. First, a framework will be developed which
              serves as a taxonomy for the areas of knowledge comprising software
              engineering. The framework will build on the work of the ABET program criteria
              for software engineering education and the classification proposed by the
              Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK) project sponsored by the IEEE
              Computer Society and the Association for Computer Machinery. Four areas of
              particular importance to undergraduate software engineering - design, quality,
              requirements, and process - have been selected as the most appropriate starting
              points for developing curricular materials.

Each of the above four areas
              will be further subdivided into modules, each encompassing one to six lecture
              hours of material.  The goal of the proposal is to provide tested materials
              that can be adopted, modified, and enhanced by engineering educators across the
              nation. The modules serve simply to organize these materials - data sets,
              program samples, lab activities, etc. - in a coherent fashion. The repository
              thus created will be a dynamic, evolving clearinghouse to which all members of
              the software engineering community can add new and improved materials.


