Title       : LTER III: Long Term Ecological Research at Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0080592

Award Number: 0080592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harvard Forest

Temperate forests, such as those that dominate the eastern
              United States, are critically important ecosystems at regional to global
              scales. They harbor a diversity of species and habitats, provide essential
              resources, offer important amenities to densely populated regions, and comprise
              key elements in global carbon budgets. Understanding the structure, function
              and patterns of these ecosystems and anticipating their responses to natural
              disturbance, environmental change and anthropogenic disturbances and stress are
              therefore critical societal goals that depend on a sound knowledge of
              fundamental ecological processes. Such insight can only be gained through
              long-term, interdisciplinary research that integrates field studies,
              measurements, experiments and modeling over a range of temporal and spatial
              scales.

The Harvard Forest LTER program seeks to interpret ecological
              pattern and process in New England forests and to apply this knowledge to
              regional and global issues in forest conservation, land restoration and
              protection, public policy and the environment. Over the past decade, the
              program has matured into a collaboration that applies unique approaches in
              historical and community ecology, ecophysiology, atmospheric chemistry and
              ecosystem studies to the interpretation of long-term, large-scale experiments
              and measurements, mechanistic studies and retrospective research. This research
              has produced over 300 publications, a synthesis book, an annual research
              program for more than 35 students, and innovative approaches to regional,
              national and international cross-site studies.

Phase III of the research
              will (1) extend measurements, modeling and historical studies to regional
              scales, (2) interpret landscape development, vegetation and wildlife dynamics,
              and ecosystem patterns in relationship to millennial-scale climate change, land
              use and disturbance, (3) evaluate ecosystem responses to critical ongoing
              disturbances and stresses (e.g., forest cutting and conversion, ozone and
              nitrogen pollution, and invasions by pests and non-native species, (4)
              interpret long-term measurements and responses to experimental treatments
              mechanistically and in relation to inter-annual and inter-decadal variation and
              history, and (5) apply these results to understanding the current and projected
              role of this region in global carbon storage.



