Title       : Research on Advanced Technologies for Housing: Experimental Assessment of Site
               Integrated Planning and Information Technologies in Residential Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0080073

Award Number: 0080073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonhard E. Bernold bernold@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Lorenc  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will address two of the goals defined by PATH (the
              President' Partnership for Advancing Technology in Housing.) Research will
              evaluate the effect of a new method of tracking construction waste in order to
              improve the reuse at residential construction sites. Additionally, we will
              measure the effects of improved sites through managed site layouts. The
              organization of the worksite will also provide a more "ergonomically correct"
              material delivery and transportation paths which should lead to fewer injuries
              including the reduction of back injuries. Current practices will be analyzed
              and methods for improvement will be noted and tested. Specifically, it is
              proposed to develop a Site-Integrated-Planning concept that takes into account
              all levels of residential construction. Such a plan will address critical goals
              of construction such as finding ways to reduce waste, improve safety/ergonomics
              of a residential building site, and reduced delay time in the inspection
              process. New models will be provided to aid in the development of more precise
              and better management tools to improve productivity as well as the safety at a
              construction site. Additionally, by applying a wide variety of critical
              information technologies, the researchers will assess the effects improvements
              in communication can have on residential construction.

