Title       : Signal Transduction During Active Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0080045

Award Number: 0080045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Shuman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to understand the mechanism of signaling during
              active transport.  The hypothesis to be evaluated is that information about
              rates of solute transport into cells is used by regulatory proteins to control
              gene expression.  The rate of substrate transport into a cell may be a better
              reflection of its availability in the environment than its intracellular
              concentration.  This may be especially true for compounds that are rapidly
              metabolized.  The maltose transport system of E. coli is a well-characterized
              ATP-binding cassette transporter that has been extensively studied both by
              genetic and biochemical approaches.  Recently it was found that the maltose
              transporter participates in the regulation of mal gene expression by repressing
              transcription.  This project will investigate the molecular basis for the
              ability of the transporter to participate in gene regulation using three
              approaches.  Initially the sites on the MalT protein that are required for
              interaction with the maltose transporter will be identified. A physical
              interaction between the MalK subunit of the transporter and the MalT protein
              has been demonstrated.  In order to find the region(s) within the MalT protein
              that are required for interaction with the transporter, malT mutations that
              interfere with the ability of the MalT protein to interact with the transporter
              will be isolated.  The sites of the mutations will be determined by DNA
              sequence analysis.  Several phenotypes of the malT mutations will be assessed. 
              Second, it will be determined if repression interferes with the ability of the
              MalT activator to bind to its recognition sites on DNA.  The maltose
              transporter represses mal gene expression by interfering with the function of
              MalT, the activator of the mal regulon.  This could occur by affecting the
              ability of MalT to bind to MalT sites found upstream from mal promoters. 
              Alternatively, the transporter may affect the ability of MalT to activate
              transcription without affecting its binding to specific sites on DNA.  DNA
              footprinting of MalT to sites upstream from mal promoters will be measured to
              assess the ability of MalT to bind to promoter sites in the presence and
              absence of the purified transporter.  Finally, the hypothesis that the
              regulatory activity of the maltose transporter is coupled to transport activity
              will be directly tested.  The ability of the transporter to repress mal gene
              expression is inversely correlated with ATP hydrolysis.  A mutant transporter
              that binds but is unable to hydrolyze ATP is a stronger repressor than the
              wild-type transporter.  In addition, mutant transporters with very high levels
              of ATPase activity are less able to repress and result in high constitutive
              levels of mal gene expression.  The hypothesis that repression is relieved when
              the maltose transporter is activated and pumping sugars into the cell will be
              evaluated.  Mutant forms of the transporter that are activated by periplasmic
              maltose binding protein (MBP) without ligand and are able to transport related
              sugars that are not normally inducers of the mal regulon will be employed. 
              This hypothesis would be supported if, in these strains, activation by MBP or
              transport of the related sugars results in relief of transporter-mediated
              repression and constitutive mal gene expression.


