Title       : Optics in the Middle Ages: Alhacen Edition, 4-5
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0080445

Award Number: 0080445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67554              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. M. Smith smitham@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80445 - A. Mark Smith (University of Missouri - Columbia) - "Alhacen
              Edition, 4-5"

The goal of this project is to complete a critical edition,
              with English translation and scholarly annotation, of books 4-5 of the medieval
              Latin version of Alhacen's Kitab al-Manazir ("Treatise on Optics"), a
              comprehensive treatment of light and sight in seven books. Composed in Arabic
              in the very early eleventh century, this treatise was rendered into Latin some
              two centuries later under the title De aspectibus.  In that form it quickly
              became a canonical source for optical thought in the Latin West, inspiring a
              series of important derivative works (above all those of the "Perspectivist"
              authors Roger Bacon, John Pecham, and Witelo) and also serving as a primary
              text in the teaching of optics until the early seventeenth century. Both
              directly and indirectly, then, Alhacen's De aspectibus played a critical role
              in the formation of medieval and Renaissance ideas about light, color and
              visual representation. Unlike the first three books of the De aspectibus, which
              deal with visual perception in general, books 4 and 5 are devoted specifically
              to reflection and the formation of point-images in plane, convex and concave
              mirrors. Remarkable for both its originality and its mathematical
              sophistication, Alhacen's analysis of image-location in book 5 served as the
              benchmark for the study not only of reflection but also for mathematics in the
              later Middle Ages. The proposed critical edition will make this portion of
              Alhacen's work accessible in definitive form not only to specialists in the
              history of science but also to those with more general interests in medieval
              and Renaissance intellectual and cultural history.

