Title       : Auxin Response Factors and Auxin Regulated Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0080096

Award Number: 0080096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Guilfoyle GuilfoyleT@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gretchen Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0080096
Thomas Guilfoyle and Gretchen Hagen

Guilfoyle
  
              Auxin is a plant hormone known to play important roles in differential growth,
              root formation, apical dominance, and vascular patterning.  These growth and
              developmental processes may be regulated, at least in part, by the expression
              patterns of primary (or early) and secondary (or late) auxin response genes. 
              Early auxin response genes contain one or more Auxin Response Elements [AuxREs]
              containing the sequence TGTCTC, which confers auxin responsiveness to the
              promoters.  Auxin Response Factors [ARFs] are transcription factors that bind
              with specificity to TGTCTC AuxREs.  ARFs contain an amino-terminal DNA binding
              domain [DBD], and most ARFs contain a conserved carboxy-terminal domain [CTD]
              that facilitates their dimerization to themselves or Aux/IAA proteins.  Amino
              acids located between ARF DBDs and CTDs are nonconserved and represent
              activation or repression domains.  Specific ARFs can activate or repress
              auxin-responsive transcription by binding directly to TGTCTC AuxREs and may
              further potentiate transcriptional activation or repression by dimerizing with
              ARF(s) that are bound to AuxREs.  While Aux/IAA proteins do not bind directly
              to TGTCTC AuxREs, they might also potentiate repression [or possibly
              activation] on AuxREs by forming heterodimers with ARF(s) that are bound to
              AuxREs.  Major questions arise from the identification of many ARF and Aux/IAA
              proteins in Arabidopsis.  How do specific ARFs with similar DNA binding domains
              target particular TGTCTC AuxREs?  What governs the formation of specific pairs
              of ARFs, Aux/IAA, and ARF-Aux/IAA proteins?  How do ARF and Aux/IAA homodimers
              and heterodimers determine whether an auxin response gene is activated or
              repressed?  Does auxin play a role in targeting specific ARFs to TGTCTC AuxREs,
              in selecting the types of dimers that form, and/or in determining whether an
              activation or repression domain is functional when residing at an AuxRE?  What
              other transcription and signalling factors participate along with ARFs and
              Aux/IAA proteins in regulating primary auxin response genes?  The long term
              goal is to answer these questions and to begin to untangle the seemingly
              complex network of ARF and Aux/IAA interactions that must occur within cells to
              regulate auxin-responsive gene expression.  The project has the following
              specific aims:   (1) to determine if ARFs and Aux/IAA proteins show selectivity
              in interactions with one another; (2) to determine if auxin has an effect on
              ARF activation or repression domains directly or if an ARF CTD is required for
              auxin-responsive activation or repression; (3) to determine if Q-rich ARF
              activators play redundant roles in auxin-responsive gene expression; (4) to
              determine if the gene expression patterns of ARFs might restrict the types of
              ARF and Aux/IAA dimers that form in planta; and (5) to identify proteins
              besides Aux/IAAs that interact with ARFs and play roles in auxin signaling and
              auxin responses.  


