Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Laboratory Simulation of Lightning and Dusty Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0080862

Award Number: 0080862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124784             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Beasley wbeasley@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              (In collaboration with EPS 00-82725)
Scientists at the Desert Research
              Institute (Atmospheric Sciences); University of Nevada, Reno (Department of
              Physics, High Energy Density Science Group), and the School of Meteorology at
              the University of Oklahoma will collaborate to design and construct a system to
              simulate and study, in the laboratory, electrical discharges through
              atmospheres containing cloud and aerosol particles over a wide range of
              terrestrial and also extraterrestrial conditions.  Lightning, as an electrical
              discharge, occurs through the atmosphere in and above thunderstorms, in
              volcanic eruptions and in clouds of other planets, notably Jupiter.  The system
              will also be well suited to study certain industrial processes for producing
              and modifying aerosol (such as diamond) and the technology of protection from
              lightning strikes to spacecraft launch vehicles and electrical transmission
              systems.  It will have a high voltage capability, up to one million volts, with
              a discharge current of up to 100,000 amps through a cubic meter laboratory
              cloud chamber with controlled gas composition, pressure, temperature and
              relative humidity and will be capable of being filled with particulate clouds
              of both volatile materials, such as water droplets and ice crystals, as well as
              aerosol of low volatility, such as certain minerals and alkali halides.  The
              electrical system will consist of a Marx bank parallel - series arrangement of
              capacitors together with additional elements, with capability for control of
              voltage, current and current rise and fall time.  The chamber will carry
              appropriate feed-throughs and electrodes for direct discharge and an inductive
              loop to give an electrode-less ring discharge.  The time constants of current
              rise and fall (on the order of 100 nanoseconds and 10 microseconds,
              respectively) will be controlled to give direct simulation of atmospheric and
              other processes.  Measurements will be made of the form and speed of the
              discharge using a streak camera and gated optical detectors.  The role of
              particulates of different size, shape and composition as they relate to changes
              in trace gas composition will be investigated and emissivity/absorption
              measurements in selected visible, UV and x-ray wavelengths will also be
              performed.  The chamber will be designed with internal sensors and appropriate
              transmission windows for external laser diagnostics.  The utility of the system
              will be demonstrated in the second year through initial studies of the leading
              discharge tip through ice and water cloud interfaces and in the rate of NOx
              production, both of which are current scientific issues in atmospheric
              science.
 
