Title       : PGE/PG: Gender Composition and Engineering Team Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0080669

Award Number: 0080669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Knecht rknecht@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra K. Lasich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara M. Moskal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering and science fields increasingly demand the use of team
              decision-making in order to meet needs of a rapidly developing technological
              society.  Although women historically have been limited in their participation
              during decision-making processes within these fields, this situation is
              changing.  The Colorado School of Mines is currently investigating how gender
              composition of teams in the first and second years affects quality of their
              products and satisfaction of individual team members.  The goal of the proposed
              collaborative effort is to build upon current research by investigating mixed
              gender teams in upper level undergraduate courses, graduate research efforts,
              and industrial settings.

The purpose of this request for a Planning Grant is
              to refine the collaborative strategy and to secure essential partnerships to
              bid successfully for a Collaboration Grant.  We have subdivided the effort into
              four work packages.  Work package 1 validates the results of the Experimental
              Study and investigates the extension to upper division undergraduate courses as
              well as other universities.  Work packages 2 and 3 expand the research effort
              to include graduate programs and industrial settings.  Work package 4 examines
              how results of the previous three work packages can be used to improved both
              undergraduate and graduate curricula.  We are not proposing four independent
              research efforts, but rather a strategy that supports continual exchange of
              information across work packages following a natural progress that students
              follow through their undergraduate education into either graduate school or
              industry.

Results of this study are likely to suggest techniques, supporting
              strategies, and practices by which mixed-gender teams can make successful
              decisions.

