Title       : LTER: Biodiversity, Disturbance and Ecosystem Functioning at the Prairie-Forest
               Border
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0080382

Award Number: 0080382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. David Tilman tilman@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah E. Hobbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal request of the Cedar Creek Natural History Area Long-term
              Ecological Research project. The nine co-investigators of the Cedar Creek LTER
              are using theory with long-term experiments and observations to examine (1)
              controls of biodiversity, community assembly and ecosystem functioning in
              upland ecosystems at the prairie-forest boundary, (2) the effects of both
              biodiversity and community composition on ecosystem processes, and (3) the
              impacts of major perturbations - including climatic variation, nitrogen
              deposition, elevated CO2, predator suppression, and changes in fire frequency -
              on species composition, diversity and ecosystem functioning. The approach
              combines studies of numerous species on several trophic levels with studies of
              the ecosystem processes that they affect and that affect them. This work is
              designed to combine and synthesize the often disparate approaches of
              population, community, and ecosystem ecology. This work will build on an
              18-year record of research at this site.
	These studies focus on the various
              direct, indirect and feedback processes that control the composition, dynamics,
              and biodiversity of these grassland and savanna ecosystems, and on the effects
              of the composition and biodiversity of these ecosystems on their stability and
              functioning. Specifically, for the next six years, this team will continue and
              expand on five major sets of long-term research, including experimental and
              observational studies on biodiversity, nitrogen addition, fire frequency,
              trophic interactions, and successional dynamics and land use. 
	The results of
              many of these studies are relevant to society because they will provide a
              better understanding of the long-term impacts of human actions on ecosystems.
              For instance, this research will help elucidate the factors that control
              biodiversity and the effects of the loss of biodiversity on ecosystem
              functioning. Studies of the impacts of nitrogen addition, of elevated CO2, of
              fire frequency, and of changes in trophic structure all address issues related
              to major ways that humans are impacting the environment.

