Title       : A First Course Based on Complex Problem-Solving Within a Simulated
               Entrepreneurial Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0080379

Award Number: 0080379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Denning pjd@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nada Dabbagh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Menasce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd-Peter Paris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravindra A. Athale  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Washington College of Engineering proposes to mount a major
              new initiative to integrate biology into the engineering curriculum for
              undergraduate and graduate students. They will develop this initiative in
              phases. In the first phase, key elements will be developed under Action Agenda
              support. In later phases  A three-tiered system is proposed that will affect
              all undergraduate engineering students at the University of
              Washington.

First Tier: The first level will include all engineering
              undergraduates, and will involve the integration of intriguing biological
              examples of engineering concepts ("mini-modules") into the existing core
              engineering curriculum at the Freshman and Sophomore levels. In addition, they
              will create ENGR/BIO Freshman Interest Groups to create a forum for students
              with early interest in the engineering/biology interface to interact.

Second
              Tier: The second level will involve development of a new Junior-level course
              entitled,
"Biological Frameworks for Engineers." This will be a hands-on
              project based course in fundamental engineering-based biological concepts that
              will develop in engineers the common language and concepts of biology.
              

Third Tier: The third level is a more in-depth learning experience in the
              interface between biology and engineering. These experiences take many forms:
              1) a large number of existing and planned courses in more specialized subjects,
              2) undergraduate research opportunities, and 3) industrial internships at the
              engineering/biology interface. Once students have taken the new junior-level
              course, they will be better prepared to take advantage of each of these
              opportunities. 


