Title       : Ion Channels as Effectors for Cell Growth Regulatory Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0080796

Award Number: 0080796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley G. Rane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1136,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Using model cell systems for cell growth control, the principal investigator
              and others have advanced the concept that ion channels are integral components
              of the central growth factor/proto-oncoprotein/ oncoprotein growth regulatory
              signaling networks. Specifically, the laboratory of the principal investigator
              has identified a fibroblast intermediate conductance, calcium-activated,
              potassium channel, FIK, that is selectively up-regulated in response to growth
              factor or oncoprotein stimulated mitogenic signaling. In addition, specific
              block of FIK function with peptidyl toxins has been shown to reversibly inhibit
              cell proliferation. FIK has also been shown to regulate transcriptional
              activity of the MRF4 muscle regulatory transcription factor in 10T1/2-MRF4
              fibroblasts, a model cell system for defining the linkage between signaling
              events at the cell membrane and growth regulatory transcription events. A key
              hypothesis for how FIK regulates cell growth is that it insures consistent
              hyperpolarization of the cell membrane to or near the potassium equilibrium
              potential. The model predicts that this hyperpolarizing action will, in turn,
              promote mitogenic calcium entry via growth factor activated,
              voltage-independent calcium channels. In support of this idea, preliminary
              studies have identified a calcium channel in 10T1/2-MRF4 fibroblasts which is
              activated by bFGF, an important growth regulatory peptide for these cells.
              Thus, a wealth of published work and preliminary data have identified FIK and
              peptide growth factor activated calcium channels as key physiologic regulators
              of cell growth. The long term goal of this project is to define how these
              channels regulate cell growth, thus providing a unique insight into this aspect
              of cell physiology. Specific project goals are: 1. Establish a mechanistic
              basis for the role of FIK in cell growth regulatory signaling. Physiological
              and pharmacological means will be used to examine the link between FIK channel
              regulation and growth control in fibroblast cells, with the 10T1/2-MRF4 model
              system being exploited to understand how FIK modulates growth-associated
              transcription. 2. Homology clone the fibroblast IK channel (FIK). An homology
              cloning strategy will be implemented based on the sequence of recently cloned
              human calcium-activated potassium channels. Physiology of the heterologously
              expressed cloned channels is remarkably similar to the fibroblast IK which this
              lab has extensively characterized. Cloning FIK will ultimately allow
              utilization of a number of approaches (inducible expression, antisense
              inhibition of native expression, point mutations to perturb ionic selectivity,
              etc.) to determine how the channel regulates cell growth. 

