Title       : Development of an In Vitro Assay for Chloroplast Protein Targeting in the Moss,
               Physcomitrella patens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0080202

Award Number: 0080202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Theg smtheg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Approximately 90% of the proteins in chloroplasts are encoded in the nucleus,
              translated on cytoplasmic ribosomes and imported post-translationally across
              the envelope membranes.  A large subset of these proteins are further targeted
              to one of the numerous internal plastidic compartments.  Most of our knowledge
              of this process comes through in vitro experiments performed with isolated
              chloroplasts and thylakoids.  More recently, a relatively small number of
              mutants have been described which are defective in plastid protein import,
              allowing genetic analysis of the import process.  However, it has been
              difficult to combine both genetic and biochemical analyses in the same plant,
              as those that are convenient for genetic use are poor biochemical subjects, and
              vice versa.

        The moss Physcomitrella patens is unique among land
              plants in its ability to incorporate introduced DNA by homologous
              recombination.  This opens the possibility to examine plant functions by
              site-directed mutation and allele replacement.  The utility of this model plant
              system would be significantly enhanced if it were to prove to be a good
              organism for biochemical as well as genetic analysis.  The objectives of this
              project are to collect the tools required to perform in vitro analysis of
              chloroplast protein targeting in the moss, and then to optimize the procedures
              for isolation of protein import-competent chloroplasts and thylakoids.  It is
              hoped that this work will lead to the development of the first plant model in
              which biochemical and genetic tools can be combined without difficulty in the
              same organism.


