Title       : Pillared Layered Compounds: Their Synthesis, Structure and Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0080040

Award Number: 0080040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Clearfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0080040
Clearfield, Abraham

This project focuses on the synthesis of micro
              and mesoporous materials based upon two types of reactions; the pillaring of a
              newly synthesized vanadyl phosphate and the designed exploitation of metal
              phosphonate chemistry.   The novel vanadyl phosphate is a dark green layered
              compound that intercalates amines and on refluxing in alcohol solution
              exfoliates.  In this condition it reacts with inorganic polymers to produce
              porous pillared products with high surface areas and uniform pores sizes.  A
              second type of reaction involving gel formation of the vanadyl phosphate with
              first row transition metal acetates also leads to porous materials of unknown
              structure, where pores in both cases can tuned to narrow ranges in the
              important intermediate size range of 10 to 25 nanometers.  The second class of
              materials is more involved with the design of porosity by choice of the
              phosphonic acid and metal.  The nature of reactions leading to new materials
              will be probed and the materials characterized by use of X-ray and electron
              diffraction, NMR and vibration spectroscopies, electron microscopy, surface
              area and pore size measurements and where needed computer modeling procedures. 
              The ion exchange, sorption and complexing behavior, and catalytic properties as
              well as electronic and magnetic behavior of selected compounds from both the
              vanadium and phosphonate studies will be examined.
%%%
Meso and microporous
              materials area predicted to be useful as catalysts, adsorbents, molecular
              silvers, ion exchanges and in special cases exhibit interesting electronic and
              magnetic behavior.  This project should result in discovery of new phenomena
              related to formation of porous structures and will serve as an excellent
              vehicle for training students, including undergraduates, in the design of new
              materials with functional properties.

