Title       : Modeling Multisensory Enhancement in the Superior Colliculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0080789

Award Number: 0080789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Anastasio tja@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1162,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The brain is the most powerful information processor known.  Part of its power
              derives from its ability to combine (or integrate) information from multiple
              sensory systems.  For example, we can combine sight, sound, and touch in
              forming an integrated perception of events in our environment.  Combining input
              from multiple sensory systems is known as multisensory integration. 
              Understanding how multisensory integration actually works in the brain will
              provide important insights into the nature of perception.  In studying
              perception it is important to realize that, no matter how good sensory systems
              may be, they can't provide perfect information.  The information provided by
              sensory systems must be considered as uncertain to some extent.  Perception may
              involve the use of sensory inputs to provide evidence of events in the
              environment.  The superior colliculus is a brain structure that causes
              mammalian animals (like us) to turn our heads and eyes in the direction of new
              events in the environment.  Many neurons in the superior colliculus receive
              inputs from more than one sensory system.  These multisensory neurons exhibit a
              property know as multisensory enhancement, in which the response to an input
              from one sensory system can be greatly increased by input from another sensory
              system.
We have developed an hypothesis that multisensory enhancement is the
              result of processing by which collicular neurons use multisensory input to
              compute the probability that an event has occurred in the environment.  The
              goal of our project is to develop a model that explains how neurons might
              actually perform this computation, and then use actual data from collicular
              neurons to test the model.  The computational model we propose will be
              adaptive, that is, capable of changing its own behavior on the basis of its
              experience with the environment.  It will be composed of two stages that are
              meant to represent two separate stages in the development of multisensory
              enhancement in the brain.  Collicular neurons are known to receive multisensory
              inputs from both lower and higher levels in the brain.  In the first stage,
              model collicular neurons will learn to extract the maximum amount of
              information from lower-level multisensory inputs.  In the second stage, model
              collicular neurons with use higher-level multisensory inputs to refine their
              computation of the probability of events in the environment.  We will test this
              model by comparing its behavior with that of actual collicular neurons studied
              in cats.  Our model predicts that the amount of multisensory enhancement
              observed for collicular neurons should depend upon other properties such as the
              location of those neurons in the colliculus.  Our model should also make
              predictions concerning how the behavior of collicular neurons should change
              when the higher-level inputs are removed.  Proposing a detailed model of
              multisensory enhancement and testing the model against actual data should
              provide us with some new insights into how multisensory enhancement may be
              organized in the brain.  A better understanding of this more basic form of
              multisensory integration might open the door for a better understanding of
              perception in general.




