Title       : US-South Africa Workshop: Biotechnological Applications of Deep Subsurface
               Microbial Investigations to Deep Mining; Bloemfontein, South Africa, November
               2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a0080581

Award Number: 0080581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tullis C. Onstott tullis@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0521000   Mineral Benefication                    
Program Ref : 1066,9104,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Onstott
INT-0080581

This award supports the participation of seven US
              scientists in a US-South Africa Workshop on Biotechnological Applications of
              Deep Subsurface Microbial Investigations to Deep Mining, scheduled for November
              2000 at the University of the Orange Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa. 
              The organizers are Tullis C. Onstott, Department of Geosciences, Princeton
              University, and Rudy Boer and Frank Hodgeson of the Institute for Ground Water
              Studies and Department of Geology, University of the Orange Free State. The
              workshop is a result of earlier investigations by scientists from the United
              States, Canada, Sweden, and South Africa into microorganisms associated with
              deeply-buried rocks and groundwater of the ultradeep gold mines of South
              Africa.  The goal of that research was to determine whether these mines, which
              extend more than 3 km below the land surface, offer ready access to indigenous,
              subsurface microbial communities and whether radiolysis of groundwater provides
              a nutrient source for the microorganisms.  The PI subsequently received a
              5-year LExEn (Life in Extreme Environments) grant from the National Science
              Foundation to pursue this investigation into the origin of "fissure" water and
              the in situ rates of microbial oxidation and reduction in mining
              boreholes.

The main themes of the workshop are:  ground water, hazardous
              gasses, air quality, in situ leaching, borehole technology, and education and
              training.  As part of the latter, the participants will develop educational and
              field training programs for historically disadvantaged populations in South
              Africa as part of a capacity building agenda.  The workshop will bring together
              US and South African researchers in universities and government institutes with
              mining engineers in private industry to discuss research results and explore
              future collaboration and will also establish a bridge between the PI's LExEn
              project and South African biotechnology development programs that are mining
              oriented.
  


