Title       : Nanoscope for Individual Molecules in Biophysics and Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0080792

Award Number: 0080792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1226648            (Estimated)
Investigator: Watt W. Webb www2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Many essential biological signals, ranging from DNA transcription to
              immunological responses to infection, can be activated and controlled by a
              single or a few molecules or in the cell; therefore, the capability for
              measurement of dynamical functions of individual biomolecules in vivo and in
              vitro is necessary for effective biophysical research.  The objective of this
              award is to create effective instrumentation for observing and understanding
              these sensitive life processes, and as a byproduct to enhance the molecular
              sensitivity of analytical microchip biotechnology.  Non-invasive optical
              detection of individual biomolecules and location with nanometer precision and
              measurement of the dynamics of individual molecular functions in vivo or in
              vitro is needed.  Optical microscopic imaging of fluorescence is a promising
              approach, but access to single molecule processes is tenuous, although
              individual molecules have been detectable in special cases for many years.  The
              aim of this award is to develop a user-friendly, benign optical nanoscope for
              single molecule detection and localization at nanometer scales on living cells
              for biophysical research.  Recent research on fluorescence of individual
              molecules has revealed photophysical pathology that confounds many biophysical
              applications at the single molecule level, but fortunately promising research
              approaches have been discovered that may yield satisfactory optical probes.


                  The optical nanoscope development relies on multiphoton laser microscopy
              (MPM) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS).  Combining these methods
              enhanced by precision nanostructure fabrications, new optimized optics and new
              software developments provides the basis to design and construct a
              purpose-designed optical Nanoscope complex for optimized single molecule
              dynamical measurements using FCS with MPM imaging for nanometer molecular
              localization in cellular and tissue structures. The equipment to be purchased
              consists of the components required to develop, construct and optimize the
              optical nanoscope on a timeline of about three years. The development of single
              molecule optical probes utilizes photophysical instrumentation to measure
              optical dynamics from hundreds of picoseconds to hundreds of seconds with time
              correlated single photon counting, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy,
              photon burst analysis, and spectral recording, all at the single molecule
              level. 

     Human resource development comprises an inherent byproduct of
              this program through interdisciplinary training of participating predoctoral
              and postdoctoral students and visiting scientists in several disciplines. They
              can be expected on the basis of our past experience to become effective
              biophysical researchers as academic faculty, technology managers, and research
              and development leaders.

