Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of ZTL Function in the Arabidopsis Circadian
               Clock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0080090

Award Number: 0080090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Somers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The circadian clock provides for both anticipation of coming changes and for a
              buffering against rapid variation in the environment. Despite its importance,
              little is known about the molecular components of the circadian clock in
              plants, though much phenomenology has shown that the basic properties of clocks
              are similar across the plant and animal kingdoms. The long-term objective of
              this study is to identify and integrate components of the circadian clock
              system of plants into a coherent framework of interaction. The specific means
              towards this end will be through using the mutant and wild-type gene products
              of the recently cloned locus in Arabidopsis, ZEITLUPE (ZTL). Mutations at this
              locus (ztl-1, -2) affect flowering time and greatly increase the period of the
              circadian clock in a light dependent way. These loci will be one of the primary
              tools used to understand how light input to the clock system interfaces with
              the oscillator itself. ZTL is comprised of a novel combination of a putative
              light-sensing domain (LOV domain), an F-box and 6 kelch motifs, identifying
              regions that are likely to play distinct roles in function of this protein. The
              specific goals of this project are: 1) to complete the genetic positioning of
              ZTL locus within the context of the known red light and blue light signal
              transduction pathways. 2) To identify physical interaction partners of the ZTL
              protein through yeast 2-hybrid interaction library screens and through targeted
              testing of candidate factors. 3) To identify genetic interaction partners of
              ZTL through suppressor and enhancer screens based on the ztl-1 phenotype. 
              Given the strong effects these mutations have on flowering time, these studies
              should more clearly develop the link between the circadian clock, light
              signaling and plant development.


