Title       : Social Influences on Endocrine and Behavioral Responses During Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0080320

Award Number: 0080320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Hennessy michael.hennessy@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In infants of primate and other mammalian species, the presence of the mother,
              but not another familiar animal, can prevent or reduce hormonal stress
              responses to threatening conditions.   This selective capacity of the mother to
              reduce stress responses seems to disappear after puberty, but other companions
              may attain this ability at about the same time.  These normal developmental
              changes may influence social grouping patterns of the species and have
              implications for understanding how humans cope with stressful conditions. Many
              of the relations between stress hormones, social partners, and behavior,
              observed in primates, have also been observed in guinea pigs.  Therefore,
              guinea pigs are the subjects of these initial experiments.  Proposed studies
              will: (1) document in detail changes that occur from infancy to adulthood in
              the ability of various classes of social companions to reduce hormonal stress
              responses;  (2) examine how these changes correlate with developmental changes
              in behavior and social grouping tendencies; and, (3) determine if these
              developmental changes are due to rising levels of gonadal hormones at the time
              of puberty.

Hormones have a huge impact on behavior and its development from
              infancy to adulthood.  Puberty is the time of the most dramatic hormonal
              changes of all postnatal life.  Yet with the exception of sexual behavior
              itself, surprisingly little is known about the effects of hormones on behavior
              during this important period.  Proposed studies will provide basic information
              on how hormones of puberty influence the ability of social partners to moderate
              stress hormones and organize social behavior.  Results will be of value to
              researchers examining how social support reduces various stress-related
              physiological responses at different portions of the life span.  The proposed
              work will also further science education by involving undergraduate students
              planning careers in neuroscience.

