Title       : STTR Phase II: Early Detection and Identification of Individual Pathogenic
               Microorganisms in Food with a Flow Cytometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0080956

Award Number: 0080956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Shorthill shorth@me.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SoftRay, Inc.
	      519 South Fifth Street
	      Laramie, WY  82070    307/766-6267

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9107,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II Project will demonstrate the
              real-time detection of single foodborne pathogenic bacteria in a real-world
              operating environment.  SoftRay demonstrated an innovative technique to detect
              pathogenic microorganisms in Phase I, based on laser-induced fluorescence
              coupled with flow cytometry.  The Phase I research showed conclusively that
              this approach is feasible, and that the technique has key advantages over
              current alternatives including it is: 1) capable of detecting single
              microorganisms (techniques other than immunofluorescent flow cytometry or
              immunofluorescent microscopic imaging require in excess of 104 microorganisms),
              2) able to completely examine a large volume of food or water in real time, 3)
              intrinsically automatic, and 4) sensitive only to the selected bacteria or
              viruses.  In Phase II, SoftRay will demonstrate a lost-cost, self-contained
              prototype system for the detection of pathogenic microorganisms in food or
              water, including E. coli O157:H7 on beef.  This innovative technique is based
              on laser-induced fluorescence in which a stream of solution containing the
              microorganisms is labeled with fluorescent probes and is then illuminated with
              a laser diode (commonly called flow cytometry).  The resulting fluorescence is
              detected with a CCD imager using a novel time-integration scheme.  The proposed
              device will use a simple optical configuration and a laser diode to provide a
              low-cost, rugged, small, lightweight package that can be used to detect
              specific, individual bacteria in real time.  Key technology objective is to
              develop a pathogenic bacteria detection technique that can analyze 1 ml of
              fluid for selected pathogens in less than 1 minute, to a sensitivity of less
              than 10 pathogenic microorganisms per ml.

The result of the Phase I and II
              project will be the demonstration of a prototype sensor capable of individual
              microorganism detection of unprecedented sensitivity, selectivity, and speed. 
              This will enable rapid detection of individual specific pathogenic
              microorganisms in a wide array of applications, including: food processing
              inspection, clinical applications (such as detection of tuberculosis in
              sputum), biological warfare defense, and many other situations where single
              microorganism detection is required.  The technique can also be used to detect
              small numbers of molecules, including explosives and groundwater contaminates.
