Title       : Reducing Workplace Aggression using Collaborative Action Science to Enhance
               Organizational Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0080676

Award Number: 0080676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel I. Harmon jharmon444@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairleigh Dickinson Univ
	      1000 River Road
	      Teaneck, NJ  076661996    201/692-2221

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses organizational learning, organizational change and
              performance improvement in the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs (VA). Its two
              objectives are to assess the effectiveness of organizational change
              interventions designed to reduce workplace aggression and stress and improve
              performance; and to examine whether and how using "collaborative action
              inquiry" - a form of participatory action research in which participants
              partner to co-manage cycles of research-action-reflection - may enhance
              organizational learning and change.
With access to a huge longitudinal
              database of objective and perceptual measures concerning virtually every aspect
              of VA operations and performance, as well as "enthusiastic" participation from
              not only VA management but also its unions, the research team will first model
              effects and costs of workplace aggression and stress through VA's value chain,
              to identify high-leverage intervention points, those with greatest potential to
              improve service quality and cost-effectiveness. Second, the project will
              provide a template for how organizations can collaboratively use their own data
              to generate learning and improvement. Third, the project will derive guidelines
              for improving academic-practitioner collaboration.
Panelists praised the
              creativity of the project, while raising several issues to which the PI has
              responded: because the root causes of aggression and stress are common, and
              because the VA is so diverse, generalizeability of results should be
              substantial. Improvements in the quality of life for the VA's 240,000
              employees, and through them, the VA's many clients alone would be a substantial
              benefit. The character of the VA, its size and diversity, the importance of
              service industries in general, and of those like the VA's benefits
              administration centers, healthcare facilities and cemeteries in particular, all
              increase the project's potential impact. 

