Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: Spatial Intelligence for Computer-Enhanced
               Interaction with Physical Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0080124

Award Number: 0080124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1847084            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal C. Nelson nelson@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kiriakos N. Kutulakos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1088,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0080124
Nelson, Randal C.
University of Rochester

CISE Research
              Infrastructure:  Spatial Intelligence for Computer-Enhanced Interaction with
              Physical Environments

Intelligent computer systems have considerable
              potential to augment human abilities, not only in accessing abstracted
              information, but also in dealing with physical environments (both real and
              virtual).  A canonical example of such a system, though certainly not the only
              one, is a robot with which one can converse.  To mediate between people and a
              physical environment, an intelligent system must perceive spatial structure of
              various sorts and competently execute physical actions.  At the same time, it
              must communicate with human users to provide information, accept instruction,
              or assist interactively with complex tasks. 

The term "spatial intelligence"
              can be used to capture the overarching ability to perceive, act in, and
              communicate about a physical environment.  Implementing spatial intelligence
              depends on integrating a variety of enabling technologies in AI, distributed
              systems, and human interfaces.  Some of the most critical of these
              technologies, particularly in machine perception and natural language
              communication are currently crossing a threshold that promises to make useful,
              end-to-end, spatially intelligent systems viable for the first time.

The
              overall goal of the project is to enable creation of flexible spatial
              intelligence with which human users can interact naturally to carry out a
              variety of collaborative tasks.  The project will create and equip a laboratory
              resource specifically designed to advance the state of the art in the various
              enabling technologies, and facilitate and demonstrate their integration into
              end-to-end systems.

