Title       : Collaborative Research: Luwian-Roman Interaction in Western Rough Cilicia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0080029

Award Number: 0080029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Rauh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. LuAnn Wandsnider, Nicholas Rauh
              and an international group of collaborators will conduct archaeological
              research in the Western Rough Cilicia region of Turkey. Located in the Eastern
              Mediterranean the area was famous both as a pirate base and for the tenacity
              with which it resisted incorporation into the succession of empires which
              sought to dominate this large Near Eastern region. During the first and second
              centuries BC pirates reportedly amassed 1000 warships and 30,000 combatants and
              extended their naval operations and depredations throughout the Mediterranean,
              roving as far as Italy and Spain. In 67 BC the Roman general Pompey temporarily
              eliminated the pirate menace and in 71 AD the region was formally incorporated
              into the Roman empire. Although literary sources attest to this fact, it is
              unclear to what extent the Rough Cilicia maintained a degree of autonomy or the
              nature of the relationship between this peripheral area and the core of the
              Roman empire. Through archaeological research the investigators will study the
              changes in social organization which took place after incorporation and the
              evidence for direct Roman presence in the area. To meet these objectives they
              will develop a ceramic reference collection which will allow dating of
              individual sites. They will conduct a coarse grained foot survey (supplemented
              by remote sensing and interview with local inhabitants) and will document
              architectural sites to establish stylistic conventions and construction and
              remodeling sequences for domestic, fortification, religious and industrial
              structures. They will also carry out a preliminary paleoenvironmental studies
              to determine whether detailed environmental reconstruction is possible. If so,
              this will establish the groundwork for looking at utilization and degradation
              of the landscape.

Empires arose independently in many regions of the world
              and archaeologists wish to understand the processes which underlay their
              origins and the functioning. By definition, power rests with a central ethnic
              group which attempts to extend control - usually through actual or implied use
              of force - over the maximum area possible. At the same time subject peoples try
              to retain as much autonomy as possible. Researchers have posited multiple
              strategies both for the conqueror and the conquered and Rough Cilicia provides
              an excellent context to evaluate them.

