Title       : Bayesian Networks in Philosophy of Science and Epistemology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0080580

Award Number: 0080580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luc J. Bovens bovens@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80580 - Luc J. Bovens (University of Colorado at Boulder) 
"Bayesian
              Networks in Philosophy of Science and Epistemology"

There is a long
              philosophical tradition of addressing questions in philosophy of science and
              epistemology by means of the tools of Bayesian probability theory. In the late
              1970s, an axiomatic approach to conditional independence was developed within a
              Bayesian framework. This approach in conjunction with developments in graph
              theory are the two pillars of the theory of Bayesian Networks, which is a
              theory of probabilistic reasoning in artificial intelligence. The theory has
              been very successful over the last two decades and has found a wide array of
              applications ranging from medical diagnosis to safety systems for hazardous
              industries. Aside from some excellent work in the theory of causation,
              philosophers have been sadly absent in reaping the fruits from these new
              developments in artificial intelligence. This is unfortunate, since there are
              some long-standing questions in philosophy of science and epistemology in which
              the route to progress has been blocked by a type of complexity that is
              precisely the type of complexity that Bayesian Networks are designed to deal
              with: questions in which there are multiple variables in play and the
              conditional independences between these variables can be clearly identified.
              Integrating Bayesian Networks into philosophical research leads to theoretical
              advances on long-standing questions in philosophy and has a potential for
              practical applications.

In philosophy of science, there is the question of
              how we can confirm a hypothesis with unreliable instruments. What is the impact
              of repeating the experiment many times over? Of repeating the experiment with
              different instruments? Of developing a theoretical underpinning that boosts the
              reliability of the instrument? Of calibrating the instrument? These are the
              sort of questions that can be fruitfully modeled by means of Bayesian Networks.
              The results have surprising repercussions on standard theses in philosophy of
              science (e.g. the variety of evidence thesis and the Duhem-Quine thesis) and
              yield some novel theoretical insights. As to practical applications, our
              methodology will be applied to a case study on the discovery of the top quark: 
              what makes this case interesting is that the theory at hand and the methods
              that are used to analyze the data that confirm the theory are probabilistically
              dependent.

In epistemology, foundational questions have not been addressed
              sufficiently within a probabilistic framework. There is the sceptical challenge
              dating back to Descartes' Meditations that we cannot trust our senses and that
              our empirical knowledge has no justification. The coherentist answer is that
              even though the processes by means of which we gather information about the
              world may be less than fully reliable, the very fact that the scientific story
              fits together, i.e. has an internal coherence, provides justification that the
              story is true. But how are we to understand the claim that our information
              gathering processes are less than fully reliable? How are we to understand the
              claim that a story is internally coherent? There are many open questions about
              these central notions in coherentism. Within the framework of Bayesian
              Networks, multiple notions of less-than-full reliability can be modeled and a
              probabilistic measure of coherence, which has been a long-time dream of
              coherentists, can be developed. With a clear understanding of these central
              notions in hand, the coherentist answer to the Cartesian sceptic can be
              assessed.

This theoretical work on reliability and coherence has practical
              applications in the theory of belief change. How does a cognitive system (a
              person or an expert system) update its beliefs when it receives new information
              as its input? Under what conditions does it add this new item of information to
              its previous beliefs? Under what conditions does it discard some of its
              previous beliefs? On the standard approach, new information is added to the
              belief set until an inconsistency appears. It is more realistic to let belief
              change be determined by two factors, viz. how reliable are our information
              sources and how well does the new information cohere with what we already
              believe. These factors can be directly modeled by Bayesian Networks. Such
              modeling yields novel theoretical insights about belief change and carries a
              promise of applications to information management in expert systems.

