Title       : Karl Pearson: Lives of a Statistician
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0080104

Award Number: 0080104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Porter tporter@history.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-80104 - Theodore Porter (UCLA) - "Karl Pearson:  Lives of a
              Statistician"

This award supports a study of the early career of Karl
              Pearson, founder of the biometric school that worked out the modern methods of
              statistics. Pearson did not take up statistics until about 1892, when he was 35
              years old. Before that he worked at a remarkable variety of topics and causes,
              including German religious history, history of philosophy, feminism, socialism,
              and the ethical value and cultural significance of science. He also wrote a
              romantic novel and a "nineteenth-century passion play." In many ways his early
              beliefs and values seem at odds with his later advocacy of statistics in almost
              every domain of inquiry. As a young man he wrote movingly of his desire to know
              nature directly, in contrast to the putative superficiality of quantitative
              knowledge. Yet his career displays striking continuities as well, above all in
              his lifelong opposition to individualism. This was expressed early in a strong
              moral commitment to socialism and an impulse to dissolve the self in nature. In
              his later writing, he exalted the rigors of scientific method as a vehicle for
              taming the individual and creating citizens.

This work is also about
              objectivity, considered not mainly as a set of public, intellectual values, but
              rather from the standpoint of the internal life of the scientist. For Pearson,
              statistics was a strategy of self-discipline and renunciation. By giving up the
              impulse to know nature directly, he was able to define science in terms of
              method rather than subject matter, and in this way to universalize its claims.
              Pearson's early professional life provides the historian an unusual opportunity
              to integrate the private life with the research commitments of a mathematical
              scientist, and to show something of the sacrifice as well as satisfaction in
              fashioning a life of exact science. This work should be of interest not only to
              historians, but also to anyone concerned about the role of science in modern
              culture, or about patterns of recruitment into science according to
              intellectual and religious values, social class, ethnicity, and gender.

