Title       : Functional Evolution of Locomotor Posture in Tetrapods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a0080158

Award Number: 0080158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Reilly reilly@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrone R. Biknevicius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The early terrestrial vertebrates are thought to have had a sprawling posture,
              as do modern salamanders, where the limbs are held laterally to the body. 
              Erect posture, where the limbs are held directly under the body, is thought to
              have evolved twice, once in the ancestors of mammals and once in the lineage
              containing dinosaurs (archosaurs). The biomechanical consequences of these
              different postures have been little studied and the hypothesis of a three-grade
              postural system (sprawling, semi-erect, and erect postures) has been recently
              questioned.  A quantitative understanding of locomotor posture in living
              tetrapods with different postures is necessary to evaluate the consequences of
              this postural shift in the evolution of terrestrial tetrapods. 

	The general
              goal of this study is to complete functional morphological analyses of hind
              limb kinematics and whole body kinetics (ground reaction forces and external
              mechanical work) during locomotion in a series of extant taxa representative of
              each major tetrapod class.  These data will then be used to define, compare,
              and contrast various tetrapod postures in order to test a series of hypotheses
              about postural function and evolution in vertebrates.  They will also be used
              to determine whether and how force dynamics of the limbs have changed during
              the evolutionary shift from sprawling to erect postures.  

