Title       : Growth and Characterization of Wide-Bandgap Self-Assembled Quantum Dots for
               Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0080630

Award Number: 0080630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $860037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Dupuis dupuis@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkatesh Narayanamurti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG project is a collaborative effort between researchers at U. TX, Austin,
              Harvard U., and U. VA. The project addresses materials science based approaches
              to achieving high-performance laser diodes in the high-energy visible region:
              (1) growth and characterization of III-P-based wide-bandgap self-assembled
              quantum dots(SAQD) composed of direct-bandgap ternary alloys, e.g., InxGa1-xP
              on GaAs substrates, and (2) growth of InxAl1-xP ( x = 0.6 to ~1.0) quantum dots
              on GaP substrates. These SAQD materials and lasers will be studied to generate
              the basic knowledge required to optimize such structures for optoelectronic
              applications such as light sources emitting in the green and yellow spectral
              regions for full-color laser displays, sources for holographic memory storage,
              and high-speed light sources for low-cost plastic-fiber-based optical
              communications systems. The research strives for fundamental insight into the
              physics of two-dimensionally confined systems in III-V materials. The growth
              and properties of III-phosphide quantum dots will be explored and the control
              of strain will be employed to develop an understanding of the growth of uniform
              QD arrays. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science with high technological relevance. Experimental tools
              are now available to allow atomic level observation of elementary surface
              processes which when better understood allow advances in fundamental science
              and technology. The results of this work may allow a new level of reliable
              control of materials growth, allowing semiconductor devices with reproducible
              properties to be attained in a variety of academic and commercial settings. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. The project involves the collaborative work of students and
              faculty in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Physics, and Materials.
*** 

