Title       : Multidisciplinary Studies in Bioinformatics and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0080935

Award Number: 0080935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499994             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Foster foster@cs.uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is the establishment of an independent,
              self-sustaining research Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies,
              (IBESt) at the University of Idaho.  Researchers with common interests in
              evolutionary mechanisms in the intersection of biology, computer science, and
              mathematics will focus on tool and infrastructure development to sustain
              interdisciplinary research and to further growth and understanding of
              Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies research issues.  Research projects
              will be carried out in the following areas:  (1) Parallel and Distributed
              Bioinformatics, (2) Transposable Element Simulation and Analysis, (3)
              Statistical Analyses of Comparative Phylogeographic Data, and (4)
              Self-Repairing, Fault Tolerant Programs via Evolution.  The goals of the
              project which will advance the formation of IBESt are as follows.

Recruit a
              new distinguished professor of Bioinformatics, retain and support current
              faculty, and retain and recruit excellent graduate students.

Expand the
              current record of accomplishment in interdisciplinary research in order to
              build a successful, externally funded research program in bioinformatics and
              evolutionary studies.

Construct a powerful, expandable Beowulf computing
              system for teaching and research.

Disseminate knowledge to the broader
              university community and to the public through the conduct of seminars and
              workshops.

