Title       : Engineering Education for Inclusive Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0080500

Award Number: 0080500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Stamper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry A. Benedict  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is growing consensus in engineering that a fundamental change is required
              in the
education of future engineers to ensure that they be well prepared for
              their roles in the
21st century. The demands relate both to their success in
              the job market and to their
responsibilities as inventors and innovators of
              powerful tools and technologies that are
increasingly permeating all aspects
              of our society. In addition to strong technical
capability and management
              skills, future engineers need to develop the understanding and
skills needed
              to design products and services that can serve the diverse needs of
              different
countries, cultures, and peoples.

In response to an increasing
              global economy and marketplace, the changing
demographics in our society and
              workforce, and government requirements for product
accessibility, industry is
              increasingly developing more inclusive approaches to design.
Inclusive design
              of technology means developing systems flexible enough to serve the
broadest
              possible range of users. Curb cuts, for example, were originally designed
              for
wheelchair users, but parents with strollers, bicyclists, youth on
              skateboards, and senior
citizens benefit from them, too.

The proposed
              project is a collaborative effort between Rose-Hulman Institute of
Technology
              (RHIT), Innoventure, the Education Development Center (EDC), and the
CPB/WGBH
              National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM). The overall goal of this
project
              is to develop and broadly disseminate curriculum materials and activities
              that
facilitate the integration of inclusive design concepts into
              undergraduate engineering
curricula. To accomplish this goal, the Engineering
              Education for Inclusive Design
Project will undertake two major
              activities:

(1) RHIT faculty members, in collaboration with staff members
              from EDC and
NCAM, will develop, implement and formatively evaluate case-based
              approaches
towards teaching inclusive design concepts and skills to
              undergraduate
engineering education students. Project staff will develop case
              studies of
inclusive design projects and design instructional activities to
              accompany the case
material. The case materials and activities will be
              incorporated in several
different engineering courses at RHIT, evaluated for
              their impact on students, and
revised based on the results of the pilot
              tests.

(2) The inclusive design case materials and activities will be
              broadly disseminated
both among faculty at RHIT and nationally among other
              engineering schools
through a variety of means: (a) summer faculty workshops
              hosted by RHIT that
will introduce participants to the case-based approach
              towards teaching inclusive
design; (b) through the Engineering Case Library
              sponsored by the American
Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) and housed
              at RHIT in print and
electronic formats (world wide web); (c) and through
              papers and reports,
including proceedings of the summer faculty seminars.
              These publications will be
disseminated nationally in print and electronic
              formats to schools of engineering,
professional organizations, industry
              councils, and foundations.

