Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Generating an Accurate Sense of Depth and Size
               Using Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0080999

Award Number: 0080999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379184             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Thompson thompson@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Smits  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite impressive gains in realism over the last decade, computer graphics is
              currently unable to effectively generate images of objects and environments
              that look large. This is mostly because computer graphics is poor at conveying
              information about absolute depth. The goal of this project is to demonstrate
              that it is possible to significantly improve the sense of depth and scale in
              computer graphics if rendering methods are developed with specific attention to
              the need to convey cues for absolute depth. Accomplishing this goal will
              require new insights into the 3D information extractable from 2D images,
              modifications to graphics algorithms in order to better render salient
              information, and sophisticated perceptual experimentation to validate that
              people can actually see the intended 3D space. The PI's approach will be to
              draw upon the results and methods of computational vision in ways that have not
              previously been done in the computer graphics community. Computational vision
              provides insights into the intrinsic constraints on how information about 3D
              space can be recovered from 2D images. In particular, the computational
              analysis of vision points out the important distinction between relative depth
              judgments and absolute depth judgments. Surprisingly few of the commonly
              studied image cues are in fact sufficient to provide information about absolute
              depth. Of those that do, several cannot be exploited in computer graphics due
              to fundamental limitations in display technology and our inability to precisely
              control viewing conditions except in immersive environments. The research will
              impact a broad range of graphics applications in which accurate spatial
              information needs to be conveyed, including education and training, design and
              prototyping, and telepresence.
