Title       : Advanced Interfaces to Scientific Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9700799

Award Number: 9700799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miron Livny miron@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yannis E. Ioannidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Over the last decade, a dramatic increase has been observed in the ability of
              individual experimental scientists to generate and store data, which has not
              been matched by an equivalent development of adequate data management tools.
              ZOO is a generic Desktop Experiment Management Environment that can be
              customized and placed on the desks of many scientists to manage their
              experimental studies. Early experiences with a first prototype of Zoo have
              indicated that, as with general database systems, one of the biggest challenges
              lies with the system's user interface. The goal of this project is to
              investigate several hard problems related to advanced database user interfaces
              that appear particularly important for experiment management. These include
              problems related to schema visualization, experiment flow modeling, visual
              query languages, dynamic queries, approximate query answers, incremental
              queries, and others. This work proceeds in a tight loop between developing
              generic database user interface technology, incorporating the resulting
              techniques into ZOO, and installing customized enhancements of the tool in
              real-life experimentation environments for evaluation and feedback. The
              expected results of this research will advance the state of the art in database
              user interfaces and will be incorporated into the ZOO tools. Empowered with
              this fashion, ZOO will reach the necessary maturity to be placed in actual
              experiment production environments and enable scientists to manage their
              experimental studies efficiently and effectively.
