Title       : Analysis of Common Cause Failure Data in Nuclear Power Plant Safety Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9700527

Award Number: 9700527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Kvam paul.kvam@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This grant supports the development of new statistical methods for analyzing
              common cause failure data for complex systems, such as nuclear power plant
              component groups.  For the purpose of modeling common cause failures, the
              research can lead to the development of a binomial failure rate mixture model,
              based on a parametric shock model developed for power plant risk assessment. 
              Beyond this mixture model estimator, various results will be pursued, including
              both non-parametric and parametric estimators; confidence bands and other
              measures of uncertainty; general solutions for systems of non identical
              components; and, pertinent limit properties. The mixture model will serve as a
              point of departure to further research into statistical analyses based on
              dependent failure models. This research also investigates techniques of mapping
              that replace missing data with estimated data in the risk assessment, and will
              help to characterize the uncertainty involved with various models used for the
              mapping procedure using statistical theory in addition to Monte Carlo
              simulation.   The original binomial failure rate model has been criticized due
              to the many existing databases for which the model fit is poor.  The realistic
              generalization  in this investigation is more complex than the original model
              or its non-parametric alternatives, but model fit can be greatly improved.
              There exists a strong foundation of qualitative analysis in the engineering
              literature (screening analysis, fault tree analysis, etc.), but little guidance
              with respect to some quantitative aspects common cause failure research.  If
              successful, this research will contribute to   quantitative risk analyses in
              the nuclear safety field.
