Title       : Process-Oriented Basis Representations for Multivariate Process Diagnosis and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9700330

Award Number: 9700330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell R. Barton rbarton@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9700330  Barton    Advances in the sophistication of sensoring devices have led
              to production systems that simultaneously monitor many product quality
              characteristics.  The availability of these data provide a great opportunity
              for process monitoring and control.  This research, a collaboration between the
              Pennsylvania State University and the University of Puerto Rico, investigates
              ways to link patterns in multivariate quality data with patterns associated
              with certain kinds of production problems or process parameters.  The
              researchers will develop new statistical process control tools to assist
              quality engineers in directly diagnosing the likely causes of production
              irregularities.  Their methodology uses a process-oriented basis approach,
              whereby quality measurement vectors are correlated with hypothesized problems
              in the manufacturing process.  For a given measurement vector, the methodology
              will identify a small set of potential causes, i.e. those basis elements with
              large coefficients.  Process engineers can then select appropriate control
              actions in either a manual or automated fashion.    All manufacturing
              industries recognize that quality monitoring and control are critical elements
              in enabling fast and efficient production.  As production processes become more
              sophisticated, it becomes increasingly important not only to monitor product
              quality, but also to quickly and accurately adjust process parameters when
              quality metrics degrade.  This research addresses fundamental statistical
              problems in multivariate quality control and process rectification, and as such
              is expected to have considerable impact on the ability of engineers to
              accurately diagnose production problems caused by process variables.  The
              investigators will work closely with three manufacturers of electronic
              components and/or systems in the conduct of this research, thus ensuring that
              the research is relevant to industry needs.
