Title       : Recovery, Representation, and Recognition of Two and Three-Dimensional Shape
               from Real Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9700497

Award Number: 9700497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin B. Kimia kimia@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This   research  is  concerned  with  the  problem  of  recovery, 
              representation,  and  recognition of  two  and  three-dimensional  shape from
              real images. Building on the results of previous  NSF-  funded research on
              deriving a representation for segmented  shape  that  is  robust to variations
              in the visual scene,  the  current  effort  focuses on deriving such
              representations   directly  from  real   images   of  appreciable  complexity, 
              involving   partial  occlusion, gaps, spurious edges, and noise. Two key
              complementary  approaches  are proposed. The first relies on a local
              formulation  of  deformation and shock formation by propagating local, labeled 
              waves  directly  from  edge elements and detecting,  classifying,  grouping, 
              and  labeling  the formed  singularities  (shocks)  to  recover  partial  shock
              segments from partial  contour  segments,  shock-based partitioning of shapes
              in grey-scale images prior  to  segmentation,  and  completion  of  missing 
              contours.  Secondary  (interpenetrating)  waves and a set of shock
              transformations  are  proposed to deal with alterations due to partial
              occlusion, gaps,  and  spurious edge elements. The second approach is
              complementary  to  the  first  and  captures  regional  continuity  by 
              randomly  initializing  object  hypotheses as fourth-order shocks  (seeds), 
              which  then grow based on the output of low-level processes.  The  research  is
              motivated by segmentation and registration  problems  in 3D and will focus on
              two key areas: 1) the formalization of  a  classification of 3D shocks, the
              development of a shock  grammar,  and  the  implementation of robust numerical 
              schemes  for  their  detection; and 2) the development of a geometric notion of
               scale  in  3D by devising a surface evolution scheme of diffusion,  thus 
              generalizing  the  reaction-diffusion space to  3D.  The  overall  approach 
              reflects visual modeling by sets of coupled systems  of  PDEs,  a  paradigm
              which allows for simultaneous  interaction  of  boundary  and  regio n 
              processes as  well  as  bottom-up/top-down  communication.
