Title       : Passive Actuation for Robotic Devices in Contact with Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9700528

Award Number: 9700528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne J. Book wayne.book@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Humans  and  robots have need to work together in  factories,  in  nuclear 
              facilities,  in  space and in  medicine.   To  make  the  interaction 
              inherently safe, this research is investigating  the  concept  of controlled
              passive robotic interface.  The  interface  under  study is essentially an arm
              with only dissipative  (brakes  or  clutches)  or  conservative (transmissions)
              coupling  between  joints.   No motors are used.  Forces applied at the end  of
               the  arm result in motion that can be computer controlled according to  the 
              purposes  of  the device:  to follow a prescribed  path,  to  restrict access
              to some regions of the workspace, or to provide a  haptic  display 
              representing the nature of a virtual  or  remote  environment.    Experiment
              and analysis will produce a model of the human-machine  interaction.   An 
              experimental test bed  developed  under  prior  funding will be enhanced to
              support the current research.  At the  same time a much smaller scale device is
              planned with a focus  on  haptic  displays,  enabling wider exploration  of 
              the  range  of  potential applications of the basic concept.  Experiments will
              be  conducted on the device and on its interaction with a human user.  The  
              information  transmission  capability  and  the  trajectory  enhancement 
              capability are two related  aspects  to  be  studied  experimentally  and
              incorporated into the model  of  interaction.  Theoretical  studies will be
              conducted to predict the  bounds  on  the performance to be expected with
              different controllers.
