Title       : Modular Representation Theory of Finite and Algebraic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9700965

Award Number: 9700965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Parshall bjp8w@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard L. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PARSHALL/SCOTT,  97-00965             The goals of this proposal center on
              creating a viable theory of  irreducible modular representations for finite
              groups G of Lie type.  There  are two cases to consider: (1) the describing
              characteristic theory in  which the representations are taken over a field k
              having the same  characteristic as the defining characteristic p of G; and (2)
              the  non-describing characteristic theory in which k has characteristic 
              different from p.  Over the past decade the investigators have developed  many
              new techniques (often in collaboration with E. Cline) for attacking  case (1). 
              These methods have often come about by adapting geometric  methods, such as the
              theory of perverse sheaves, to classical algebra  (especially the
              representation theory of finite dimensional algebras).  In  the proposed work
              they will continue in that direction.  At the same time,  the investigators
              will integrate their approach with high dimensional  deformation techniques
              which have also been applied to (1).  In addition,  the investigators have
              recently developed new endomorphism algebra  techniques for attacking (2).  In
              particular, their introduction (with Jie  Du) of Kazhdan-Lusztig cell theory
              into the theory of Hecke endomorphism  algebras suggests that much progress can
              be made on developing a general  theory (i.e., valid for all types) for the
              non-describing characteristic  theory.  The project involves, and/or will have
              applications to, many other  areas of mathematics, including cohomology, Lie
              theory, finite dimensional  algebras, and the maximal subgroup theory of finite
              groups.         A mathematical group is an abstract embodiment of symmetry. 
              Its  concrete realizations can provide powerful constraints on the behavior of 
              complicated physical and communications systems.  This project concentrates  on
              determining the ways in which the most important abstract finite groups  find
              concrete representations as square matrices over finite number  systems.  The
              groups and representati ons the investigators study comprise  the most
              important basic ingredients for creating a general theory of all  finite group
              representations.  In this century, similar theories for  continuous groups over
              familiar continuous number systems have played a  large role in quantum theory
              and the theory of elementary particles.  Their  finite analogs have already
              proved valuable in the design of communications  and data storage devices,
              though this finite theory remains very  incomplete.  In the next century, one
              reasonably expects that the finite  discrete worlds of computers and
              communications will become even more  important. The task of creating a viable
              general theory of finite group  representations -- as is the investigators'
              long-term goal -- is, thus, a  central problem for the future.
