Title       : Acquisition of Instrument for the Study of Artificial Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9700818

Award Number: 9700818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Kastner mkastner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700818  Kastner  The power of computers has increased exponentially with time 
              in large part because the size of devices has decreased  exponentially with
              time, resulting in a higher density of  transistors on a chip. Unfortunately,
              the cost of facilities  for producing these devices has also increased
              exponentially,  and although the market for devices has grown rapidly, it has 
              not grown exponentially.  Thus we are rapidly approaching the  time when
              facilities for new generations of conventional  devices may be too expensive to
              build.  In the past it seemed  that novel devices could not compete with
              conventional ones.  However, the economic limitation to future fabrication 
              facilities provides a new motivation for research into  classes of devices that
              may have cost advantages.  Single-  electron devices may be one of these
              classes.  Whereas single-  electron devices have, in the past, operated only at
              very low  temperatures, recent reports of operation near room  temperature
              bring useful applications much closer to reality.    This project builds upon
              past work at MIT in which it was  discovered that when a transistor is made
              very small it  behaves in an unusual way.  Whereas a conventional transistor 
              turns on only once as electrons are added to it, and whereas  such a transistor
              requires the addition of about 103  electrons to change from the off-state to
              the on-state, the  new transistor turns on and off again every time an electron
               is added to it.  The single electron transistor is made by  isolating a very
              small droplet of electrons in such a way  that electrons can move into and out
              of the droplet only by  quantum mechanical tunneling.  The MIT work has shown
              that  such a transistor behaves like an artificial atom, in that  the number of
              electrons in the droplet and the energy are  both quantized.    The transistors
              made so far have used the semiconductor GaAs  with metal electrodes on the
              surface, patterned using  electron-beam lithography, to confine the droplet of 
              electrons.  Beca use the electrons in such GaAs structures are  typically 100nm
              below the surface, the droplet of electrons  has typically been ~100nm in
              radius r.  The energy for adding  an extra electron to the droplet scales like
              r-1, and this  limits single electron operation to temperatures below ~1K  for
              r=100nm.  The goal of this project is to explore ways of  increasing the
              operating temperature of single electron  transistors and to better understand
              their physics.  In  particular, the MIT group has recently discovered a series
              of  phase transitions in the droplet of electrons confined in the  artificial
              atom at high magnetic fields.  The acquisition of  a higher-field magnet and
              dedicated refrigerator are proposed  here to study these phase transitions
              further.  %%%  New artificial atoms will be fabricated using Si instead of 
              GaAs.  Since the electrons in these devices can be as close  as 5nm from the
              surface, much smaller droplets and,  consequently, much higher energy and
              temperature scales are  expected.  The devices will be fabricated in
              collaboration  with MIT Lincoln Laboratory using the outstanding electron- 
              beam and optical lithography capability developed there under  Air Force
              sponsorship.  In this way, the effect of the NSF  funds will be strongly
              amplified.  In addition to higher  operating temperatures, Si offers the
              advantage that single  electron devices can be easily integrated with
              conventional  ones.  It is expected that single electron devices in Si can  be
              made to operate well above liquid nitrogen temperature.  Higher magnetic fields
              are required for the study of the  state of electrons in these smaller
              structures.    It is also proposed to fabricate devices in GaAs in which the 
              droplets of electrons will be smaller.  This will be  accomplished by growing
              structures in which the electrons are  closer to the surface.  A collaboration
              has been established  with the Weizmann Institute in Israel where the expertise
              in  making such structures has already been developed. Like the  col laboration
              with Lincoln Laboratory, this amplifies the  impact of NSF funding.    Single
              electron devices have the advantage that they can be  capacitively coupled.  It
              has been proposed that, because of  this, an array of such devices may function
              as an associative  memory.  That is, any set of input voltages close to, but
              not  exactly equal to, a special set will give the same output.  It is proposed
              that such an array be fabricated and studied.  Although the first such memories
              will be read-only,  understanding their physics may lead to ways of writing as 
              well.  ***
