Title       : New Methods for Natural Product Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9700141

Award Number: 9700141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy I. Totah   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Nancy I. Totah, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University of
              Iowa, is developing new methods for the synthesis of   complex natural products
              with the support of the Organic Synthesis   Program.  Selective epoxidation of
              an enamide functionality in   ten-membered macrocycles and subsequent
              transannular addition is explored   as an approach to the synthesis of 6-6
              fused ring amides with control of   up to four stereogenic centers.  This
              methodology will be applied to the   enantioselective synthesis of
              phenanthridone alkaloids such as   pancratistatin.  Exploitation of the
              conformational preferences of a   tricyclic precursor will provide access to
              C-ring modified phenanthridone   alkaloids.  The phenanthridone alkaloids are
              an important class of natural products,   displaying a variety of biological
              activities that include anticancer,   antiviral, growth regulatory, and insect
              antifeedant activities.  With   the support of the Organic Synthesis Program,
              Professor Nancy I. Totah,   of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Iowa, is developing   new approaches for the synthesis of this class of
              compounds.  These   approaches, based on the formation of molecules containing
              two rings from   precursors containing only one larger ring, offer promise for
              the   preparation of compounds available in only small quantities from natural 
               sources as well as modified compounds, not known to occur naturally,   which
              may have potential medicinal and agricultural applications                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
