Title       : Online Algorithms for Selective Multicast, Maximal Dense Trees, and Related
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9700157

Award Number: 9700157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Awerbuch baruch@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The essence of this research is a systematic classification  of the variants of
              the multicast problems that present  themselves in various networking and
              distributed systems  applications, as well as algorithmic solutions to these 
              problems in the spirit of "competitive analysis". Even  though the research
              pursued in this project is theoretical  in nature, the algorithms developed may
              be of practical  value.  The issues addressed are also being very actively 
              studied by the networking community.  This algorithmic  effort may in fact
              bridge between the Theory and Networking  communities, since the researchers in
              the Networking  community are seeking solutions to dire problems created by 
              the growing scale of the Internet and its applications. From  the algorithmic
              point of view, which is the point of view  taken in this proposal, the
              Multicast Problem can be defined  as follows.  Various network users issue
              online requests for  a connection to certain multicast sources.  The network 
              either connects this request or rejects it (admission  control decision).  If a
              request is connected, a path with  sufficient residual bandwidth is established
              starting at the  requesting user and ending either at the source or at one of 
              the users previously connected to the same source (route  selection decision). 
              The goal of these admission control  and route selection decisions is to
              maximize the total  number of users connected subject to the network capacity 
              constraints.  Namely, the number of connections to different  sources passing
              through any edge should not exceed the  capacity of that edge. The innovation
              in this research is in  developing a unifying framework that simultaneously
              captures  admission control and route selection decisions in their  full
              generality. This framework can be generalized to  include issues such as
              pricing policies, network design &  synthesis, etc.
