Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Status and Power in Social Exchange Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9700766

Award Number: 9700766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7230               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lovaglia michael-lovaglia@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Markovsky  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9700766  Markovsky    This Doctoral Dissertation  Research project will
              experimentally test a new theory of power that connects research from two
              sociological traditions: power and status.  This research (i) tests a new
              theoretical argument that connects Network Exchange Theory (Markovsky et al.
              1988, 1993) with the theory of Status Characteristics and Expectation States
              (Berger et al. 1977; Wagner and Berger 1993) and the theory of Status Value
              (Berger et al. 1972); (ii) establishes the baseline effect of status
              information on exchange outcomes for networks having no advantageous position;
              and (iii) determines if status information is sufficient to negate weak
              structural advantages that occur in one class of structures. This theory
              explains how individual traits or status characteristics lead to the
              development of power in social exchange networks. The argument is that the
              possessions of high status actors acquire a degree of status value that is
              independent of any economic or consumatory potential they may otherwise carry.
              For example, baseballs are valuable but Cal Ripken's baseball confers a unique
              sense of status value that ultimately stems from his prestige as a player. 
              Thus, this theory predicts that high status creates a sense of status value
              that attaches to goods controlled by high status actors. exchanges.    All
              experiments are conducted at the Center for the Study of Group Processes at the
              University of Iowa. Subjects interact via networked PCs, each negotiating to
              receive a share of the profit pool in each of their network relations. All
              subjects are first or second year college students and only same-gender
              subjects were included in a given session. Subjects are assigned randomly to
              their network positions where they remain for the entire session. First,
              subjects provide information on their age, gender, education, and high school
              grade point average. The experimenter then reports predetermined information
              about each subject's partners. Subjects connected to a "higher status" par tner
              believe they are working with a 27 year old engineering graduate student with a
              superior GPA.   Those connected to a "lower status" person believes that their
              partner  is a 16 year old high school student with an inferior GPA.  Several
              status undifferentiated tests in which each subject believed they are connected
              to an equal status partner comparable to the real subject in terms of age, GPA,
              year in school and academic major are ran. Each subject  is then assigned a
              commodity-colored poker chips-to control in the negotiation phase. Subjects are
              told they will negotiate with their partners for poker chips, and each will
              receive chips different from their own in color to help the experimenter keep
              track of the interactions. Following the status manipulation and chip
              allocation, subjects begin the negotiation and exchange phase. In each
              experiment, subjects complete 60 rounds of negotiation, making a maximum of one
              exchange per round. All are encouraged to gain as many chips as they can for
              themselves and told that their pay will be determined by the number of poker
              chips they earned.  Data collected will be used to test several statistical
              models using regression analysis.     ****
