Title       : Approximation Algorithms via Linear Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9700029

Award Number: 9700029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213514             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Shmoys shmoys@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most combinatorial optimization problems are NP-hard, and  hence unlikely to
              have a polynomial-time algorithm that  finds an optimal solution. This project
              investigates the  design of algorithms that find near-optimal solutions but 
              also come with a guarantee that the solution is not too much  worse than
              optimal. This research investigates algorithms  that produce solutions
              guaranteed to be nearly-optimal by  relying on information contained in the
              optimal solution to  linear programming relaxation.  One consequence of such 
              results would be to provide a theoretical justification for  the strength of
              the bounds given by these linear programming  relaxations. By giving algorithms
              for which one can prove  that the solution found has value relatively close to
              the LP  bound, one also shows that relative error of the  solution(compared to
              the integer optimum) is also small.  Furthermore, past experience has shown
              that the insight  needed to devise algorithms with such performance guarantees 
              can also lead to algorithms with superior empirical  performance. The research
              focuses on several specific areas  in which computational experience has
              indicated that  particular linear programming relaxations provide strong 
              bounds and attempts to build on this to design approximation  algorithms with
              good performance guarantees and good  practical performance. Scheduling
              problems arise in a cross-  section of applications, and the proposal focuses
              on several  basic scheduling models, with the aim of developing  algorithmic
              techniques that are not particularly application  specific. Facility location
              problems are a type of network  design problem in which the aim is to build a
              distribution  network consisting of facilities and routes used to serve 
              clients from the facilities.  Known relaxations produce  extremely high-quality
              bounds and the research will attempt  to provide some theoretical justification
              for this, as well  to devise new algorithms that also build on these. The 
              traveling salesman problem is per haps the canonical  optimization problem, and
              this investigation will try to  resolve a well-known conjecture on the strength
              of the so  called Held-Karp lower bound.  For the bin-packing problem,  this
              research will focus on a conjecture that there exists a  polynomial-time
              algorithm that uses at most a constant extra  bins, and is based on the
              cutting-stock LP formulation. For  some other problems, such as the maximum
              acyclic sub-graph  problem, in addition to the LP-based approach described 
              above, this investigation will also explore algorithms based  on convex
              programming relaxations, which have recently been  used to strengthen linear
              relaxations in some settings. The  ultimate goal of this research is to devise
              algorithms that  will not just complement the ongoing computational work in 
              polyhedral combinatorics with a theoretical foundation, but  will also develop
              algorithmic implementations to solve these  applications more easily.***
