Title       : CAREER: Electrohydrostatics, Electrohydrodynamics and Microstructural Evolution
               During Electrodispersion Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9700860

Award Number: 9700860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra C. Greer sg28@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Harris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700860  Harris    The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
              project is  to study the fundamentals of electrohydrodynamics and mass 
              transfer with chemical precipitation that occur in electro  dispersion
              precipitation processes. This proposal addresses the  physical, chemical and
              engineering issues that govern electro  atomization in liquid-liquid systems
              and the formation of solid  particles from microdroplets.  The drawback to
              improving  electrodispersion precipitation processes in liquid-liquid  systems
              is the lack of a fundamental understanding about the  electrohydrodynamics of
              the atomization process and the mass  transfer with chemical precipitation that
              occurs in the dispersed  phase.  A tremendous amount of literature has been
              generated on  the electroatomization of pendant and sessile drops in liquid-air
               systems.  However, very little research has been done to  understand the
              effect of static and pulsed electric fields on  conducting pendant/sessile
              drops and liquid streams emanating  from a nozzle and immersed in a low
              dielectric constant liquid.  Specific questions include the effect of static
              and pulsed  electric fields on pendant drops and the conditions under which 
              shells form rather than microspheres.  Additionally, this  research project
              will be integrated into a series of graduate-  and undergraduate-level courses
              that the PI is developing on the  "Science and Engineering of Colloidal
              Systems."  The courses will  discuss the fundamentals of hydrosol and organosol
              synthesis,  surface science and engineering, and the effect of electric  fields
              on colloidal systems and surfaces.  The PI also will spend  at least two weeks
              per year during the summer conducting science  and engineering camps to
              encourage junior high and high school  minority students to pursue degrees in
              science and engineering.  %%%  This work will have a significant impact on
              increasing the  throughput of all liquid-liquid electroatomization processes
              and  on the production of microparticles with co ntrolled morphologies,  size,
              and composition.  Improvement of this technology will lower  the cost of
              ceramic starting powders for high technology  applications.  ***
