Title       : Cohomology and Modular Representation Theory of Finite and Algebraic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9700685

Award Number: 9700685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward T. Cline ecline@mmcable.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  CLINE.TEXT            The principal investigator of this grant will work in
              collaboration with  Brian Parshall and Leonard Scott of the University of
              Virginia for a  significant portion of the research activity on this grant. The
              group  will study the modular representation theory of  algebraic and finite
              groups of Lie type. In the  case where the (prime) characteristic of the base
              field is the natural  characteristic of the ambient algebraic group, the main
              problem centers  upon a famous conjecture by Lusztig for the characters of
              certain  irreducible representations.  Recent progress shows that this 
              conjecture is true for all but a finite number of primes. However, at  present,
              there is no effective bound on the size of the prime. One goal  of this project
              is to continue work toward a complete proof of this  conjecture. In the case
              where the characteristic is  not the natural characteristic, the theory is much
              less well developed.  Recent work of Cline, in collaboration with Parshall and
              Scott, yields  techniques which apply, generally, to the modular representation
              theory  of the finite groups of Lie type in all characteristics. A second goal 
              of this project therefore is to develop these new techniques into an  effective
              tool for the study of these representations in the  non-natural characteristic
              cases. In particular, one hopes  eventually to obtain significant insight into
              the nature of the  irreducible modules in these cases.    The theory of groups
              and their representations is a central area of  research in mathematics because
              its methods apply generally to the  study of any object, in particular to many
              mathematical structures, with  a high degree of symmetry. For a given group,
              the determination of its  irreducible representations is a central problem. 
              The research of the  principal investigator in this grant will have as one
              focus the  determination of these irreducible representations for the finite 
              groups of Lie type, and their associated algebraic groups. The problem  divid
              es into two major cases. The first case, in which major progress  has been made
              on the Lusztig conjecture, is much more well developed  than in the second
              where little is known in general.  Therefore the work   of the principal 
              investigator on this grant will be of a more preliminary nature in the  second
              case than in the first. Progress in either case would have  applications in
              many other areas of mathematics including cohomology  theory, Lie theory, the
              theory of finite dimensional algebras and the  study of the subgroup structure
              of the finite and algebraic groups of  Lie type.
