Title       : Applications of Probability to Problems in Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9700585

Award Number: 9700585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodrigo Banuelos banuelos@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Banuelos   9700585   The Principle Investigator will  investigate  several
              concrete open problems in    different areas of analysis where probabilistic
              ideas and techniques have already had   considerable success and where he
              believes further progress is possible. These include 1)   applications of
              martingale inequalities to investigate the  operator  norm of the Beurling- 
              Ahlfors operators in two and several dimensions, 2) the use of Brownian motions
              to   investigate sharp bounds for the fundamental frequency and fundamental gap
              of the   Laplacian in Euclidean domains, and 3) the use of asymptotic
              expansions for Wiener   functionals to investigate the asymptotic expansion in
              the trace of Schrodinger operators   and  how the signs of the coefficients in
              such  expansion depend on the sign of the   potential.    Probability Theory
              has its roots in various fields of applied sciences and hence it should   not
              be surprising that modern stochastic analysis draws many of its technical tools
              from   several distinct areas of mathematics.  What is often far from  obvious 
              is that probabilistic   ideas and techniques can be effectively used to
              investigate problems and applications   which on the surface do not seem to be
              related to probability at all. The problems   discussed above fall in this
              category.  The Beurling-Ahlfors operators are (singular)    integral operators
              which describe regularity (smoothness) properties of solutions to   various
              nonlinear  equations arising from, among other topics, elasticity.  The
              computation   of their operator norms is a fundamental problem with many
              applications.  On the surface   this operator  appears to be very far from
              probability.  The Principal Investigator, in   collaboration with G. Wang and
              A. J. Lindeman, has successfully used the theory of   martingales (fair games)
              to study this problem.  The first part of the project describes   various new
              probabilistic approaches for further work in this direction.  Bounds  on the  
              fundamental frequency and fundament al gap of the Laplacian operator are basic
              quantities   in the theory of vibrating membranes. The trace of Schrodinger
              operators plays a   fundamental role in  various problems in mathematical
              physics related to, among other   things, scattering theory. Here, too, the
              connection to probability is not transparent. In the   second part of the
              project the PI proposes to use the theory of Brownian motion and   stochastic
              calculus to investigate several open problems in this areas. It is expected
              that   these investigations will lead, as it has happened many times in the
              past, to new and   surprising applications of probability to analysis,
              geometry, partial differential equations,   and the application of these
              subjects to mathematical physics. Several students will most   likely
              participate in these investigations.
