Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Structure Property Relationships Among Modified
               Electrodes of Metal Hexacyanoferrates and Their Analogues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9700869

Award Number: 9700869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9677               (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Gomathi   (Principal Investigator current)
              G. P. Rao  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cen Electrochem Res Inst
	      
	      Karaikudi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700869  Rao  Description:  This award is for a US-Indo research collaboration
              in the  field of electrochemical sensors based on new cyanometalate modified 
              electrodes.  The co-investigators are Andrew Bocarsly of Princeton  University
              and Prabhakara Rao of the Central Electrochemical  Research Institute (CERI) in
              Tamil Nadu.  Their studies will focus  on the structure and reactivity of
              platinum(II) and palladium(II)  complexes with cyanometallates that form
              polymeric structures.   These materials form hydrogel-like structures with
              unusual  photochemical and electrochemical properties.  Bocarsly's interest  is
              the solid-state properties of these materials, while Dr. Rao will  pursue the
              potential sensor applications of these systems.  Both  groups are strongly
              grounded in electrochemistry and the use of  electrochemical methods.  The
              expertise and facilities available at  these two laboratories are complementary
              and should be enhanced  by the collaboration.    Scope: This research will add
              an international component to  domestic research that is currently funded by
              the NSF Division of  Chemistry.        The discussions leading to this
              collaboration have been thoughtful,  deliberate and point to the potential that
              solid scientific work of  mutual benefit will result.  CERI is a research
              facility of the central  government that is managed by the Council of
              Scientific and  Industrial Research (CSIR). The mission of CSIR laboratories is
              to  conduct research consistent with national priorities and India's 
              development as an industrial nation.    ***
