Title       : List Colorings and Other Combinatorial Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9700796

Award Number: 9700796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Galvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Galvin  9700796    This award provides funds for an investigation into
              list coloring problems and other problems in combinatorics. List coloring
              problems in graph theory involve coloring the elements (vertices or edges) of a
              graph in such a way that adjacent or incident elements receive different
              colors, and the color of each element must be chosen from a prescribed list of
              colors  associated with that element. For example, the list chromatic index (or
               list edge-chromatic number) of a graph is the least number n  such that, 
              given an arbitrary assignment of a list of  n  colors to each edge, there  is a
              proper edge-coloring in which each edge is colored with a color from  its list.
              The list (vertex-) chromatic number  and list total chromatic  number are
              defined analogously.  The list coloring conjecture, due to  Vizing, asserts
              that the list chromatic index of any graph (or multigraph)  is equal to its
              (ordinary) chromatic index. The list coloring conjecture  (LCC for short) is a
              notoriously deep and difficult problem.  One of the  major recent advances in
              this area was the PI's proof of the LCC for  bipartite multigraphs, a result
              which included, as a special case, the  well-known Dinitz conjecture about
              partial Latin squares.  In this project,  the PI hopes to make further progress
              on the LCC, by extending and applying  his result on the bipartite case, and by
              other means. While the main focus  of this project is on list colorings, the PI
              plans to investigate various  other problems in combinatorics and graph theory,
              possibly including, but  not limited to, the areas of Ramsey theory for paths,
              hypergraph  games, cliques in factorizations of graphs and hypergraphs, and 
              Frankl's conjecture on union-closed families.      This research is in the area
              of combinatorics. Combinatorics is generally  applicable to various practical
              problems: routing, scheduling, and other  management science problems,
              communications, cryptology, etc.  The  mathematical formulation of a scheduling
              problem is a  graph coloring  problem.  List coloring theory, besides being
              directly applicable to  certain kinds of scheduling problems, is a useful tool
              in the study of  classical graph coloring problems. The educational
              significance of a lot  of work in combinatorics and graph theory, in particular
              the kind of work  planned for this project, is that the problems and results,
              and even the  methods used, are often accessible to bright undergraduate and
              high school  students, so that they can enjoy the excitement of direct contact
              with  current research.
