Title       : Strong Correlation Effects in Double Layer Two-Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a9700945

Award Number: 9700945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Eisenstein jpe@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9700945 
              Eisenstein    This  experimental  research project utilizes double  layer  two-
               dimensional  electron  systems to study two  exciting  topics  in  quantum 
              Hall research: composite Fermions (CF) and quantum  Hall  ferromagnetism (QHF).
              CF's, which are electrons with two magnetic  flulx   quanta   attached,   have 
              provided   a   framework   for  understanding  the diversity of fractional
              quantum  Hall  states.  QHF,  on  the  other hand, offers a beautiful and
              useful  analogy  between  quantized Hall states in systems with discrete 
              internal  degrees  of  freedom  (like  spin or layer  index)  and  ordinary 
              magnetic materials. Remarkable new phenomena, like textural phase  transitions 
              and  skyrmionic topological excitations,  have  been  discovered  in  QHF's. In
              double layer 2D electron gases,  simply  changing   the   thickness  of  the 
              separating  barrier   allows  interpolation  between  a  system best described 
              as  two  weakly  coupled  composite  fermion liquids  to  a  single  quantum 
              Hall  ferromagnet. In addition to conventional magneto-transport, novel 
              experimental probes requiring separate electrical contact to  the  individual 
              layers  (e.g., Coulomb drag, tunneling  spectroscopy,  and  counterflow
              transport) will be employed to uncover important  new  information in both the
              CF and QHF limits and, uniquely,  on  the transition between them.  %%%%  This
              experimental research project is devoted to basic properties  of  two 
              conducting electron systems, each confined into  a  two-  dimensional planar
              region, when the two systems are parallel  and  in  close  proximity  separated
              only  by  a  thin  planar  tunnel  barrier.  Such coupled parallel sets of
              two-dimensional electrons  at low temperatures and with high magnetic fields
              exhibit unusual  characteristics. In each layer the effective charge carriers 
              are  "composite Fermions", which are electrons with two magnetic  flux  quanta 
              attached.  As  the   spacing between  the  two  layers  is  reduced, which
              increases the interaction, a crossover in behavior  is  expected from a case of
              weakly interacting composite  Fermion  systems  to  a state called a single
              quantum Hall ferromagnet.  A  ferromagnet  is a system in which electron
              magnetic  moments  are  aligned  parallel, as in a bar magnet or compass
              needle.  On  the  one hand the experiments will provide new basic information
              about  electron systems when they are in interaction in confined  layers  at
              low temperatures. For example, one experiment will measure the  degree to which
              motion (electrical current) in one system "drags"  the  second system. On the
              other hand the device structures which  are  used in these experiments are
              similar to those used  in  the  most advanced microelectronic devices in the
              GaAs technology, and  indeed  fabricating these devices may lead to innovation 
              in  the  GaAs technology. This research will involve students who will  be 
              well   trained  in  the  area  of  physics  and  will  also  gain  familiarity
              with semiconductor device technology, and who will be  excellently  trained for
              employment in industry,  government,  or  education.  ***
