Title       : Upper-Atmosphere/Ionosphere Studies with the MU Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1999  
File        : a9700162

Award Number: 9700162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Oliver wlo@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses four themes:  waves, electric fields, winds and
              temperatures.      The Middle and Upper Atmosphere radar's phased-array
              construction facilitates the wave work.  By observing in multiple directions
              simultaneously, the PI can distinguish temporal variations over the radar and
              spatial variations caused by features moving over the radar.  He will use this
              capability to detect gravity-wave propagation over the radar.  These waves,
              almost always present, are best observed in daytime conditions near the peak of
              the ionosphere.  The PI plans to observe waves in the drift velocity in
              addition to density, study the altitude profile of these waves and their
              dissipation, and map out their spatial structure.    Measurements of electric
              fields will contribute to developing global electric field models.  These
              electric fields (during solar maximum) show interesting global relationships
              based on consideration of magnetic conjugacy and summer-hemisphere control of a
              magnetic field line based on seasonal differences in electrical-conductivity. 
              The PI plans to extend his study to solar minimum, as well as compare data with
              other radars to test hypotheses made with solar maximum data.    MU
              measurements of thermospheric neutral winds show smaller speeds than do winds
              at other longitudes.  The expanded winds database the PI plans will contribute
              improvement to current wind models.  The PI will also examine this data set for
              signatures of global wind circulation systems originating from different global
              processes:  direct solar heating, auroral thermal forcing, and equatorial
              momentum forcing.    Finally, he will investigate neutral and ionospheric
              temperatures, both to develop models of their behavior and to aid in the
              interpretation of radar Doppler and power data.
