Title       : New Transport Phenomena from Communication of Multiple Edge Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9700767

Award Number: 9700767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth G. Gwinn bgwinn@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9700767 
              Gwinn  This  experimental research project focuses on conducting systems 
              formed by the "edge states" that lie near the perimeter of quasi-  two 
              dimensional electron gases in the quantum Hall effect (QHE).  Fundamentally 
              new  transport behavior is  predicted  for  sample  geometries  that  bring
              multiple edge states into  communication.  Two sample geometries will employed
              in this project. These are  a  GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice pillar with edge states
              communicating on  a  2D surface sheath; and a gated GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction
              with  edge  states  communicating across a  long,  narrow  "line  gate" 
              barrier. Existing theoretical predictions in these cases will  be  tested with
              measurements to be made using a high-field (19Tesla),  low  temperature (20mK)
              apparatus on samples fabricated from MBE-  grown  GaAs/AlGaAs 
              heterostructures. It  is  expected  that  the  results   will   advance 
              general  understanding  of   electronic  transport in quasi-1D- and in
              anisotropic 3D- materials.  %%%  This  experimental  research project  probes 
              electron  transport  behavior  in  novel  devices based on one of  the  most 
              advanced  device technologies in microelectronics; that based on the  GaAs- 
              GaAlAs  system.  This  system is used in some  advanced  electron  devices  for
              computer use because it can lead to faster operation  than equivalent devices
              made of silicon. The experiments will  be  based   on  thin  conducting  layers
               fabricated  in  the  GaAlAs  technology  which give a confined two-dimensional
              "electron  gas"  in   which   the   residual  scattering   from   impurities  
              and  imperfections  is  reduced  to  extremely  low  levels,  so  that 
              inherent  electron gas behavior at very low temperatures  and  at  high 
              magnetic  fields can be observed, and  compared  to  recent  theoretical 
              models.  Results  from  this  research  may  include  unusual  new  effects or
              materials which may find new application  in  tech nology.  This  research
              project is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves graduate students who
              will  be  excellently  trained to enter positions in industry, government or
              education.  ***
