Title       : Development of a High Stiffness/Large Travel Multiple Degrees of Freedom
               Magnetic Suspension Actuator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9700372

Award Number: 9700372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Hsiang Menq   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Crucial to the success of ultra-precision fabrication systems are advancements
              in tool actuation technologies that provide large workspace volume of tool
              motion at nanometric accuracy with high dynamic stiffness.  Recent developments
              in the Magnetic Suspension Actuator (MSA) are characterized by narrow gap
              operation and low dynamic stiffness.  This has resulted in a suspension
              actuators that possess either multi-degree-of-freedom actuation with low
              workspace volume or large travel in small (one or two) degrees of freedom with
              low dynamic stiffness.  This research plan is to develop an MSA with six
              degrees of freedom with large travel range, high stiffness, high bandwidth, and
              nanometric trajectory tracking accuracy.  The approach to accomplish this goal
              consists of two basic components: (1) development of magnetic actuation
              technology that uses a rational basis for the optimal location of the
              electromagnets based on dynamic force balance, and (2) development of nonlinear
              control strategies that utilize nonlinear model of the electromagnetic field to
              obtain large travel.   The development of MSA is valuable to motion
              applications which require dynamic interactions with the environment.  The fine
              motion control and large travel properties of the MSA development has the
              potential of enabling accurate electrical and mechanical probing of the silicon
              wafers in semiconductor manufacturing over large areas at high velocities. 
              High-stiffness, high-bandwidth properties of the MSA are critically important
              to ultra precision metal cutting, non-circular turning, and micromachining
              where nanometric tracking accuracy at high bandwidths in face of significant
              external forces is required.
