Title       : Development and Application of Methods for the Calculation of Accurate
               Structures, Energetics and Properties of Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9700627

Award Number: 9700627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Peter Taylor is jointly funded by the Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program in the Chemistry Division and the the New Technologies   Program in the
              Advanced Scientific Computing Division to continue his   research in the
              development and application of methods for the   calculation of accurate
              structures, energetics, and properties of   molecules.   Methods will be
              developed for the computation of accurate,   ab initio, small molecule,
              electronic wavefunctions using contracted   Gaussian geminals (predetermined
              linear combinations of   explicitly-correlated, two-particle, Gaussian basis
              functions).  Geminal   parameters for molecules will be extracted from
              optimized atomic   wavefunctions.  Scalable algorithms will be developed for
              implementation   on parallel computers.    Taylor asserts that two-electron
              basis sets   offer much more rapid convergence and thus provide a route to
              higher   accuracy for small systems, and a way to extend existing levels of  
              accuracy to larger molecules.    Applications include the determination   of
              anharmonic frequencies and vibrational intensities for small   molecules, and
              studies involving the electronic spectroscopy of organic   and transition-metal
              systems and small elemental clusters.    Orbital-based concepts and
              computational methods play a central role in   modern chemical theory, but
              there is a practical limit to the accuracy   attainable in orbital-based
              computations using existing supercomputers.    The goal of this project is to
              develop improved computational methods   using geminals (explicit functions of
              the coordinates of a pair of   electrons) rather than orbitals.  If successful,
               this will significantly   increase the accuracy of theoretical predictions of
              gas phase reaction   rates such as those required for improved computer  models
              of the earth's   atmosphere.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
