Title       : Theoretical Studies of Electronic Structure and Dynamical Aspects of
               Electronically Nonadiabatic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9700771

Award Number: 9700771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Yarkony yarkony@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Prof.  
              Yarkony at Johns Hopkins University over the next three years.  Yarkony's  
              research will focus on fundamental questions concerning the electronic  
              structure aspects of electronically non-adiabatic processes.   Of   particular
              interest will be the locus of points of the conical   intersection,
              particularly of two states of the same symmetry.  The   prevalence and impact
              of conical intersections will be studied in the   ensuing grant period to
              investigate their role in electronically   non-adiabatic processes.  A second
              basic question concerns the diabatic   bases routinely used to study the
              dynamics of non-adiabatic processes.    Although routinely used, diabatic bases
              exist only in an approximate   sense.  Line integrals of the derivative
              coupling can be used to   determine the size of the nonremovable part of the
              derivative coupling,   that is the portion of the derivative coupling that must
              remain even in   the 'most diabatic' basis.  Yarkony will use this technique to
              identify   systems for which the nonremovable part of the derivative coupling
              is   appreciable.  For these systems he will use the ab initio derivative  
              couplings to construct the 'most diabatic' basis and compare the results   with
              commonly used but necessarily approximate diabatization procedures.     This
              work is expected to provide fundamental insights to the nature of   diabatic
              bases.  The chemistry of molecules exposed to light, photochemistry, is  
              fundamentally different from the chemistry of ground state molecules.    The
              essential difference lies in the interconversion of electronic energy   created
              by the photoexcitation process into vibrational, rotational and   translational
              energy as the molecule relaxes non-adiabatically to the   ground electronic
              state.  Although non-adiabatic processes are   ubiquitous, occurring for
              example in vision, photosynthesis, and   stratospheric ozone degradation, many
              basic questions concerning   non-adiabatic processes need to be addressed.  One
              of the principal   drivers of non-adiabatic processes is a topological feature
              known as a   conical intersection.  Once thought to be rare occurrences
              attributable   to special, symmetry, properties of a molecule, it is now clear
              that like   non-adiabatic processes themselves conical intersections are
              ubiquitous.    Yarkony will use a unique system of computer algorithms
              developed at   Johns Hopkins University over the last decade to study
              fundamental issues   related to  conical intersections and the way they
              influence   non-adiabatic processes.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
