Title       : Contact State Space: Automatic Generation, Reasoning, and Search
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9700412

Award Number: 9700412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Xiao xiao@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zbigniew W. Ras  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert H. Sturges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In  many  robotic manipulation tasks, especially assembly  tasks,  motion of
              objects in contact is common and even desired in  order  to reduce
              uncertainties. An important tool in dealing with motion  in  contact is
              reasoning about contact states, which is the focus  of this project.
              Specifically, this research has two major goals:  (1)  to  investigate  proper
              representation of  discrete  contact  states and state transitions, and (2) to
              investigate criteria and  techniques for automatic planning of contact motions
              in terms  of  contact  state  transitions.   The  first  major  research   goal
               responds  to  the fact that although various ways of representing  discrete 
              contact  states for polyhedra  have  been  proposed  in  related  research, 
              there  is a lack of  general  and  systematic  investigation on the best way(s)
              of defining/representing contact  states and state transitions based on certain
              important criteria,  such   as  (i)  how  easy  it  is  to  describe/represent 
               state  transitions,  and  (ii)  how easy it is to  distinguish  adjacent 
              states.  The  first  criterion is  important  from  the  need  of  automatic  
              generation  of  contact  state  space.   The   second  criterion,  addressing 
              the  granularity  of  representation,  is  particularly  important from the
              need of automatic identification  of  contact  states in the presence of
              uncertainties. The  second  major  research goal is closely related to the
              first one  and  is  particularly  aimed at flexible assembly tasks. In pursuing
               both  goals,  theoretical  concepts will be validated  by  experimental 
              implementations and executions. This will result in a fundamental 
              understanding  of the physics of the most common  assembly  tasks  and   relate
               this  knowledge  quantitatively  to  the   planning  processes  which  can 
              perform them in flexible  assembly.   This  collaborative  effort is expected
              to lead to  results  that  will  significantly  impact  the  design, 
              evaluation,  generation  and  execution  of  conta ct-motion plans  for 
              automatic  assembly  in  general.
