Title       : Delta Rural Systemic Initiative Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9700041

Award Number: 9700041
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7384000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Alexander ccalex@sunset.backbone.olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9700041  Alexander  ABSTRACT                                                   
              The Delta Rural Systemic Initiative    The Delta Rural Systemic Initiative
              (DRSI) is an award to the University of Mississippi on behalf of a consortium
              of state, local, and university educators in Arkansas, Louisiana, and
              Mississippi. The project targets rural, impoverished school districts in the
              Lower Mississippi River Delta region of the three states.    The DRSI project
              will: (1) improve the K-14 learning environment in the targeted
              counties/parishes to address student needs and promote student achievement in
              science, mathematics, and technology (SMT); (2) increase the capacity of local
              communities to build and maintain quality science, mathematics, and technology
              educational opportunities; (3) establish mechanisms that promote the
              development and implementation of appropriate policies at local and state
              levels that will sustain SMT education reform; and (4) create a regional
              infrastructure that will utilize intra- and interstate alliances to develop
              sustainable regional improvements in science, mathematics and technology
              education.    The DRSI has 3 primary focus areas:      Local and regional
              capacity building and leadership development-The initiative will offer to the
              district and school personnel leadership institutes and professional
              development opportunities that are designed to promote standards-based
              instruction, and adoption of systemic reform principles. Some of these will be
              given directly by the initiative team or through sub-contracts, and some will
              be developed by the districts and supported by sub-awards from the initiative. 
                Resource convergence and brokerage-The initiative leadership and field
              personnel will provide assistance to regional school personnel in realigning
              and redistributing funding allocations in a manner responsive to systemic
              reform  . . . .  prmclples.    Technical assistance and on-site follow-up-The
              initiative, through field personnel, will systematically provide technical a
              ssistance to district and school personnel in a manner that will improve
              educational efforts to adopt standards-based practices.        DRSI will
              facilitate educational systemic reform by working directly with district and
              school personnel--some district-specific opportunities and some offered on a
              regional basis. Much of the district-specific work will be the responsibility
              of six Field Coordinators (FCs), who will be assigned to certain participating
              districts.  -
