Title       : Graph Algorithms and Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a9700053

Award Number: 9700053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Berman berman@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Furer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to design and analyze discrete  algorithms
              solving hard combinatorial graph problems.  Because  many of these problems are
              NP-hard, an exact solution is often  not feasible; in such cases approximation
              algorithms are a viable  alternative. In addition to attacking approximation
              problems that  seem to require new strategies, a main goal is to investigate
              the  applicability of design principles developed successfully for  traditional
              discrete optimization problems to comparable tasks  occurring in other areas,
              in particular in Computational  Molecular Biology and Operations Research.  As
              problems of very  similar combinatorial flavor are found in different areas, it
              can  be expected that many solution methods are extendible as well.  For
              example, previous research has resulted in the comparison  method to analyze
              the approximation of the Maximum Independent  Set problem for bounded degree
              graphs.  A bipartite graph is used  to compare an optimal solution with a
              solution found by an  approximation algorithm.  It can be expected that this
              method  will have many more applications. The research plan includes new 
              approaches to algorithm design applicable to various problems in  algorithmic
              graph theory including Steiner trees and the graph  isomorphism problem. 
              Another goal is to study the limits of  approximability by polynomial time
              algorithms.  While several  spectacular results have been obtained in this
              area, for many  approximation problem the gap between  the quality of  the 
              approximate solutions obtained in polynomial time and the proven  hardness
              results remains large.
