Title       : Quantification of the Change in Clay Permeability Due to Contamination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9700036

Award Number: 9700036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annalingam Anandarajah rajah@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The most serious consequence of inadequate design of waste containment
              facilities or a chemical spill is migration of chemicals into groundwater
              supply.  Central to the analysis of pollution transport through soils is
              knowledge of permeability of the soil, before and after becoming saturated with
              chemicals.  The objective of this research is to develop a method of predicting
              the change in soil permeability due to contamination.  The project will seek to
              develop a method of quantifying the change in permeability caused by
              replacement of pore fluid with a certain amount of specific contamination.  The
              mechanical behavior of the clayey soils in this study depends to a great extent
              on the composition of the pore fluid.  When existing pore water is replaced
              with another fluid, the interparticle force may in some cases become more
              repulsive, causing the dispersion of the particles, and yet in other cases
              become more attractive, causing flocculation and shrinkage of particle
              clusters.  A permeability test with water as the permeant can be conducted in a
              reasonable  length of time.  However, a direct method of determining a
              contamination-induced corresponding change in permeability is to perform a
              compatibility test in a laboratory on undisturbed field specimens.  Considering
              the wide variety of contamination possible, this procedure is very time
              consuming and costly.    A new method to estimate the change in permeability is
              based on the Olsen's cluster model, which recognizes that particles are
              arranged in clusters in a clayey soil, and that fluid flow through such a soil
              occurs primarily through inter-cluster pores.  The Kozeny-Carmen equation
              applied to this cluster model was found to represent reasonably well the
              influence of porosity on the value of permeability.  With the pre-contamination
              permeability experimentally determined, this modified Kozeny-Carmen equation
              allows the calculation of the permeability change caused by contamination as a
              function of the change in inter-cluster porosity.  Previously developed
              physico-chemical theories will be used to compute the change in inter- and
              intra-cluster porosity caused by contamination.  Commercial clays (including
              montmorillonite, illite, kaolinite, and mixtures) as well as two natural soils
              will be used in this study. Contaminants will include formamide, ethanol,
              acetic acid, triethylamine, heptane, benzene, and a sample of industrial
              landfill leachate.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
