Title       : Dissertation Research: Anthropogenic Landscapes? The Effect of Prehistoric Human
               Populations on Fire Frequency and Vegetation on the Northern Columbia Plateau
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9700544

Award Number: 9700544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, MS Elizabeth Scharf will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. MS Scharf wishes to determine the effect that
              prehistoric Native Americans had on their environment. This is a very strongly
              debated topic and the answer is important because it helps to determine the
              natural environmental baseline against which human actions should be measured.
              Many scientists have argued that the level of prehistoric technology was so
              low, that prior to European colonization, vegetation was maintained in an
              essentially pristine condition and that the changes which are clearly indicated
              in the environmental record were due to climate change or other non-human
              causes. Others however have maintained that even without metal implements and
              large scale forest clearance, actions by prehistoric Native Americans had a
              significant effect, primarily through accidental and purposeful burning. When
              present in significant numbers, humans cause fires and these occur more
              frequently than those resulting from other actions such as lightning strikes.
              The ecological effects of more frequent burning are very different from
              situations where such episodes are more widely spaced in time.  To examine this
              question MS Scharf will collect cores from a series of lake basins in
              Washington State. She has chosen a region where extensive archaeological
              research has been conducted and changes in prehistoric population densities can
              be calculated over time. Through the study of volcanic tephra and radiocarbon
              determinations, segments of the cores can be accurately dated. Analysis of
              oxygen isotope ratios will provide information on climate change. Pollen and
              charcoal respectively will provide the bases for reconstructing vegetation and
              fire history. Counts of the spore Sporomiella serve to monitor herbivore
              density since these relate to the amount of dung being washed into each basin.
              Through statistical analysis of these complementary data bases, the effect of
              human agency on vegetation can be addressed.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide information on long term human-environment
              interaction, an issue of interest to geographers, paleoecologists and
              archaeologists. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
