Title       : Dissertation Research: Fine Scale Evolutionary Adaptation to Temperature: A
               Comparative Approach Using Porcelain Crabs(genus Petrolisthes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9700701

Award Number: 9700701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9450               (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Somero somero@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Somero  9700701           Marine porcelain crabs of the genus Petrolisthes occur
              over a  wide geographical range--from extremely hot tropical environments  to
              cold north- and south temperate regions--and at widely  different heights in
              the intertidal and subtidal zones. Thus,  congeners of Petrolisthes encounter
              substantial differences in  mean temperature and temperature range, making
              these crabs an  excellent study system for examining evolutionary adaptation to
               temperature within a relatively narrow taxonomic group. The PI's  initial
              studies of two congeners, P. eriomerus and P. cinctipes  from low- and high
              intertidal zones, respectively, indicate  pervasive adaptations to temperature
              and emersion stress. The  proposed studies build on this work, and include, for
              several  additional congeners: (1) determination of upper lethal  temperature
              limits; (2) examination of the temperature sensitivity  of structural and
              kinetic properties of lactate dehydrogenase; (3)  determination of the function
              of leg membrane structures in gas  exchange; and (4) development of a molecular
              phylogeny, using the  sequence of the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene The
              latter  experiments will enable analysis of the interspecific differences  in
              physiological-biochemical-molecular traits to be analyzed in a  phylogenetic
              context, thus enabling putative "adaptive"  differences to be distinguished
              from changes not due to  evolutionary responses to temperatures.    .
