Title       : Double Dirichlet Series and Generalized Metaplectic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9700757

Award Number: 9700757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Hoffstein jhoff@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        9700757  Hoffstein      In this proposal we put forward two new
              techniques for the study of automorphic, Dirichlet and Hecke L-series.  The
              first technique involves the use of double Dirichlet series, associated groups
              of functional equations and a convexity principle for functions of two complex
              variables. Our purpose is to study the properties of L-series of number
              theoretic interest in one variable s that arise in these double Dirichlet
              series as coefficients in the expansion as a Dirichlet series in another
              variable w. Such double series often arise in the theory of metaplectic
              Eisenstein series on higher rank groups.  A good deal of our efforts in past
              years have been devoted to obtaining information about collections of  L-series
              that appear in these double series.  The main tool has been generalizations of
              the Rankin-Selberg method applied to metaplectic Eisenstein series and cusp
              forms.  A major obstacle to progress, however, has been the difficulty of
              analyzing the archimedian factors associated to these L-series that are created
              by the Rankin-Selberg process. It is our belief that the technique described
              above should be applicable in all the cases that are theoretically accessible
              by the Rankin-Selberg method, but the difficulties of working at the infinite
              place should be avoided.  We hope to use this method to prove the entirety of
              the symmetric fourth power  L-series associated to an automorphic form on GL(2)
              .  This would have as a consequence an improvement of the best known exponent
              in Fourier coefficients estimates for Maass forms from  5/28  to  1/6 .  Other
              applications should include the entirety of the symmetric cube L-series,
              non-vanishing of infinitely many cubic twists of a GL(2) automorphic L-series
              at arbitrary points, and mean value estimates for arbitrary order twists of
              Hecke L-series. The second technique is connected to certain generalizations of
              metaplectic forms.  Metaplectic forms on  GL(2)  transform under the action of
              a congruence subgroup of the fu ll modular group. In this project, the
              investigator and his collaborators will construct a new kind of metaplectic
              group with the Kubota symbol replaced by a representation of the congruence
              subgroup. This could then be used to construct an Eisenstein series. The
              investigator hopes that the Artin  L-series associated to extensions of the
              base field with Galois group a subgroup of  G  will be connected to this
              Eisenstein series.  If true, an investigation of integral transforms of the
              Eisenstein series could lead to new information about certain classes of Artin
              L-series.  At the very least, an investigation of such generalizations of
              metaplectic forms should prove interesting, as they appear to be completely new
              objects.      This research falls into the general mathematical field of Number
              Theory.  Number Theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
              numbers,  addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of
              one  whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics
              and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However,
              within  the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse 
              applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and 
              communication systems.
