Title       : Integrated Cost, Time and Quality Manufacturing Evaluation for Design Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9700581

Award Number: 9700581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norma F. Hubele hubele@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chell A. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for development of time-saving tools to connect
              more closely design and manufacturing. The overall purpose of this research is
              to provide a mathematically sound and rigorous approach to the integration of
              decision making in design and manufacturability assessment.  In particular,
              there are three primary objectives of the work:  (1) an integrated model for
              design and manufacturability assessment, (2) a template-free feature
              methodology for complex, multi-axis and rotational machined parts combined with
              a decision analysis approach for assessing time, cost and process variation of
              quality attributes of a proposed product, and (3) a feedback system for linking
              manufacturing evaluation and the design product model. The objective is to make
              recommendations for improving design and manufacturability. This approach is an
              extension of previous work done in generative process planning based on
              template-free features.      The significance of this project is that the
              integrated model takes into account information-based decision making in design
              and manufacturability assessment. By using manufacturing features based on
              machining capabilities of the parochial factory, and not constrained to
              theoretical template features, the emphasis is on the process. The goal of this
              work is the development of theory and tools by which an organization or
              individual can evaluate a product model of a proposed part in relation to the
              factory's specific manufacturing capabilities. The comparison explicitly states
              the decision-making criteria, preference and costs. If successful, this
              flexible model will demonstrate the important elements in manufacturability
              assessment and how this assessment can be linked back to the product model and
              design to investigate redesign options.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
