Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Polymeric Liquids in Extension-Dominated
               Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9700034

Award Number: 9700034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Gary Leal lgl20@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. Milner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1024,1253,1504,1773,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700034  Leal    The ultimate objective of this GOALI award (supported  jointly
              by the Division of Materials Research and the  Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities) is the  development of a predictive basis to describe the  behavior
              of solutions of linear-chain, flexible  polymers in flows that are either
              extensional or  extension-dominated.  The primary emphasis is on  solutions
              that are sufficiently ent  angled that  reptation-based theories are expected
              to apply.  The proposed experimental studies utilize a novel  combination of
              flow cells, known as 2- and 4- roll  mills, that are designed to produce pure
              extensional,  or extension-dominated, two-dimensional flows, that  can also be
              either steady, or time-dependent; and  optical techniques that can probe the
              chain  configuration and the actual velocity gradient at any  point within the
              flow cell.  Chain configuration is  inferred from two-color birefringence
              measurements of  the degree of optical anisotropy in the fluid. A  unique
              implementation of dynamic light scattering  provides a pointwise measure of the
              velocity  gradient for either steady or transient flows.  Comparisons with
              theoretical models are made via  full-field fluid dynamics simulations for the
              dilute,  Boger-type fluids. For reptation-based models  of monodisperse and
              bi-disperse entangled solutions,  measured biorefringence data is compared with
               model predictions using the measured velocity  gradient data as input.  %%%% 
              From a technological point of view, the ability to  predict the behavior of
              polymeric liquids in  extensional flows would allow an understanding of the 
              relationship between material characteristics and  processing.  From an
              educational standpoint, this GOALI project  offers enhancements to the normal
              Ph.D. program.  Graduate students will spend up to a year in  residence at the
              Exxon Corporate Research Laboratory,  where they will work directly with Scott
              Milner, as  well as visiting the Exxon Research Labs at Baytown  where work is
              being carried out on  both polymer  synthesis and polymer processing issues
              that are  directly related to the fundamental objectives of  this project.  ***
