Title       : Scattering and Recoiling Imaging Spectrometry (SARIS) for Surface Composition,
               Structure, and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9700665

Award Number: 9700665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Wayne Rabalais RABALAIS@UH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                A method for the determination of the structure and composition of  solid
              surfaces in real time and in a spatially resolved manner is  the subject of
              this research project in the laboratory of Professor  J. Wayne Rabalais at the
              University of Houston.  The Analytical and  Surface Chemistry Program provides
              support for these studies of  scattering and recoiling imaging spectrometry
              (SARIS) for the real  time analysis of solid surfaces.  Development of
              modelling and  interpretive methodology is a focus of the present research, and
               application to a wide range of surface analysis and thin film  growth problems
              is being carried out.  Completion of a new  instrument for SARIS studies is
              expected shortly, and applications  in several areas of materials science form
              the focus of the work of  this research project.  Real time, spatially resolved
              information  about the structure and composition of solid surfaces is crucial
              to  the understanding of a very wide range of important technological 
              problems, ranging from semiconductor device fabrication to  heterogeneous
              catalysis.  Ion scattering spectrometry is being developed as a method for the 
              real time spatially resolved analysis of solid surfaces.  This  research
              combines instrumental development, calculational modelling  for the
              interpretation of experimental results, and application to  a wide variety of
              important surface analysis problems to provide a  wide ranging project of
              significant technical  import.  Significant applications of this methodology in
              the  analysis of electronic materials are to be expected.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
