Title       : Vibrational Spectroscopy of Ion Solvent Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9700610

Award Number: 9700610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchio Okumura mo@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Mitchio Okumura of  
              California Institute of Technology in his continuing studies on anionic  
              cluster solvation.  Specifically, he uses vibrational predissociation  
              spectroscopy to study the structure of various anions hydrated with `n`  
              molecules of water, as a function of n.  Apparently, experimental studies   on
              cationic hydrate clusters and anions clustered with rare gases   indicate that
              solvation shells form and the ion is in the interior.    Theoretical work on
              halide anionic hydrate clusters suggest, on the other   hand, that the ion is
              bound to the surface of clustered water molecules,   and as the cluster size
              increases, a transition from surface- to   interior-solvation occurs.  Okumura
              will focus on the hydrogen stretching   region; the frequency shifts and
              linewidths in this region should yield   insight on hydrogen bonding both
              between ion and solvent molecules and   among solvent molecules.  In addition,
              two photon (infrared-infrared   double resonance predissociation or
              infrared-ultraviolet vibrationally   assisted photodetachment) spectroscopy
              will be brought to bear on those   clusters that are more strongly bound. 
              Finally, cluster solvation of   acids implicated in stratospheric aerosol
              chemistry will be investigated.    An ab initio theoretical effort will be
              carried out to aid in   determining cluster geometries.    While the aim of
              this work is to investigate ion-solvent interactions at   a fundamental level,
              a second motivation is to elucidate solvation   processes and ionic reaction
              mechanisms of relevance to atmospheric   chemistry.  Many of the systems that
              will be investigated play central   roles in heterogeneous reactions occuring
              in the stratosphere and   troposphere.  Adducts of these ionic hydrates with
              atmospheric species   such as nitric acid and hydrochloric acid may serve as
              models of   intermediates in the adsorption and ionic dissociation on
              atmospheric   aerosols.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
