Title       : Molecular Thermodynamics of Fluids in Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9700999

Award Number: 9700999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Monson monson@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  PROJECT SUMMARY      CTS-9700999  Monson, P.A.  U. Massachusetts Amherst    
                   This proposal seeks support for research in the molecular modeling of two
              important aspects of fluid behavior in porous materials.  Both concern the role
              of the adsorbent microstructure.  Traditionally this has been analyzed in terms
              of the behavior of fluid in single pores.  Although this analysis has led to
              important insights into the problem, recent research in this group and others
              has shown that important effects occur which cannot be understood on the basis
              of single pore behavior.  Effects associated with confinement, wetting and
              adsorbent disorder are all significant in determining the behavior and these
              effects are coupled.  A program of research using computer simulation and
              theory is planned.  Among the issues to be explored are:  extending the range
              of adsorbent microstructures considered; analysis of hysteresis loops in
              adsorption/desorption isotherms; further development and application of
              theoretical techniques; and investigation of fluid mixture phase separation in
              such systems.    The second area for study involves the role of  structural
              deformations in the absorbent microstructure during adsorption.  In almost all
              thermodynamic treatments of physical  adsorption it has been assumed that the
              adsorbent is a rigid matrix that is not structurally altered upon adsorption. 
              While this is an excellent approximation in most circumstances there are now
              important examples where experiments provide evidence of significant structural
              deformations on adsorption.  A program to study these phenomena using Monte 
              Carlo computer simulation is suggested.  The goals are to evaluate different
              models for adsorbent flexibility, develop methods for calculating the
              thermodynamic properties needed for a study of phase transitions in such
              systems and to develop insights into when such structural deformation may have
              a significant impact on the system.
