Title       : Lattice Curvature and Crystal Plasticity: Theory and Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9700358

Award Number: 9700358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233938             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Parks dmparks@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700358  Parks    A  program  of constitutive and computational research  in 
              crystal plasticity is proposed which is based on the concept  of    
              geometrically    necessary    dislocation    density,  proportional  to certain
              spatial gradients of crystal  shear  strain,  as  providing a physical means to
               introduce  size-  dependent  plastic  response  in  crystals.   The   proposed
               formulation   fits  nicely  with  the  underlying   physical  concepts, most
              clearly described by Ashby over 20 years ago.      Among  the  host  of 
              applications  where  scale-dependent  plasticity driven by this mechanism is
              encountered  are  the  grain-size dependence of flow strength and
              work-hardening in  polycrystals   (Hall-Petch  effect),  size   dependence   of
               indentation  microhardness,  particle-size  effects  in  the  dispersion 
              strengthening crystals.  and  others.   In  each  case,   the   attainment  of 
              locally  inhomogeneous   shear  strain,,over     a    characteristic   
              geometric     length  scale,,results   approximately   in   the   storage   of 
               a  geometrically  necessary  dislocations,   where  b  is   the  crystal 
              lattice constant.  These "geometric"  dislocations,  which   relieve  the 
              lattice  incompatibility  which  would  otherwise be introduced by conservative
              dislocation movement  in  producing the strain gradient, act as obstacles to
              other  (glissile)  dislocations,  producing  very  enhanced   local  hardening.
                   A review of the field shows that the computational methods  proposed  for
              dealing with this class of problems  are  both  feasible  to  implement  and
              are  methodologically  in  good  agreement   with   the   materials  science  
              understanding.  Preliminary  computational results  on  a  multi-crystalline 
              aggregate  have  shown a clear Hall-Petch effect,  based  on  "first 
              principles."  The effects of the  extra  dislocation  density,   which  is 
              concentrated  near  grain   boundaries  struggling to deform compatibly, also
              give rise to  distinct  patterning of  strain within the grain.    The proposed
              extensions of the work will address less  idealized versions of the Hall-Petch
              phenomenon, the  deformation of thin metallic layers constrained between 
              ceramics, including thermally-induced misfit strain, and  particle size effects
              in the dispersion strengthening of  crystals.  The results will be of
              fundamental scientific  value, being a first computational thrust into
              quantifying  scale effects in crystal plasticity and the interactions of 
              statistically stored and geometrically necessary  dislocations.  Among the
              industrial applications which could  benefit from a robust computational
              capability to account  for scale-dependent plasticity are the mechanical
              behavior  of multi-layer electronic devices and thin films.
