Title       : Local Atomic Structure and Properties of Transition Metal Oxides using Pair
               Distribution Function Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9700966

Award Number: 9700966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon  J. L. Billinge billinge@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700966  Billinge    The local structure of transition metal oxides (TMOs)
              exhibiting  interesting electronic properties will be studied using the pair- 
              distribution function (PDF) analysis of powder diffraction data.  This 
              technique utilizes Bragg and diffuse scattering over a very wide range  of 
              momentum transfer (Q) and yields the atomic short-range order  directly.  It
              goes beyond the approximation of perfect crystallinity  and allows the local
              structure to be solved on length-scales from 1-20  angstroms. This type of
              structural analysis will be applied to a  variety of transition metal oxides
              such as high-Tc materials, layered  manganites and nickelates and the colossal
              magnetoresistant  manganites.  In these materials, the structure can respond to
              the  electronic state and we will look for correlations between changes in 
              electrical properties and local structural effects.  In this way, the  nature
              of localized electronic states, such as polaronic, bipolaronic  and
              charge-phase-separated states, will be elucidated.  %%%  The great materials
              scientist F.C. Franck is reported to have said  "crystals are like people -- it
              is the defects which make them  interesting".  Indeed, many of the most
              interesting, and useful, new  materials exhibit a  high degree of atomic
              disorder; and it is often  the defects which give  them their interesting
              properties.  This  presents special challenges for solid state physicists and
              materials  scientists because of the difficulty of studying atomic level
              defects  in materials.  We will be using the  technique of atomic pair- 
              distribution function (PDF) analysis of neutron and x-ray diffraction  to
              characterize transition metal oxides; an important group of  materials which
              fall into the above category.  We will use novel data  analysis and modeling
              techniques, developed both by us and by others,  to extract quantitative 
              structural information from the data and  correlate these observations with the
              measured electrical properties.  A number of these material s show great
              technological promise, such as  the high-Tc superconductors and colossal
              magnetoresistant manganite  materials which may have an application in computer
              read/write heads  for  example.  We are attempting to understand the role that
              atomic  defects play in their interesting electrical properties.  ***
