Title       : Decipherability of Codes and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9700228

Award Number: 9700228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francine Blanchet-Sadri blanchet@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The theory of uniquely decipherable (UD) codes has been widely  developed in
              connection with automata theory, combinatorics on  words, formal languages, and
              monoid theory.  Recently, the  concepts of multiset decipherable (MSD), set
              decipherable (SD),  and numerically decipherable (ND) codes were developed to
              handle  some special problems in the transmission of information.  Unique 
              decipherability is a vital requirement in a wide range of coding  applications
              where distinct sequences of code words carry  different information.  However,
              in several applications, it is  necessary or desirable to communicate a
              description of a sequence  of events where the information of interest is the
              set of  possible events, including multiplicity, but where the order of 
              occurrences is irrelevant.  Suitable codes for these  communication purposes
              need not possess the UD property, but the  weaker MSD property.  In other
              applications, the information of  interest may be the presence or absence of
              possible events (or  may be only the total number of events).  The SD (or ND)
              property  is adequate for such codes.    This project extends the
              investigations carried out by several  researchers on decipherability of codes.
               Unique decipherability,  multiset decipherability, and set decipherability of
              codes turn  out to be particular cases of a more general concept of 
              decipherability in monoids which establishes a close connection  between some
              classes of codes, called varieties of codes, and  some classes of monoids,
              called codifiable varieties of monoids.  This connection may allow the use of
              monoids to better understand  decipherability of codes.    Most of the
              procedures are based on game techniques, graph  congruence techniques,
              categorical techniques, as well as  techniques related to dominoes and to graph
              algorithms.
