Title       : SGER: Late Cenozoic Rift Sedimentation, Volcanism and Tectonism in the Northern
               Afar: Geological Setting of the Danakil Region of Eritrea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9700870

Award Number: 9700870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Walter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Human Origins
	      2453 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    415/845-0333

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5928,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9700870  Walter     In 1992, Eritrea emerged as an independence nation after a
              thirty year war.  In June 1993, we contacted colleagues at the Earth Science
              Unit, University of Asmara concerning the feasibility of beginning geological
              and paleontological research in Eritrea.  At their invitation, Walter visited
              Eritrea in July 1994 and met with the University of Asmara, the Geological
              Survey, the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the National Museum, and the Ministry
              of Culture.  This paved the way for a reconnaissance field survey in the summer
              of 1995.  A field permit was granted in March, 1996 (Attachment 1).  We propose
              to investigate the Danakil Depression of Eritrea, which is the northernmost
              segment of the Afar Rift system, itself a major branch of the East African
              Rift.  Specifically, we will investigate the northern Danakil Depression, the
              escarpments adjacent to the Depression, and the sedimentary basins along the
              Red Sea coast north of the Danakil (Fig. 1).  Our primary objective is to study
              the origin and evolution of tectonism, vol.canism, and sedimentation in an area
              where oceanic and continental rift processes merge.  We are specifically
              interested in the interplay between voicanism and tectonism as they relate to
              sedimentary basin formation, and the correlation between terrestrial and marine
              sequences.  A secondary objective is to survley the rift basins for
              hominid-paleontological and archaeological occurrences.  Results and
              observations from this study will provide insights into early hominid evolution
              in Eritrea.  In a broad sense the project concerns the first systematic survey
              of late Cenozoic sedimentary basins in Eritrea for their integrated geological,
              paleontological and archaeological content.  This proposal seeks funds to
              partially support an exploratory field project to begin January, 1997. 
              Investigators in this preliminary phase are: (1) Richard Buffler (University of
              Texas, Austin; sediment basin analysis, regional tectonics); (2) Seife Behre
              (Eritrean citizen, in priva te consulting in Eritrea; remote sensing, regional
              tectonics); (3) Tesfaye Yemane (Eritrean citizen, Ph.D. candidate, Iowa State
              University; sedimentology and stratigraphy); (4) Twiede Medhin Tecle (Eritrean
              citizen; Eritrean Ministry of Mines and Energy; regional geology); (5) Semere
              Solomon (Eritrean citizen; University of Asmara; structural geology; (6) Carl
              Vondra (Iowa State University; stratigraphy, sedimentology, rift basin
              analysis) and (7) Robert Walter (Institute of Human Origins, geochronotogy,
              volcanology, regional tectonics).  Partial support is provided by a grant from
              Anadarko Petroleum Corporation (Budget).  This is a preliminary project in an
              area that has only recently been opened to scientific investigations.  One of
              our goals is to test a sequence stratigraphic approach to terrestrial basin
              analysis.  Stratigraphic sections will be subdivided into a regional framework
              using laterally extensive chronostratigraphic markers, including unconformities
              (base level falls, down cutting), flooding events (base level rises,
              aggradation), and interbedded volcanic units (flows and tephra beds) that witl
              be radiometrically dated.  Several unconformities and numerous volcanic units
              were observed during a reconnaissance survey to this area in 1995.  An attempt
              will be made to identify sedimentary cycles within adjacent marine and
              nonmarine sections, and to relate them to sea level and climatic base-level
              cycles, and to use them as correlation tools.  We will use this information to
              test models of rift evolution.  Our secondary objective, to identify potential
              hominid-bearing paleontological sites, is also a testable hypothesis.  The
              prospect of early hominid fossils in the Dana.U was initially theoretical,
              based on the hypothesis that the sedimentary basins of northern Afar formed
              under similar tectonic, geological, and paleoenvirom-nental conditions as
              hominid-bearing deposits of the central Afar, where several geological and
              anthropological research groups (including IHO's Hadar Research  Project) have
              been working for nearly twenty years.  However, in December 1995 a hominid
              skull (species uncertain) was found by an Italian geological research team (led
              by E. Abbate of the University of Florence) in Plio-Pleistocene sediments near
              Buia along the flanks of the Danakil Depression.  Their discovery is
              significant for it shows that early hominids are indeed present in the late
              Cenozoic sediments of the Danakil basin, and that this secondary objective has
              a high probability of success.  The project merits consideration as a Small
              Grant for Exploratory Research because it is preliminary work on untested and
              novel ideas (e.g., terrestrial sequence stratigraphy and early hominid
              exploration).  There is also an urgency to conduct field work, since the
              Eritrean government may not hold the permit indefinitely.  Preliminary 4OAr/
              39Ar dating of volcanic rocks collected during this study will be done at the
              University of Toronto by RCW in the laboratory of Prof.  Derek York.
