Title       : coNP Sets Whose Average Proof of Membership is Long: TowardsIndependence Results
               for the P Versus NP Question
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9700216

Award Number: 9700216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Rudich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              It is widely believed that NP does not equal coNP.  This  means that there are
              coNP sets for which some elements  require superpolynomial length proofs of
              membership.  Are  there coNP sets for which the average element requires 
              superpolynomial length proofs of membership?  Exponential  length?  One goal of
              this research is to find evidence that  such sets exist.  For example, what is
              a plausible  complexity theoretic assumption under which these average  case
              hard coNP sets exist?   Such a result would generalize  the study of average
              case complexity to work against  nondeterministic algorithms.  Furthermore,
              arguing for the  existence of these sets is part of an approach to proving  the
              independence of P not equal NP.  It has already been  argued that the existence
              of doubly exponentially -hard one  way functions rules out P/poly-natural
              proofs that  SATISFIABILITY requires superpolynomial circuits.  Furthermore,
              this implies that propositional proof systems  with the interpolation property
              do not have polynomially  bounded proofs that SAT is not in P/poly.  It might
              be  possible to generalize the `natural proof/interpolation'  approach in order
              to prove an important independence result  for SAT not in P/poly.  If average
              case hard coNP sets of  the right type do exist, then there are no
              NP/poly-natural  proofs of SAT not in P/poly.  This would imply that 
              propositional systems with the existential interpolation  property do not have
              polynomially-bounded proofs of SAT not  in P/poly. Hard coNP sets would have
              two important  consequences.  1) Generalize the known limits of P/poly  natural
              proofs to NP/poly-natural proofs.  2) Extend  independence results from systems
              with the interpolation  property to systems with the existential interpolation 
              property.  The more powerful independence tools might be  extensible to a proof
              system such as Extended Frege.
