Title       : Eisenstein Series, Continuous Spectrum, and the Relative Trace Formula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9700950

Award Number: 9700950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Rogawski jonr@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rogawski  9700950    This award funds the research of Professor Rogawski, who is
              interested in developing the relative trace formula for a pair (G,H) consisting
              of a quasi-split reductive group G and subgroup H, the fixed-point set  of an
              involution.  The PI intends to investigate problems connected with the
              contribution of the continuous spectrum to the relative trace formula.  The
              first goal of this project is  the study of period integrals  of truncated
              Eisenstein series over  H . The PI intends to develop a  theory of such
              integrals, and in particular, explicit formulas  extending his current work
              with  Jacquet on  GL(n).  The second goal is to evaluate the contribution of
              the spectral kernel to the relative trace formula for G.  These integrals will
              be evaluated using truncation, the explicit formulas, and a suitable theory of 
              (G,M) -families.  These results will be applied as one ingredient  in the
              comparison of the relative trace formula with the Kuznetzov trace formula in
              certain cases.    This proposal is in the part of mathematics known as the
              Langlands program.  This program represents a fusion of Number Theory and
              Representation Theory , and it has been a stimulus to a great deal of recent
              research in both fields. Number Theory is one of the oldest branches of
              mathematics and is concerned with the most basic of mathematical objects, the
              ordinary whole numbers.  However, it turns out that in order to express many of
              the patterns and relations discovered by mathematicians, it is necessary to use
              some of the most advanced and technical theories of twentieth century
              mathematics.  On the other hand, the problems of number theory have provided a
              powerful stimulus to research in other  diverse parts of the discipline.  The
              Langland's program provides a framework for investigating and vastly
              generalizing the so-called reciprocity laws of number theory using the tools of
              infinite-dimensional representation theory.  Although very technical and deep,
              this program  has found astonishing applica tions in areas like theoretical
              computer science (construction of expanding graphs) and coding theory (finding
              optimal Goppa codes).  It has also played an indispensable role in some of the
              recent spectacular developments in number theory itself, such as the proof of
              Fermat's Last Theorem.
