Title       : Evaluation of L-series and Explorations in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9700542

Award Number: 9700542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Lieman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                          9700542  Lieman      This award funds programs for research and
              education centered around  the areas of number theory and computational
              mathematics.  In number theory, the investigator will address several
              outstanding conjectures about the average values of various families of
              L-series of arithmetic interest, including an "on average" version of the
              Lindelof hypothesis in n-aspect; a conjecture concerning the Whittaker-Fourier
              coefficients of metaplectic forms; and a conjecture concerning the average
              values of the L-series of the classical "sum of two cubes" family of elliptic
              curves. The investigator expects to resolve each conjecture by using and
              developing a blend of techniques from metaplectic forms and analytic number
              theory. In addition, the grant includes a summer research project in number
              theory for undergraduates.  This summer program has diverse goals: to increase
              underrepresented minority participation in mathematics and science; to produce
              a self-paced mathematical investigation series which will be available to the
              general on-line undergraduate community; to involve undergraduates in active
              research investigations; and to produce new courses for the mathematics
              department at the University of Missouri. Finally, the investigator will
              undertake an experimental effort to increase graduate student visibility,
              travel opportunities, and professional  experience within the mathematics
              community.      The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early
              development of academic faculty as both educators and researchers. The Faculty
              Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide program that
              provides for the support of junior faculty within the context of their overall
              career development. It combines in a single program the support of quality
              research and education in the broadest sense and the full participation of
              those traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering. This program
              enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on  the
              development of full, balanced academic careers.
