Title       : Stoichiometric and Catalytic Transformations Using Transition Metal Aryloxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9700269

Award Number: 9700269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian P. Rothwell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program with a contribution for instrumentation from the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities supports research on transition metal   aryloxides
              by Dr. Ian P. Rothwell, Department of Chemistry, Purdue   University.  
              Titanium aryloxides are catalysts for regio- and   stereoselective coupling of
              unsaturated organic molecules.  Cyclodienes   and various olefins and alkynes
              have been shown to undergo this type of   reaction.  Here the synthetic
              usefulness of the reaction will be   exploited and the mechanism that controls
              product geometry will be   determined.  In addition, low valent tungsten
              aryloxides will be tested   as 4-electron reducing agents.  A newly developed
              ligand,   2,6-diphenol-3,5-di-tert-butylphenol, will be used to synthesize high
                valent early transition metal organometallic compounds and highly  
              electrophilic, low coordination transition metal compounds.  In contrast   to
              analogous ligands used in the past, this ligand does not undergo   metalation. 
              Chelation via ortho-phenyl substitutents within these   ligands opens the door
              for investigation of new types of metal-arene   bonding and reactivity,
              including CH-bond activation and stereospecific   coupling.  Sterically bulky
              groups bound to transition metals are often effective in   preventing reactants
              of certain size and shape from accessing the metal   center.  As a consequence,
              the reactions that do occur produce products   with a preferred geometry.  In
              this study, bulky alkoxide groups will be   used to effect stereospecific
              reactivity to some titanium- and   tungsten-promoted reactions of utility in
              the synthesis of organic   compounds.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
