Title       : Spectroscopy of Coulomb Interactions in Disordered Electronic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9700482

Award Number: 9700482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Lee ml3g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9700482  Lee 
                This experimental research project focuses on elucidating Coulomb 
              interaction effects in disordered electronic solids. The  project  will 
              concentrate  on  doped silicon, but will  include  work  on  quasicrystals and
              perovskites. Three complementary spectroscopies  will   be  used.  First, 
              previous  work  on  electron  tunneling  measurements  of the single-particle
              density of  states  will  be  extended  down  to  0.1K and to more insulating
              materials,  where  observation  of  strong  interaction effects  such  as 
              multiple-  electron  excitations  and spin correlations  will  be  possible. 
              Second,  noise  spectroscopy will be pursued to characterize  the  random 
              charge  fluctuations in disordered  solids..  Third,  the  finite frequency
              electrical conductivity will be measured through  the  microwave  regime (0.05
              to 20 GHz) in  order  to  probe  the  transport  density  of  states.  This 
              frequency  range   is   of  particular interest because some existing DC
              conductivity results  suggest the presence of a correlation gap of width 8 to
              12 GHz.  %%%  This  experimental  research  project  uses  three  complementary
               techniques  to  study the effects of the  Coulomb forces  between  electrons,
              and between electrons and charged impurities,  on  the  conduction  behavior 
              of disordered electronic  conductors,  with  some  emphasis on the important
              semiconductor silicon. Electrical  conduction  in  silicon results in part from
              dopant  atoms  which  contribute a free carrier, and in this process the
              impurity  site  also  becomes  charged. The random distribution  of  the 
              charged  impurity  sites  alters the motion of the free carriers  in  ways 
              that  are  of  interest  in  this study. Experimental  techniques  include  
              electron   tunneling  spectroscopy,  electrical   noise  measurement,  and 
              finite  frequency  conductivity  measurements.  Results  from  this research
              may include unusual new  effects  or  m aterials  which  may  find new
              application in  technology.  This  research project is interdisciplinary in
              nature and involves both  graduate  and  undergraduate students  who  will  be 
              excellently  trained to enter positions in industry, government or education. 
              ***
