Title       : Dissertation Research:Phenotypic Selection on the Timing of Life History Events
               in Psilocorsis quercicella (Lepidoptera: Oecophoridae) Resulting from
               Multi-Trophic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9700887

Award Number: 9700887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7996               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Marquis robert_marquis@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9700887  Marquis   The PIs' research will explore how two forces, food quality
              and parasite attack, act as selective forces influencing the pattern of
              variation in development time in a population of oak-feeding caterpillars.  As
              such, this study contributes to a basic goal of population biology, elucidating
              the ecological and selective forces that shape patterns of variation within
              populations of organisms.  The PIs' research is important because few studies
              have examined how multiple forces interact to produce such patterns in natural
              population.  Within our study population, caterpillars vary considerable in
              when they begin feeding and how long it takes them to complete development. 
              Caterpillars that feed on low quality leaves may take longer to complete
              development, increasing their risk of being attacked by their natural enemies,
              parasitic wasps whose offspring feed on the body of the caterpillar, eventually
              killing it.  Additionally, a caterpillar's risk of being attacked depends on
              the time during the season during which it develops.  By manipulating these two
              factors (the timing of feeding and the quality of leaves caterpillars feed on),
              the relationship between each of these factors and the rate of parasitism will
              be determined.   The results of this study will contribute to our understanding
              of how ecological forces interact to influence timing in the life cycle of
              insect herbivores.  By documenting the consequences associated with feeding at
              different times or for different durations, this study will provide important
              evidence regarding the relative importance of plant quality and parasitism as
              two biological forces impacting natural herbivore populations.  In particular,
              this study will be one of the first to demonstrate that parasitic wasps
              represent an important selective force influencing the timing of life cycle
              events of caterpillar populations.  Additionally, since these parasitic wasps
              represent an important selective force for economically important pests, this
              study will pr ovide data relevant to the success of long-term biological
              control programs.  Such programs have been developed to control outbreaks of
              economically important pest insects which feed on agricultural products.  In
              contrast to the relatively simple agricultural systems, natural systems are
              highly complex, often involving multiple parasite species attacking a single
              herbivore resulting in a decreased likelihood of outbreak.  Understanding how
              natural populations of herbivores are effectively regulated by their parasites
              is thus critical to control efforts in highly managed agricultural ecosystems.
