Title       : Inelastic Light Scattering Studies of Kondo Insulators and Other Low Carrier
               Density Kondo Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9700716

Award Number: 9700716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Lance Cooper s_cooper@uimrl7.mrl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9700716 
              Cooper  This  experimental  research project focuses on  inelastic  light 
              (Raman  and  Brillouin)  scattering studies  of  the  electronic,  magnetic, 
              and  vibrational excitations of Kondo  insulators  and  related   low  carrier 
              density  Kondo  systems.  The   symmetry,  anisotropy,  and  temperature
              dependencies  of  spin  and  charge  excitations  will  be  studied  to
              elucidate  the  unconventional  ground  and low-lying excited states of Kondo
              insulators. Studies  of the magnetic field and pressure dependencies of the
              charge and  spin  excitations  will  be performed. Finally,  studies  of  the 
              phonon  anomalies  in Kondo insulators will  be  carried  out  to  clarify  the
              nature of the strong interaction between charge  and  phonon degrees of
              freedom.  %%%  This  research  project  involves experimental  light 
              scattering  measurements from "Kondo insulators",  a poorly understood  class 
              of  insulators containing rare earth and actinide elements. These  compounds 
              display  unusual magnetic and  electrical  properties,  believed  to  be  due 
              to the interaction between  tightly  bound  electrons on the heavy rare earth
              or actinide elements,  and  the  outer  shell electrons from the lighter
              elements. It is desirable  to  carefully  measure the novel behavior,  and, 
              ultimately,  to  extend the theory of crystalline solids to cover these cases. 
              If  this  is done the theory can be more confidently applied  to  the  wider 
              range of solids which includes semiconductors, metals  and  others,  which find
              wide application in technology. Results  from  this  research may include
              unusual new effects or materials which  may find new application in technology.
              This research project  is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves  both 
              graduate  and  postgraduate  students who will be excellently trained  to 
              enter  positions in industry, government or education.  ***
