Title       : Applications of Algorithmic Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9700660

Award Number: 9700660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Anderson anderson@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research will address a number of different topics in  the design and
              implementation of algorithms.  The common  theme of the research is application
              of advanced algorithmic  techniques techniques to practical problems.  Four
              specific  problem areas are under investigation:  (1) N-body  Simulation:  This
              is a collaborative project with the UW  Department of Astronomy studying N-body
              simulation.  The  basic objective is to improve the algorithms and data 
              structures used for massive simulations. The scale of  simulations raise quite
              a few interesting computational  geometry problems.  (2) Constraint
              Satisfaction: One method  of developing graphical user interfaces is to use a
              system  of constraints to specify the behavior of the interface.  Algorithms
              will be developed to solve the types of  constraint systems which arise in this
              domain.  There will  be particular emphasis on constraint hierarchies, and on
              the  efficiency of solutions. (3) The Traveling Tourist Problem:  The problem
              is to visit a set of cities in minimum time  where travel is restricted to a
              periodic timetable. In other  words, it is the traveling salesman Problem
              restricted to  public transportation.  Heuristic and exact algorithms for  this
              problem will be developed and implemented. (4) Model  Checking Software
              Specification: A technique from hardware  verification will be applied to a
              major problem in software  engineering.  In the last several years, symbolic
              model  checking has become a very important tool for hardware  verification. 
              This project is to investigate whether model  checking can also be applied
              successfully to evaluate  software specifications.  The specification of TCAS,
              a  collision avoidance system used in commercial aircraft will  be a major case
              study for the project.
