Title       : High-Performance Digital Electronics Using Superconducting Integrated Circut
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9700794

Award Number: 9700794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. Feldman feldman@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Bocko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9700794      ABSTRACT    This award provides funding to the University of
              Rochester under the direction of Dr. Marc J. Feldman, for the support of a
              Combined Research-Curriculum Development project entitled, "High-Performance
              Digital Electronics Using Superconducting Integrated Circuitry Technology." 
              This project is aimed toward students who seek careers in both the
              superconductor and semiconductor integrated circuitry industry.  The
              superconducting electronics "industry"  is still quite small, limited to
              specialized niche applications, however superconducting electronics provides an
              ideal training ground for engineers preparing to join the forefront of
              semiconductor electronic and integrated circuitry technology; the design
              principles and testing methodology employed in superconducting circuitry
              development will clearly have a growing importance to semiconductor technology
              as current trends toward faster and lower power semiconductor circuits
              continue.  A two-semester lecture/laboratory course will be developed for
              Senior undergraduate and beginning graduate students.  Superconducting digital
              electronics is presently practiced at a modest level of integration, thousands
              of active elements, so that students may manage the entire development and
              testing of a superconducting integrated circuit with state-of-the-art
              performance.
