Title       : Nonlinear Equations and Bound Costrained Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9700569

Award Number: 9700569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl T. Kelley tim_kelley@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,9251,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9700569  Kelley       The principal investigator will continue his research
              program in the numerical  solution of large systems of nonlinear equations and
              bound constrained  optimization problems.  In the area of nonlinear equations
              the PI will  expand his recent work on nonlinear equations in two directions:
              (1) pseudo  transient continuation, a popular method for computing steady-state
              solutions  of certain problems in fluid mechanics and combustion, and (2)
              research into  termination criteria for nonlinear iterations with applications
              to the  method-of-lines solution of partial differential equations. The PI will
              also  continue his work on multilevel methods for compact fixed point problems.
               In the area of bound constrained optimization in function spaces, the
              principal  investigator will continue his work on methods for bound constrained
              parabolic  control problems, begin a new project on preconditioners for bound 
              constrained problems in infinite dimension, and redesign his implicit 
              filtering code with a view toward applications in automotive engineering  and
              environmental monitoring. New algorithmic features will be added  to the code,
              the code will be ported to a parallel computer, and  theoretical questions
              related to the new algorithms will be addressed.  Such questions include
              detection of and escape from stagnation in  Nelder-Mead and related algorithms
              and convergence of quasi-Newton  methods in the presence of noise.    Many
              processes and models in engineering and science are expressed as nonlinear 
              equations. Numerical simulation of these processes requires the rapid and 
              accurate solution of these equations and a clear understanding of the methods 
              and their limitations. Simulation is then used in design and optimization  for
              manufacturing. The optimization problems that arise in industrial design  are
              often noisy because of measurement or simulation error. The principal 
              investigator will continue his work on the computational solution of  nonlinear
              equations and optimization p roblems. The work will consist of  study of
              algorithms, needed to ensure robustness and reliability of  simulations,
              implementation on distributed memory computers for rapid  turn around, and
              testing in the context of engineering applications.  Through the principal
              investigator's collaborations with scientists  and engineers in industry,
              national laboratories, and academia,  the work will be used in (a)
              environmental measurement and remediation,  (b) simulation, optimal design, and
              control in the aerospace industry,  and (c) optimal design in automotive
              engineering.
