Title       : Dissertation Research: Sensory Drive for Multi-Modal Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9700763

Award Number: 9700763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Endler endler@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Endler  9700763         The proposed research addresses several key issues in 
              animal communication and signal design using wolf spiders of  the genus
              Schizocosa.  Building on strong evidence that male  wolf spiders have evolved 
              morphological and behavioral  traits used as signals during courtship, a series
              of  experiments will be conducted to examine 2 key factors in  shaping signal
              design:  (1) preexisting preferences for  signals (2) environmental
              constraints.  This study also  examines the importance of a motion-based visual
              display in  female preferences and signal efficacy.  To test the  influence of
              preexisting preference for signals, the  phylogenetic  relationships among
              Schizocosa spiders will be  determined using DNA sequence data.  By overlaying 
              morphological and behavioral traits (male signals and female  preferences
              respectively) onto the phylogenetic tree, it is  possible to determine the
              order in which they appeared  evolutionarily.  If signals used by males during
              courtship  evolved to qtimulate preexisting preference in females, the  female
              preference will precede the male trait on the tree.  In addition, a correlation
              between display and habitat  characteristics, independent of phylogenetic
              history, is  predicted if the environment plays a role in shaping signal 
              design.  Finally, be presenting females with 3-dimensional  animations of
              courting males, this research tests how  specific behavioral traits may
              influence female mate  preferences.
