Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: The Biology of Butterflies of Northern
               Pakistan, Gilgit to Khunjerab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9700669

Award Number: 9700669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24793              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project by Dr.
              David Spencer Smith of Florida International University and Dr. S. Azhar Hasan
              of the Pakistan Museum of Natural History in Islamabad.  The research is to
              extend the study of butterfly fauna of the Karakoram region in northern
              Pakistan to include the region between Gilgit (elevation 4,500 ft) through
              Nagar/Hunza to the Sino-Pakistan border (16,000 ft).  Until recently, this
              region was inaccessible, and it remains a conspicuous gap in knowledge of the
              biology of Pakistan more poorly known than the adjacent areas of Central Asia
              including Afghanistan and the eastern Himalayan.  The terrain is an extremely
              complex system of high mountains and valleys, with vegetation substantially
              restricted to glacier-fed stream courses and irrigated land at lower
              elevations, with extensive arid mountain slopes.  The study area comprises the
              Indus valley and selected side valleys, to assess evolution of faunal
              diversification through isolation, including genetic study.  Diversity of
              species/subspecies will be assessed in the context of altitudinal/ecological
              zonation, range, phenology and ingress of Oriental taxa into a largely
              Palaearctic biogeographical zone.  Scope: The project includes field and
              laboratory studies intended to extend the knowledge of biodiversity of the
              Himalayan region in general, and in particular will contribute to the research
              and training programs of the cooperating institutions.  It will help with the
              conservation strategies of the Pakistan Museum of Natural History.  The project
              brings the expertise and skills of the US scientist with the domestic resources
              available to the staff of the Museum of Natural History in Islamabad.  These
              resources include access to and familiarity with the terrain, the habitat, and
              the use of lands in the region to be studied, as well as the experiences of the
              Museum staff.  Dr. Hasan is the Curator of the Zoological Sciences Division of
              the Museum.  He has a Ph.D. degree from Oxford University and has numerous
              publications on butterflies of Pakistan.  The collaboration should benefit the
              US and Pakistani researchers.  This project meets INT objective of supporting
              U.S.-foreign collaboration when it is mutually beneficial.  The project is
              partially supported by the Division of Environmental Biology.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
