Title       : Applications of Effective Diophantine Approximation to Diophantine Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9700837

Award Number: 9700837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Murray M. Schacher                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bennett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Bennett  9700837        This award provides funds for a project on the
              application of effective techniques from Diophantine approximation (principally
              Pade approximation to hypergeometric functions and the theory of linear forms
              in the logarithms of algebraic numbers) to various Diophantine problems.
              Specifically, Bennett intends to extend previous work on solutions of
              simultaneous Pell equations or, more generally, intersections of quadric
              surfaces, combining the aforementioned methods with recent work of Schlickewei
              and Wirsing and of Voutier. These results have a number of interesting
              applications to bounding the number of integer points or rational points of
              bounded height on certain classes of elliptic curves. They also lead to
              parameterized families of elliptic curves with rank at least two and,
              potentially, to families with rather higher rank. The PI also plans to extend
              these techniques to the problem of absolutely bounding the number of solutions
              to certain simultaneous decomposable ternary quadratic form equations and to
              bound the number of common values of recurrence sequences, as considered by
              Schlickewei and Schmidt. In the latter situation, one would hope for rather
              stronger bounds than those obtained by Schlickewei and Schmidt, though perhaps
              in less generality. In addition to the core program of research outlined above,
              the PI intends to pursue three additional problems. First, the PI will apply
              p-adic gap principles similar to those of Bombieri and Evertse to attack a
              conjecture about the function g(k) in Waring's problem. Second, the PI will
              continue his investigations of the hypergeometric method, with reference to
              improving known bounds upon solutions to the Ramanujan-Nagell and related
              polynomial-exponential equations and to cubic and quartic Thue equations.
              Finally, the PI intends to extend his joint work with N.P. Dummigan and T.D.
              Wooley on representations of integers by binary additive forms, to more general
              decomposable forms.        This research falls into the g eneral mathematical
              field of Number Theory. It concerns the solutions to algebraic equations in
              whole numbers and generalizations. Number theory is among the oldest branches
              of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
              However, within the last half century, it has become an indispensable tool in
              diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
              communication systems.
