Title       : Interior Point Methods: Semidefinite and Nonlinear Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9700448

Award Number: 9700448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato D. C. Monteiro monteiro@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9147,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In a semidefinite programming (SDP) problem, a linear function of  a symmetric
              matrix variable X is minimized subject to linear  equality constraints on X and
              the essential constraint that X be  positive semidefinite.  Several problems
              can be cast as SDP  problems including linear programs, convex quadratic
              problems  with convex quadratic inequality constraints, matrix norm 
              minimization and a variety of maximum and minimum eigenvalue  problems. In
              addition, SDP has many applications in enginnering,  combinatorial optimization
              and statistics.    It is known that several interior point algorithms for
              linear  programs can be extended to SDP problems. As in linear  programming,
              many of these methods are polynomially convergent  and perform very efficiently
              in practice. In particular,  the class of primal-dual interior point methods
              and their higher-  order variants are the most effective interior point
              methods.  In contrast to linear programming, there are many ways one can 
              compute the Newton search directions used in primal-dual  algorithms for SDP.
              For this reason, the theory of primal-dual  methods for SDP is substantially
              more difficult than that for LP.    This project addresses the development of
              the theory and  implementation of primal-dual interior point algorithms for SDP
               problems.    The objectives of this research project include:  1) developing a
              new primal-dual interior point algorithm for SDP;  2) advancing the knowledge
              of the theory of polynomial and  superlinear convergence analysis of
              primal-dual methods for SDP;  3) studying the existence and asymptotic behavior
              of continuous  trajectories for SDP;  4) developing new higher-order
              primal-dual methods for SDP;  5) implementing the new proposed algorithm and
              comparing it  against existing primal-dual interior point methods; and  6)
              extending primal-dual interior point algorithms to the context  of nonlinear
              SDP and complementarity problems.
