Title       : Finite Element Analysis of Strain Localizaion in ExcavationsResearch into
               Network Algorithms and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9700426

Award Number: 9700426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronaldo I. Borja borja@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the study of strain localization on the stability and
              deformation behavior of open and supported excavations.  Previous studies have
              demonstrated the usefulness of the standard finite element (FE) method in
              modeling the process of sequential excavation and construction particularly
              when the soil mass is deforming homogeneously.  However, when a narrow band of
              intense shearing forms within the soil, the standard FE interpolation becomes
              inadequate because it is incapable of representing the effect of shear bands
              which could form across the finite elements.  Therefore, in the regime of
              intense shearing, the standard FE method would predict a stiffer structural
              behavior even though a bifurcated response is already in order.  In braced and
              tied-back excavations, this implies that the predicted movements and support
              loads will be smaller, and so the standard FE solution will err on the unsafe
              side.  This research will address this problem by modeling strain localization
              as a problem of strong discontinuity, which involves jumps in the displacement
              field.  The idea of slip lines in soil mechanics is consistent with this
              analysis.   Within the context of FE analysis, problems involving strong
              discontinuities result in solutions that are completely independent of the FE
              mesh, in particular showing a sharp resolution of the discontinuities even in
              unstructured meshes.  Furthermore, this approach admits the use of traditional
              rate-independent models of continuum mechanics, even those which do not offer a
              characteristic length scale, since the discontinuities are now assumed to
              correspond to sets of measure zero in the mathematical sense.  The
              investigation will cover drained and undrained behavior using a finite
              deformation theory based on multiplicative plasticity, and will involve the use
              of J2 plasticity and modified Cam-Clay plasticity models.  There are numerous
              field cases where strain localizations are known to have formed during the
              process of sequential excavation, and these will be used to test the accuracy
              of the proposed analytical methodology.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
