Title       : Phase Separation and Interfaces of Confined Aqueous Colloidal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9700147

Award Number: 9700147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Robert mrobert@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9700147  Robert Marc/Rice U.    It is proposed to study the phase
              separation, tension and structure of interfaces of confines aqueous colloidal
              systems.  Confined colloid systems play important roles in several
              technological applications, such as paper, pesticides, cosmetics,
              pharmaceuticals, the processing of materials from ceramic powders, and the
              formulation of coatings (paints) for wood and masonry (brick, concrete, cement,
              stone, stucco).    The study of aqueous colloidal systems is motivated by
              current stringent environmental and safety laws enforcing, in particular, the
              reduction or elimination of VOC (volatile organic compounds).  In the project,
              emphasis is given to technologically important aqueous formulations such as
              those containing the nonionic water-soluble polymer HEC (cellulose ether
              hydroxyethylcellulose)  and its hydrophobically modified from HMHEC
              specifically designed for aqueous dispersions.  HEC and HMHEC are the most
              widely used thickeners/stabilizers in latex paints and essential additives in
              numerous materials such as inks, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, foods, and
              ceramics.    The systems to be studied are aqueous colloidal suspensions
              stabilized by non-adsorbing, water-soluble polymers.  Phase separation
              (reversible flocculation) is investigated for confined systems as a function of
              composition and particle/polymer size ratio, and experimental results are
              compared with predictions of statistical mechanics.    For confined systems,
              the interfacial structure, i.e., the variation of the colloidal concentration
              and the pair distribution (correlation) function in the interfacial region, are
              determined by digital videomicroscopy.  These experimentally determined
              interfacial structures will be compared to those predicted by statistical
              mechanics.    The tensions of the fluid interfaces will be determined for
              confined and unconfined colloidal systems, by the capillary rise and sessile
              drop methods and by digital videomicroscopy, in the latter case from the shape
              of  the meniscus away from the sample cells walls.    Together with its
              potential beneficial impact on energy and environmental issues, this research,
              if successful, will contribute to the advancement of knowledge by providing for
              the first time the determination of fluid phase separation of colloidal systems
              in confined geometries, the determination of interfacial tension of confined
              and unconfined colloidal systems, as well as the experimental determinations of
              interfacial structure and of critical interfacial tension of a confined,
              two-dimensional fluid.   ***
