Title       : Investigations into the Laser Ablation Process and the Pursuit of New Chemical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9700116

Award Number: 9700116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374500             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Lester S. Andrews lsa@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              W. Lester S. Andrews of the University of Virginia is supported by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue his matrix-isolation  
              Fourier Transform Infrared studies of reactive species.  In previous   work,
              laser ablation was used to generate hot atoms which subsequently   reacted at
              or near the matrix to form the species of interest.  In this   award, the
              emphasis is on a) understanding the laser ablation process   itself and b)
              pursuing new chemical applications.   In the former case,   e.g., the PI will
              investigate the source for the activation energy of the   reaction in which
              laser ablated Fe reacts with O2 to form OFeO, a   reaction that does not occur
              thermally.  Is the activation energy due to   excess kinetic energy, electronic
              excitation involving metastables or   radiation from the laser plasma? 
              Additions to the apparatus involving   magnetic or electric fields will allow
              manipulation of charged species,   which should lead to an understanding of
              some of the underlying   mechanisms.  Laser ablation experiments with beryllium
              and oxygen in a   neon matrix will be carried out in an attempt to isolate the
              first   neutral neon compound NeBeO.  Finally, the isolation of reaction  
              intermediates in semiconductor growth processes will be attempted.  Given  
              current interest in pulsed laser ablation to grow semiconductor thin   films,
              reactions of GaAs, GaP and InSb with H2 will be emphasized.     Density
              functional theoretical studies will be done in collaboration with  
              Bauschlicher, although the emphasis in this proposal is on the   experimental
              aspects.    Pulsed-laser ablation is rapidly becoming an extremely important
              physical   technique and is currently employed in such diverse areas as plasma 
               physics, analytical chemistry and the growth of superconductors.  Better  
              understanding of the laser ablation process would help foster further  
              applications of this technology.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
