Title       : Topological Minors of Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9700623

Award Number: 9700623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guoli Ding ding@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      Ding  9700623        This award provides funds for an investigation of
              three fundamental problems involving topological minors. The first problem is 
              Robertson's double-path conjecture, which states that if a class G of graphs is
              closed under topological minors and is free of arbitrarily long double-paths,
              then G does not contain infinite antichains with respect t o the
              topological-minor relation. This is a fundamental conjecture in graph theory.
              It relates structural graph theory, combinatorial optimization, and classical
              combinatorics. The PI has made significant progress towards solving this
              conjecture, which includes, but is not limited to, proving the conjecture for
              all minor-closed classes of graphs and for the class of graphs of cutwidth at
              most three. He hopes that his  past experience on this problem together with
              some of his new ideas will help him to settle this conjecture completely. The
              second problem is the edge version of Hajos' conjecture. Recently, the PI has
              established the edge version of Hadwiger's conjecture by identifying all minor-
              minimal graphs with chromatic index greater than n. Now he proposes to study
              topological-minor-minimal graphs with chromatic index greater than n. This is
              exactly the edge version of Hajos' conjecture, which claims that  K_n  is the
              only topological-minor-minimal graph with  chromatic number greater than n.
              This problem relates not only to Hajos' conjecture and Hadwiger's conjecture,
              but also to Vizing's planar graph conjecture and several well-known results in
              this field. The third problem concerns unavoidable graphs of large crossing
              number.  Crossing number is a typical graph parameter that is monotone with
              respect to the topological-minor relation but not with respect to the minor
              relation. A natural problem concerning this parameter is to understand what
              makes the crossing number big. One obvious cause is a high genus for the graph.
              There are also other causes. For example, for some large n, the containment of
              a topological minor D_ n can make the crossing number large. The PI proposes to
              characterize the complete list of unavoidable graphs of large crossing number. 
                  This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
               of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely 
              important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
              such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in 
              computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of 
              combinatorial research.
