Title       : Algorithmic Issues in Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a9700163

Award Number: 9700163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva Tardos eva@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This research is concerned with algorithmic problems  relevant to the design,
              maintenance, and management of high  speed communication networks.  High-speed
              integrated  communication networks are going to be the most important 
              communication platform of the future, presenting new  technological challenges.
              The essence of many of these  technological problems is the interactability of
              certain  simple network problems, such as routing and packet  scheduling.  The
              research is concerned with developing fast  and simple approximation algorithms
              for these combinatorial  problems.  Such algorithms can serve as tools for 
              successfully answering these challenges.  Some of the more  promising
              approaches will be tested on real network data.  Designing efficient methods to
              get packets of information  across a communication network is one of the main
              problems  in implementing Broadband Integrated Services Digital  Network(BISDN)
              standards, such as ATM (Asynchronous Transfer  Mode).  The packet routing
              problem is simply that of moving  packets in a communication network from their
              sources to  their desired destinations quickly, reliably, and using as  few
              resources as possible.  A solution to this problem  consists of two distinct
              (though by no means independent )  parts:  a selection of paths for the packets
              (routing) and a  schedule of the motion of packets along their selected paths 
              (packet switching).  The main thrust of the research is on  the two basic
              algorithmic issues:  routing and packet  switching.  The combinatorial essence
              of many real-life  routing problems is the disjoint paths problem.  Research 
              directions for the routing problem include both off-line and  online problems
              with worse-case, and competitive analysis,  respectively.
