Title       : Process-Oriented Basis Representations for Multivariate Process Diagnosis and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9700191

Award Number: 9700191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119852             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gonzalez-Barreto davdig@ece.uprm.edu; sonia@ece.uprm.edu; laured29@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    789/832-4040

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9700191  Gonzalez-Barreto       Advances in the sophistication of sensoring
              devices have led to production systems that simultaneously monitor many product
              quality characteristics.  The availability of these data provide a great
              opportunity for process monitoring and control.  This research, a collaboration
              between the Pennsylvania State University and the University of Puerto Rico,
              investigates ways to link patterns in multivariate quality data with patterns
              associated with certain kinds of production problems or process parameters.   
              The researchers will develop new statistical process control tools to assist
              quality engineers in directly diagnosing the likely causes of production
              irregularities. Their methodology uses a process-oriented basis approach,
              whereby quality measurement vectors are correlated with hypothesized problems
              in the manufacturing process.  For a given measurement vector, the methodology
              will identify a small set of potential causes, i.e. those basis elements with
              large coefficients.  Process engineers then select appropriate control actions
              in either a manual or automated fashion.       All manufacturing industries
              recognize that quality monitoring and control are critical elements in enabling
              fast and efficient production.    As production processes become more
              sophisticated, it becomes increasingly important not only to monitor product
              quality, but also to quickly and accurately adjust process parameters when
              quality metrics degrade, This research addresses fundamental statistical
              problems in multivariate quality control and process rectification, and as such
              is expected to have considerable impact on the ability of engineers to
              accurately diagnose production problems caused by process variables.  The
              investigators will work closely with three manufacturers of electronic
              components and/or systems in the conduct of this research, thus ensuring that
              the research is relevant to industry needs.
