Title       : Minimizing Tolerance Loss in the Solid Freeform Fabrication of Next Generation
               Tooling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9700320

Award Number: 9700320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297836             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Beuth beuth@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Solid freeform fabrication (SFF) methodologies allow arbitrarily complex shapes
              to be automatically built in a layered fashion directly from Computer Aided
              Design models.  In the development of SFF techniques for tooling manufacture,
              the creation of parts with a high level of geometric accuracy is important. 
              This research focuses on predicting, measuring, and minimizing tolerance loss
              in parts produced by thermal deposition based SFF processes.  With thermal
              deposition, tolerance losses in SFF are caused by residual stress, taking the
              form of large-scale part warping or dimensional changes.  The ability to
              predict and control tolerance loss is critical for manufacturing intricate
              assemblies with interconnecting parts such as injection mold tooling. 
              Experiments and solid mechanics analyses are proposed to measure and predict
              tolerance loss in simple geometries and for fully complex three-dimensional
              parts.  Results will be demonstrated by producing complex shaped,
              multi-material injection mold tooling.   This research is central to the
              understanding of the fundamental issues which control part tolerance loss.  It
              may lead to useful mathematical models for predicting part tolerance loss as a
              function of part geometry.  The model-based test results could provide a good
              indication of the best means for maintaining part tolerance.  The research is
              interdisciplinary in nature and it has a strong tie with industry.
