Title       : Dynamical Systems in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9700910

Award Number: 9700910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal L. Smith halsmith@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Smith  9700910       Dynamical systems that arise in the biological sciences,
              and  especially in population biology, often have special features  that can be
              exploited in the study of their asymptotic behavior.  They are typically
              dissipative and often the different components  have a fixed feedback relation
              to other components.  Systems of  competitive or cooperative type and monotone
              cyclic feedback  systems often arise.  In this project the investigator
              exploits  these special features, particularly monotonicity properties, in 
              order to describe the asymptotic behavior of the system.  He  explores the
              possibility that some classes of systems with  definite feedback relations
              between components have simpler  long-term dynamics than their dimension
              implies.  For example, the  asymptotic behavior of cooperative systems of
              differential  equations is convergence to equilibrium, while competitive 
              systems behave like general systems of one less dimension and  monotone cyclic
              feedback systems satisfy the Poincare-Bendixson  trichotomy whatever their
              dimension.  The application of these  ideas to mathematical models of microbial
              cultures in  bio-reactors is pursued.  Of particular interest is a model of 
              microbial competition for limiting resource in a distributed  environment
              mimicking the large intestine of a mammal.  The  central questions of interest
              to physiologists are what factors  determine the set of micro-organisms able to
              colonize the gut and  what are the chief factors determining the stability of
              the  colony to invasion by ingested organisms.  Modeling issues arise  in order
              to model both advection of the lumen and the effects of  bacterial adherence to
              the intestinal walls.  The model is  intended to focus on these questions.  In
              a different direction,  the investigator continues earlier work aimed at
              simplifying  complicated structured population models (those models that take 
              account of biological structure such as age, size, physiological  state, etc of
              a population) to simpler mode ls consisting of delay  differential systems,
              possibly state dependent.  The rationale is  that there are fewer tools that
              apply to the hyperbolic partial  differential equations that arise in
              structured population models  than there are for delay differential equations. 
              As a particular  example, a model of microbial growth in a chemostat
              incorporating  effects of cell-cycle phase is investigated.       Mathematical
              models play a major role in the theoretical  understanding of many issues in
              the biological sciences.  Mathematical models, as simple caricatures of the
              real phenomena,  allow an investigator to more easily and inexpensively answer
              the  kinds of questions: "what if we change this to that?"  Many such  models
              that arise in physiology, population biology,  bioengineering and epidemiology
              take the form of differential  equations where it is important for
              understanding the  applications to determine what happens to the solutions of
              these  equations over the long run.  The equations that arise in the 
              biological sciences typically have special features not found in  mathematical
              models in the physical sciences.  This project aims  at developing methods that
              exploit these special features to  determine the long-time behavior of the
              solutions and to apply  these methods to problems of current interest in
              biotechnology,  population biology and physiology.  Improved methods will lead
              to  more accurate predictions from existing mathematical models and  the
              ability to analyze more complicated, realistic models.  As  one example among
              several to be considered in the proposed work,  the investigator and P. 
              Waltman propose to study a mathematical  model of microbial growth and
              competition for nutrients taking  place in the large intestine of a mammal.  As
              the intestines are  often a source of infection from micro-organisms, it is
              important  to understand the factors involved in determining the kinds of 
              bacteria normally present in the intestine and the factors that  determine
              whether an invadin g organism (e..g. a pathogen) can  successfully establish
              itself as a member of the colony.  They  intend to construct a mathematical
              model based on a flow reactor  that will exhibit the main features of the
              intestine (flow of  lumen through the intestine and bacterial adherence to the
              walls  of the intestine) in order to better understand the answers to  the
              questions posed above.
