Title       : Dissertation Research: A Novel Method to Distinguish Between Selective and
               Mutational Hypotheses to Account for Substitution Rate Lineage Effects in
               Mitochondria, and Its ...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9700982

Award Number: 9700982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7940               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Lewontin dick@mcz.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9700982  Lewontin    ATP is the high-energy molecule used to drive nearly
              all metabolic processes and is produced in subcellular compartments called
              mitochondria, which have small circular DNA molecules determining some of the
              proteins required for its synthesis.  The remainder of the proteins needed for
              ATP synthesis are specified in chromosomal DNA which resides in the nucleus. 
              The pattern of mitochondrial DNA sequence change varies dramatically in related
              groups of vertebrate species, which could be due either to variation in
              mutation rate or to variation in functional constraint on proteins specified by
              that DNA.  The funded research is intended to distinguish between these two
              hypotheses by examining the rate of DNA change in some of the nuclear
              (chromosomal) genes encoding proteins involved in ATP synthesis in these same
              vertebrate species.  The mutational hypothesis predicts no relationship in rate
              of substitution between nuclear and mitochondrial genes, since the nuclear
              genes are not exposed to mitochondrial mutation rates, while the functional
              hypothesis does predict a relationship, since proteins responsible for ATP
              synthesis function in the same context irrespective of gene location.    The
              distribution between nuclear and mitochondrial locations of the DNA specifying
              the proteins involved in ATP synthesis raises many interesting questions about
              the coordination of function of these proteins.  This research explores one
              aspect of this coordination by asking whether patterns of similarity and
              difference in mitochondrial DNA sequence between species are echoed in
              functionally related nuclear DNA sequence between those same species.  In
              addition, this research introducing a novel approach to the problem, one based
              on variation in rate of DNA sequence change.
