Title       : Applications of the Discharging Method in Graph Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9700750

Award Number: 9700750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sidney W. Graham                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Sanders   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yue Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          Sanders  9700750      This award provides funds for a joint research
              project involving Daniel Sanders and Yue Zhao.  The objective of the research
              proposed here is to attempt to solve several problems which are related to
              graphs embedded in surfaces using a relatively new and unexploited technique,
              aalled the Discharging Method.  These problems include:  (i) Vizing's Planar
              Graph Conjecture;  (ii) the Total Coloring Conjecture for planar graphs;  (iii)
              the Entire Coloring Conjecture;  (iv) the Cyclic Coloring Conjecture;  (v) the
              Nine Color Conjecture;  (vi) further investigation on the k-Walk Conjecture,
              which the principal investigators solved in 1996;  (vii) vertex reconstruction
              of 4-connected planar graphs, which is a special case of the Vertex
              Reconstruction Conjecture;  (viii) edge reconstruction of triangulations of
              surfaces, which is a special case of the Edge Reconstruction Conjecture.  Some
              of these problems have been around for more than thirty years, but still remain
              unsolved.  Recently, the principal investigators have successfully solved
              several problems related to (i)--(vi) by using the Discharging Method.  It
              seems that other methods which were used to attack several of the problems
              mentioned above have stalled, and that the Discharging Method indeed provides a
              far more general and powerful tool for various problems.  The principal
              investigators also intend to continue their search for new areas of graph
              theory where the Discharging Method can be applied.    This research is in the
              area of combinatorics. One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient
              methods of studying how discrete collections of objects can be arranged.  The
              behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern communications. 
              For example, the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone
              systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete
              sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.
