Title       : Subvarieties of Hypersurfaces and Local Positivity of Ample Line Bundles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9700491

Award Number: 9700491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geng Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Xu  9700491    This project is concerned with research in algebraic geometry. 
              Based on the mirror symmetry principle, physicists proposed several years ago a
              formula to predict the numbers of rational curves of various degrees on a
              general quintic threefold.  Recently, Givental showed that the numbers
              suggested by the physicists agree with the numbers of J-holomorphic curves of
              genus 0 of various degrees on a general quintic threefold for a generic almost
              complex structure J.  The principal investigator will work on Clemens'
              conjecture about the finiteness of rational curves on a general quintic
              threefold in each degree.  He is also working towards an understanding of the
              local positivity of ample line bundles on a smooth projective variety through
              the study of Seshadri constants, which is related to a conjecture of Nagata on
              a relation between the singularity of a plane algebraic curve and the degree of
              the curve.  In addition, the principal investigator will study the algebraic
              hyperbolicity of the complement of a general hypersurface and the enumeration
              of algebraic curves on smooth projective surfaces.  Finally, he will work on
              the quantum cohomology algebras of Fano manifolds,  to see whether the quantum
              cohomology algebras of Fano hypersurfaces are semi-simple in the sense of
              Dubrovin.    This is research in the field of algebraic geometry.  Algebraic
              geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has
              had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its origin, it
              treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations,
              namely polynomials.  Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from
              algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding application
              in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and
              robotics.
