Title       : Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9700871

Award Number: 9700871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Ulmer ulmer@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9700871  Ulmer  A fundamental problem in number theory is to construct rational
              points of infinite order on elliptic curves defined over global fields.  To
              date, the most successful general method has used Heegner points. Briefly, one
              defines certain divisors on a modular curve by specifying points in the upper
              half-plane; the theory of complex multiplication allows one to show that these
              divisors are defined over a number field, and using a modular parameterization
              one gets rational points on the elliptic curve.  One needs then to test whether
              these points have infinite order, which can be done by comparing their heights
              with special values of L-functions using the method of Gross and Zagier. The
              first project Ulmer will pursue is extending these methods to the case of
              elliptic curves defined over the fields of functions of curves over finite
              fields.  Specifically, he proposes to develop the analogues of the results of
              Gross and Zagier relating values of L-functions to heights of special points on
              Shimura curves.  This will allow one to prove that certain Heegner points, a
              priori rational, have infinite order and thereby prove the conjecture of Birch
              and Swinnerton-Dyer for elliptic curves over function fields whose L-function
              vanishes simply.  The second project Ulmer will investigate is also related to
              elliptic curves over function fields.  As in the number field case, the group
              of rational points on such an elliptic curve is finitely generated.  On the
              other hand, the group of local points is very big--it is a Zp-module of
              infinite rank.  He proposes to construct a submodule of the local points which
              is of finite Zp-rank and which contains the global points.  In contrast to the
              Heegner point construction, this method yields points which are a priori of
              infinite order; in some cases one can identify a Z-module of points which are
              conjecturally rational over the ground field, thus offering the hope of an
              alternative construction of global points of infinite order.  The third project
              deals with  the mod p Galois representations attached to classical modular
              forms.  Specifically, Ulmer plans to use the existence of a large supply of
              congruences between modular forms proved in his previous work to study the
              geometry of a parameter space of p-adic modular forms constructed by Coleman. 
              He also hopes to relate a property of modular representations (``twisted
              ordinarity'', which is roughly speaking the condition that the representation
              be reducible when restricted to a decomposition group at p) to ``slopes'',
              i.e., to the valuations of Hecke eigenvalues.      This project falls into the
              general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest
              areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry.  This combination has proved
              extraordinarily fruitful, having recently solved problems that withstood the
              efforts of generations.  Among its many consequences are new error correcting
              codes which are used in computer storage devices like compact disks and hard
              drives and secure information transmission schemes which are used for financial
              transactions on the internet.
