Title       : Dynamics and Predictability of Mesoscale Rainband in Lee Cyclones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9700626

Award Number: 9700626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Lackmann gary@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Koch  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9700626  Koch        Progress in forecasting of precipitation and severe weather
              associated with  mid-latitude cyclones has been slow, compared to advances in
              understanding and  ability to forecast the synoptic-scale aspects of cyclones. 
              A major reason for this  has been the lack of data with sufficient spatial and
              temporal resolution to resolve  mesoscale processes associated with
              precipitation bands.  One of the mesoscale  phenomena that has been suggested
              to play an important role in the formation and  modulation of precipitation
              bands is mesoscale gravity waves.  Gravity waves  present a real challenge to
              weather forecasters, because they have been nearly  impossible to detect with
              standard synoptic observations and are not routinely  predicted by operational
              models.  The major observational and modeling  improvements being brought about
              by the National Weather Service Modernization  now affords the opportunity for
              the research and operational meteorological  communities to work together to
              develop improved understanding of these mesoscale  phenomena.  Additional
              research is needed on wave dynamics and generation  mechanisms, and to
              differentiate them from the presence of other mesoscale  phenomena, notably
              cold fronts aloft        A definitive identification of gravity wave generation
              mechanisms and  vertical structure, their interactions with convection, and
              their role in the  cyclogenesis process remains elusive.  One cause for this
              confusion is that the  evidence often suggests more than one mechanism may be
              operative.  Recent  research by the Principal Investigator has focused on
              understanding the forcing,  dynamics, and vertical structure of
              weather-producing mesoscale gravity waves using  primarily surface, wind
              profiler, and mesoscale model data obtained during the  STORM-FEST project. 
              The Principal Investigator has found there to be a  predilection for strong
              waves to be generated in regions of dynamic imbalance  during lee cyclogenesis
              as a jet streak encounters the Rocky Mountai ns.  However,  in at least one of
              these cases, the evidence also suggests that a cold front aloft  occurred in
              close proximity to the waves.        The research to be performed under this
              award represents both a continuation  of the Principal Investigator s past
              efforts and an extension into new but related  directions. The ultimate goal is
              to incorporate observed precipitation band structure  and dynamics into a new
              conceptual model for lee cyclones in the central U. S.  The  first objective is
              to resolve the role of cold fronts aloft versus gravity waves, or  perhaps
              their interactions, in the generation of rainbands.  Secondly, the research 
              will help to remove ambiguities concerning the role of unbalanced dynamics in 
              gravity wave formation.  The third objective, will be to address the issue of 
              mesoscale predictability, in terms of what data and data assimilation
              techniques are  required for mesoscale models to reliably produce observed
              gravity waves.  Lastly,  the Principal Investigator will complete an ongoing
              investigation of solitary waves  and bores generated by cold fronts.       
              Results from this research potentially will have direct and immediate impact 
              on the ability to predict mesoscale gravity waves.   ***
