Title       : Recognizing and Finding Articulated Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9700446

Award Number: 9700446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davi Geiger geiger@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  award  funds investigation of an approach to detecting  and  recognizing 
              deformable articulated shapes, such  as  people  and  animals,  from real
              images.  The approach involves  specifying  a  "language" for representing such
              objects, based on previous  work  on  deformable  template models.  These
              models represent  objects  probabilistically,  where  the  probabilities  are 
              required   to  specify  likely geometric deformations of the object and  of 
              the  imaging  function. To handle effects such as lighting changes  or  partial
               occlusion  of  the object.  These models,  however,  are  complex,  and  so 
              detecting  them  in  images  poses  formidable  combinatorial optimization
              challenges.  This research explores  a  strategy  which makes use of a small
              number of image "primitives"  which can be thought of as key features.  These
              may include  both  local   image  structures  such  as  image  corners  and  
              larger  structures  such  as symmetric shapes.  These  should  be  simple 
              enough  that well-established optimization techniques can  detect  them 
              optimally.  The primitives are desaribed probabilistically,  like the object
              models, enabling the use of information theory to  quantify  how  much 
              information a particular primitive  provides  about the preseance or absence,
              or configuration of the object in  an  image.  It also enables optimal choices
              of primitives  to  be  made,  with  the  goal of finding primitives  that  are 
              easy  to  compute and convey maximal information about the objects  in  the 
              image.
