Title       : Metallapolyynes: Archetypes for Understanding and Rationally Designing
               Conjugated Transition-Metal Compounds and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9700451

Award Number: 9700451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Hopkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Michael D. Hopkins, Department of Chemistry, University of   Pittsburgh, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for the study of   conjugated transition metal compounds and
              materials. The project aims to   answer two questions: (1) How does
              metal-for-carbon substitution affect   the electronic structures of
              pi-conjugated organic compounds? and (2)   What implications does this hold for
              improving the technological   properties of these materials? A series of
              polyynes in which carbon atoms   are systematically replaced by metal centers
              will be prepared and their   bonding probed by electronic and vibrational
              spectroscopy,   electrochemistry, and X-ray crystallography. Initially the
              study will   concentrate on simple compounds in order to establish fundamental 
               structural and bonding properties of metal-ligand multiple bonds. Then  
              increasingly complex compounds, which potentially contain metal atoms   within
              conjugated pi systems, will  be studied in order to assess the   nature and
              extent of a metal atom's participation in delocalized bonding   networks.
              Variables to be investigated include the nature of the metal,   its ligands and
              oxidation state, the length of the polyyne chain, and the   number and
              distribution of metal centers within the pi network.   This work is significant
              at a fundamental level because the proposed   compounds represent a rare
              opportunity to examine systems that can be   theoretically described both using
              models commonly employed for organic   and others that are more appropriate for
              inorganic systems. The outcome   will be conceptual bridges to link the two
              ways of considering the   electronic structure of molecules. From a more
              practical viewpoint, the   results will be applicable to the design of optical
              and electronic   materials. Because of close structural and electronic
              relationship   between the metallapolyynes prepared in this investigation and
              the   conjugated organic materials currently used in a number of applications, 
               the correlations established during this project will allow the  
              technologically valuable properties of latter to be extended in a   rational
              fashion to the former. Two specific properties of   metallapolyynes that will
              be developed are intramolecular electronic   coupling and nonlinear optical
              responses.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
