Title       : Problems in Analytic Theory of L-functions and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9700488

Award Number: 9700488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49591              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Stopple stopple@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ozlem Imamoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        9700488  Stopple/Imamoglu    This award funds research by the second
              named principal investigator on the following topics. First, she proposes to
              investigate a series of conjectural liftings from classical modular forms to
              Siegel modular forms.  Second, she proposes to establish a Kronecker limit
              formula for the symplectic group of degree 4. This involves finding the Laurent
              series expansion of Siegel Eisenstein series about its pole. Such a result
              would have applications to arithmetic and geometry. Third, with J. Hoffstein,
              she proposes to develop  a generalization of metaplectic forms. These new
              forms, as in the case of metaplectic forms, are expected to lead to striking
              results in the theory of L-functions. Last, jointly with L. Walling, she
              proposes to work on generalized Jacobi theta functions. These theta functions 
              can also be used  to make an appropriate  Saito-Kurokawa conjecture since they
              provide a constructive example of such a lift.     This research falls into the
              general mathematical field of Number Theory.  Number Theory has its historical
              roots in the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those
              dealing with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is among the
              oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and  communication systems.
