Title       : Proposal for Research on Fault Resistant Cryptography and the Hardness of
               Factoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9700283

Award Number: 9700283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Lipton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Recently, a new threat model has been discovered which can  be used to break
              many existing cryptographic protocols.  The  threat is based on the fact that
              certain hardware may be  induced to perform miscalculations. This scenario is 
              applicable to tamper proof devices which can be made to  miscalculate by
              operating them in an extreme physical  environment.  The possibility of
              attacking various  cryptographic protocols using hardware faults raises many 
              interesting open problems.  First, it now becomes desirable  to construct
              efficient schemes which are resistant to  attacks using hardware faults.  The
              project will develop the  theory necessary to prove the fault resistance of
              certain  schemes. Other cryptographic schemes will be analyzed to  determine
              whether they are susceptible to the new attack.  The hardness of factoring
              integers is a standard  cryptographic assumption.  Various mathematical
              implications  of this assumption will be studied.  The previous results  show
              that the hardness of factoring implies that polynomials  having many roots in
              low algebraic extensions of the  rationals are hard to evaluate.  Generally
              speaking,  criteria for when polynomials are hard to evaluate are  useful in
              many applications. Further applications of the  hardness of factoring will be
              studied. Specifically, the  goal is to construct new classes of polynomials
              which  are hard to evaluate, unless factoring is easy.  There are  several such
              candidates, for example, certain polynomials  which generate Galois extensions
              over the rationals.  Estimating the difficulty of evaluating certain
              polynomials  based on the type of number fields they generate is a  promising
              area of research.  Such results will hopefully  shed light on the complexity of
              evaluating polynomials.***
