Title       : Operator Algebras and Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9700130

Award Number: 9700130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Palle E. Jorgensen palle-jorgensen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Jorgensen    Spectpal pairs were studied first by Palle E.T. Jorgensen
              and Steen Pedersen in connection with their work on the Fuglede conjecture, but
              they turned out later to also have connections to wavelet theory, fractal
              iterations, Julia sets, and quasi-crystals. The harmonic analysis which is
              needed will be project 1 of the proposal, and it is based on analysis of
              certain representations of the Cuntz algebras, and on endomorphisms of von
              Neumann algebras. This representation theory is further expected to be useful
              in connection with the study of concrete geometric tiling questions. But the
              representations  needed are type III (generically), while some of the methods
              from earlier work are type I. Nonetheless they have already proved amenable for
              adaptation to the infinite case. Jorgensen also plans to collaborate with his
              colleague Florin Radulescu on dynamical systems of endomorphisms which arise in
              Berezin quantization. The index theory which is available for the
              time-independent systems is likely to help us understand the time-dependent
              case which is the result of the operator algebraic approach to Berezin
              quantization.    The proposal is in the interface of basic mathematics with its
              technology applications.  The latter refer to mathematical tools from harmonic
              analysis and wavelet theory which are applied in current data-compression
              algorithms.  These application spin-offs include "fingerprint electronic
              storage" and high-resolution television; but the proposal is on the theoretical
              side of the equation.  There are two basic operations from mathematics
              (translation and scaling) which go into the filters that govern algorithms, and
              the repetition in the recursive process refers to the preservation of the same
              minimal data from one step to the next.  Hence the term "filter bank".
              Surprisingly, and noted by the proposer in recent research papers, these
              filter-constructions may be understood as representations of the kinds of
              algebras which form the basis for the proposed researc h.
