Title       : Minimizing Environmental Impact of Chemical Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9700537

Award Number: 9700537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan F. Brennecke jfb@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. McCready  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Schmitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Stadtherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9700537  Brennecke      Abstract    The award provides funding to the
              University of Notre Dame, West Virginia University and the University of Nevada
              at Reno, under the direction of Dr. Joan Brennecke, for the support of a
              Combined Research-Curriculum Development project entitled, "Minimizing
              Environmental Impact of Chemical Manufacturing Processes."  This project will
              incorporate the results of recent and ongoing research on environmentally
              conscious chemical manufacturing processes into the chemical and metallurgical
              engineering curricula.  The project will seek to develop the students'
              appreciation of the impact of pollutant release from chemical processes and of
              the environmental, ecological and long term economic benefits of pollutant
              minimization or elimination.  It will also equip students with an active
              knowledge of the technology being developed to minimize the environmental
              impact of chemical manufacturing processes.  This will be accomplished through
              involving students in the research efforts and by incorporating the results of
              that research into two new elective courses and into instructional modules that
              will be integrated throughout the chemical engineering curriculum.  This
              project's ultimate goal is to produce chemical engineering professionals who
              are equipped with the awareness, knowledge and ability to minimize the
              environmental impact of the chemical manufacturing processes that they oversee.
