Title       : Dissertation Research: Feeding Ecomorphology of Crotaphytid Lizards:
               Illuminating Casuality Through Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9700914

Award Number: 9700914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvalee H. Wake mhwake@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wake  9700914             Ecomorphology is a sub-discipline that has emerged
              from  interest in the relationship between organismal morphology  and natural
              history. Morphology includes both structure and  function. Relating variation
              at these levels to variation in  whole-organism performance can help to reveal
              causality  between morphology and performance. This, combined with 
              demonstration of the importance of performance measures in  organismal ecoloey
              or behavior, makes ecomorphological  inference more robust. This is a proposal
              to study the  feeding ecomorphology of the monophyletic lizard family 
              Crotaphytidae. Crotaphytids show trends in feeding apparatus  structure,
              feeding behavior, and dietary ecology. Bite force  is an important performance
              variable influencing feeding  behavior and dietary ecology. Structural and
              functional  analyses of the feeding apparatus of three crotaphytid taxa  will
              be used to construct computer models. These models will  generate predictions
              of bite force that will be tested by  bite-force measurement. Simulated
              structural and functional  perturbations of the models will help to identify
              causality  between structural and functional variation and biteforce 
              variation. Identification of such causality links studies of  morphology to
              ecology and behavior and, ultimately,  facilitates rigorous evaluation of
              ecomorphological  evolution.
