Title       : Research in Large Deviations and Applications to Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9700852

Award Number: 9700852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82488              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Ellis rsellis@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9700852  Ellis   This research will focus on two broad areas: (1) a weak
              convergence approach to   the theory of large deviations and (2) large
              deviations for jump Markov processes and   applications to queueing networks.
              In area (1) the research is based in part on a new book   written jointly with
              Paul Dupuis. It consists of the following: (a) deriving representation  
              formulas for new classes of processes, including jump Markov processes; (b)
              proving the   Laplace principle for diffusions and other processes having
              discontinuous statistics with   various geometries; (c) proving the Laplace
              principle for a random walk model with state-  dependent noise; (d) proving the
              Laplace principle for empirical measures of Markov   chains and related
              processes, including measure-valued processes with state dependencies;   (e)
              generalizing a new formula on the Legendre-Fenchel transform of compositions of
                convex functions.  Research in area (2) consists of the following: (a) using
              a new   representation formula for large deviation probabilities together with
              weak convergence   methods to obtain an explicit formula for the rate function
              for a number of queueing   models of interest; (b) extending a recent paper on
              the large deviation analysis of general   queueing systems to other queueing
              models, including state-dependent queues; (c)   evaluating the exact large
              deviation rates and determining the overflow paths   corresponding to certain
              overflow events in a number of queueing networks.   This research program in
              large deviations is motivated by applications to queueing   networks, which are
              of fundamental importance in communication and high performance   computing. 
              The work of the Principal Investigator over the past few years, which  
              culminated in a number of important papers and a research-level book, develops
              a set of   new and powerful techniques for studying the behavior of such
              networks. For example, a   critical problem in the design of high speed
              networking technologies is to size the buffe rs   at communications switches
              within these networks so that certain overflow probabilities   are suitably
              small. Another critical problem in the design of very large multiprocessor  
              systems is to estimate the probability that the system will fail in some time
              interval. This   research will be adapted to studying these and related
              problems.
