Title       : A Strongly Coupled Analytical Study of the Interaction of Foreign Particles with
               a Solid-Liquid Interface in the Presence of Morphological and Fluid
               Instabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9700380

Award Number: 9700380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Layachi Hadji lhadji@bama.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. J. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Hadji  9700380       The objective of this project is to conduct an analytical
              study of  the interaction between a growing crystal interface and insoluble 
              spherical foreign particles. A directional solidification set-up  is considered
              to study the coupling between the distributions  of temperature and
              concentrations, fluid flow due to particle  movement, convection, solute
              segregation, interfacial deformations  and particle presence near the moving
              interface. The mathematical  model, based on the conservation equations of
              energy, solute, mass and  momentum, is complemented by a set of appropriate
              boundary conditions.  The resulting non-dimensional system displays several
              dimensionless  groupings, all of which have a role in the subsequent analysis. 
              This will predict the dominant crystal morphology, stability criteria  for
              interface shape, convection and density advection effects  and  determine the
              threshold parameter values that separate pushing  and capture of particles. A
              weakly nonlinear bifurcation analysis  will be used to determine if the
              theoretical predictions can  be verified experimentally. The methodology
              requires the use  of perturbation techniques, asymptotic analysis, the
              bispherical  coordinate system, bifurcation methods  appropriate to weakly
              nonlinear  analysis, and some numerical methods.         As we approach the
              twenty-first century, scientists and  technologists are under increasing
              pressures to satisfy  society's need for materials of lower weight and higher
              reliability.  For instance, in the aerospace industry, a reduced weight
              facilitates  an increased payload capacity in flight, operating cost savings,
              higher  speeds and longer range flights. However, lighter materials need to be 
              strengthened by the addition of tiny particles of a different  substance. This
              in turn complicates the manufacturing process.  The final cast should have
              these particles uniformly distributed  but, in practical terms, this is
              difficult to achieve. Imperfections  arise due to the migration  of the
              particles in the melt during  the solidification process, and are detrimental
              to the quality of the  end product. Some indications of how to overcome these
              difficulties  have been provided by experimental work. In view of the large
              number  of processing and physical variables, these partial solutions  are
              unable to clearly relate the processing history to the constitution  of the
              cast. There remains the crucial task of quantifying the  influence of the
              various processing parameters on the final cast,  and this is the aim of our
              analytical work.
