Title       : Theoretical Stereochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9700360

Award Number: 9700360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Mislow kmislow@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Dynamics Program supports Professor Kurt Mislow at Princeton  
              University for his studies of theoretical stereochemistry.  Professor   Mislow
              addresses a number of basic questions in stereochemistry by use of   both
              non-numerical and computational methods, with special emphasis on   topological
              aspects.  An algorithm will be developed to implement a   measure of
              topological chirality which is based on the least number of   cut-and-paste
              operations that relate a chiral construct to the nearest   achiral one.  The
              Protein Data Bank will be explored, specifically to   correlate biological
              function with a sense of topological chirality of   non-heme iron-sulfur
              proteins, and, more generally, to search for the   presence of additional knots
              and links in protein structures.  The   existence of flype groups, related by
              operations which transform one knot   or link projection into another, will be
              assayed.  In conjunction with a   study of the rotatory power of knots as a
              function of conformation, the   relative stabilities of knotted hydrocarbon
              chains will be computed in   order to determine their dependence on chain size
              and number of   crossings.  Professor Kurt Mislow's studies in the Department
              of Chemistry at   Princeton University address the often-intriguing issues
              presented by   molecules displaying unusual three-dimensional structures
              resulting from   the way in which the component atoms making up the molecules
              are   interconnected.  Molecules displaying the property of chirality, whereby 
               mirror image forms of a molecule are not identical but rather are related   as
              a right hand is to a left, are analyzed, providing a quantitative   measure of
              chirality.  Still more unusual molecular topologies, including   molecules
              containing knotted or inter-linked chains, are also studied.    Far from
              esoteric, these studies bear direct relevance to biological   molecules such as
              proteins and nucleic acids, structural analysis of   which has revealed the
              possibility of naturally-occurring knotted and   linked structures.  In
              addition to providing insights into these   biological systems, theoretical
              analyses of non-trivial molecular   topologies will prompt the preparative
              chemical community to prepare real   molecules displaying these unusual
              topologies.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
