Title       : Formal and Computational Studies of Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9700297

Award Number: 9700297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Kouri kouri@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting   Professor
              D. Kouri of the University of Houston.  In this next grant   period he we will
              continue to pursue computational implementation and   testing of the
              Time-Independent Wavepacket Divide-and-Conquer (TIWDC)   approach.  The
              immediate objectives are: a) Testing the DC-procedure   whereby the initial
              arrangement is also uncoupled from the strong   interaction region.  b) Testing
              the DC strategy for uncoupling the   vibrational-rotational, pure rotational,
              and elastic final state   interaction regions so that the maximum benefit of
              the approach can be   realized. c) Applying the DC procedure to H+O2 -> OH+O in
              order to try   and carry out the first ever completely ab initio calculation of
                state-to-state reaction cross sections for the system as a function of  
              energy.  He also will carry out the first full 3D tests of the TIWDC   method
              for photodissociation of HOD, with emphasis on a comparison with   experiment
              when the HOD is vibrationally hot.  Secondly, he will continue   development of
              the distributed approximating functionals (DAFs),   including the exploration
              of a new class of DAFs that are related to   various interpolation schemes. 
              These investigations will also study the   fitting of multidimensional
              potential energy surfaces using finite   amounts of ab initio input data, with
              particular emphasis on   electronically non-adiabatic systems.  Third, he will
              continue studies of   a new method being developed for diagonalizing extremely
              large matrices   with very dense eigenspectra.  Finally, he will begin work on
              developing   and testing new approximation methods for solving the quantum
              equations   for reactions involving more than 4 atoms in order to simulate more
                complex chemical systems.   The research supported here focuses on developing
              robust, efficient, and   highly stable methods for solving the partial
              differential equations   which are used to describe fundamental chemical
              reaction processes.    Because of the enormous complexity of the equations,
              solutions are   feasible only by using the most powerful, high-speed,
              large-memory   computers.  However, the development of a detailed understanding
              of the   elementary chemical reaction process can open up the possibilities of 
               controlling chemical reactions in order to maximize desired products.    These
              studies are also used in simulating numerically fundamental   processes that
              occur in the earth's atmosphere, in order to understand   and better deal with
              pollution.  Such studies also find application in   modeling the detailed
              chemistry of combustion in order to develop   pollution-free propulsion
              systems.  In addition, some of the techniques   being developed can also be
              used to solve other, enormously important   partial differential equations. 
              Thus, the techniques being developed   show great promise for making it
              possible to solve equations ranging from   long term weather forecasting, to
              other equations used to model   combustion.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
