Title       : MPPPD: Developing Accessible Science Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9700150

Award Number: 9700150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99943              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Goldthwaite john.goldthwaite@arch.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: John Goldthwaite      The project will develop resource materials to assist
              science  teachers provide students with disabilities the ability to 
              participate in the conduct of science laboratory experiments.  Staff from
              Georgia Tech's Center for Rehabilitation Technology  will work with the
              institution's Chemistry and Physics  Departments in setting up twelve computer
              controlled lab  experiments that are representative of first year chemistry and
               physics lab exercises.  Staff will  test the combination of  computer access 
              and computer controlled laboratory technology  and develop a resource guide
              that will permit teachers to learn  to operate these technologies
              independently.  The resource guide  will provide teachers the information they
              need for modifying  existing labs and for operating computer controlled
              systems.  It  will also cover use of computers equipped with software needed by
               blind, visually impaired and mobility impaired students.  The  project's
              activities and resulting resource guide  should be  valuable as well to the
              many schools that do not have modern  science laboratories.  Many teachers are
              developing simulations  of laboratory experiments to use as supplements to, or 
              substitutions for, chemistry and physics laboratory experiments.  Although
              simulations are not a replacement for fully accessible  laboratories, they may
              be a good alternative in the absence of  well-equipped laboratories, and they
              should be appropriate for  some students with severe disabilities who would not
              otherwise be  able to participate in laboratory experiments.  Project staff 
              will identify and document existing laboratory simulations and  low tech tools
              and techniques for making laboratory experiments  accessible.  Staff will test
              a sample of twenty simulation  programs with computer access software to be
              sure that the  simulations are fully usable by students with disabilities.  The
               resource guide will contain a comprehensive list of these  simulations and
              other low tech tools and techniques  used as  laboratory accommodations.
