Title       : Analysis and Characterization of Multi-Phase Systems with Application to Optimal
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9700638

Award Number: 9700638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Lipton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1037,9146,CVIS,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9700638  Lipton    The analysis and optimal design of multi-phase systems is
              central to the   development of  advanced materials for use in electronics,
              transportation   systems, and aerospace applications. From the perspective of
              human   physiology it is critical to understand transport phenomena in complex 
               biological systems. This project addresses areas where improved knowledge   of
              transport properties for  multi-phase systems will have a large impact on  
              technology. A significant part of this project focuses on the behavior of  
              composites with imperfectly bonded components. Imperfect bonding   between
              constituents is often the rule. Imperfect bonds are frequently the   result of
              damage to the structure incurred during use. The first project treats   the
              design of fiber reinforced materials in the presence of imperfect bonding  
              between the fiber and the matrix material. The goal is to provide rigorous  
              design rules for the optimal performance of imperfectly bonded fiber  
              reinforced structures. We consider next the transmission of oscillating  
              electric signals through structural materials possessing imperfectly bonded  
              constituents. We look for new mathematical methods that will deliver  
              structural information from the transmitted signal. These methods will rely  
              on the physics of the imperfect bond  separating the constituents. The third  
              project treats  the transport of ions in a biological system. The goal is to  
              understand the effect of cell geometry on the ionic transport within living  
              tissue. Last, the small geometries necessary for the layout of very large  
              scale integrated circuits incur high concentrations of the electric field along
                conducting paths. These concentrations often result in the failure of an  
              electronic devise such as a microprocessor. The conducting paths are often  
              made from aluminum alloys of three or more materials. We seek the best  
              geometries among multi- phase conductors so as to minimize electric field  
              concentrations.    The analysis and o ptimal design of multi-phase materials is
              central to the   development of advanced materials for use in electronics,
              transportation   systems, and aerospace structures. From the perspective of
              human   physiology it is critical to understand transport phenomena in complex 
               biological structures. This project addresses areas where improved   knowledge
              of transport properties for multi-phase structures will have   impact on
              technology and medicine. Fiber reinforced structures appear in   many
              applications ranging from golf clubs to the rotors on windmills. Over   time
              the adhesion between the fibers and the surrounding material is   compromised
              by use. We investigate the optimal design of such structures   taking into
              account the imperfect adhesion between fiber and surrounding   material. Our
              goal is to design more durable products that last longer than   conventional
              fiber reinforced products. Next, we investigate how to reduce   the failure of
              microelectronic devices due to high concentrations of electric   current. The
              small geometries used in the layout of integrated circuits   require very
              narrow strips of metal to conduct electric currents. These strips   often fail
              because of the  high volume of current that they carry. The   conducting strips
              are often made from a mixture of Aluminum, Copper , and   Silicon. We seek the
              best deployment of the  Copper and Silicon in the   metal strip to prevent
              failure. Last, we attempt an improved characterization    of inter cellular
              ionic transport. From the stand point of human physiology,   an  understanding
              of such transport for human brain cells may offer early   detection of the
              extent of damage caused by stroke.
