Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of Territory Quality and Resource Distribution on
               Movement and Space Use of Meadow Voles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9700900

Award Number: 9700900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5709               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy G. Solomon solomong@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9700900  Solomon  Both individuals and populations should be strongly influenced
              by habitat quality.  In turn, habitat quality can be influenced by many
              factors, such as the abundance and distribution of food, cover, and the
              presence of potential mates or competitors.  Individuals within a population
              usually do not utilized all available habitat.  The portion of habitat that
              individuals use on a daily basis is referred to as their home range and if this
              space is defended, it is referred to as their territory.  The objective of this
              study is to determine the influence of territory quality and resource
              distribution on movement and space use of meadow voles.  Female meadow voles
              are territorial during the breeding season and occupy relatively small ranges. 
              Male meadow voles are non-territorial throughout the year and occupy ranges
              several times larger than female ranges.     It has been hypothesized that
              female territoriality should be more pronounced in high-quality habitat
              relative to low-quality habitat and should be more evident when resources are
              clumped rather than evenly distributed.  We will test these hypotheses by
              examining patterns of overlap among female territories; low levels of overlap
              indicate territoriality whereas high levels indicate non-territorial behavior. 
              If overlap is lower in high-quality habitat than in low-quality habitat and
              lower on clumped than evenly distributed resources these hypotheses will be
              supported.     Offspring born on high-quality territories are more likely to
              remain in the natal area than offspring born on low-quality territories. 
              Additionally, offspring that leave high-quality territories should be older
              than offspring that leave low-quality territories.  We will test these
              hypotheses by examining the proportion of offspring that remain in the natal
              area as adults and the ages of individuals that leave the natal area.   
              Understanding how meadow voles respond to territory quality and resource
              distribution is important since these animals can alter pla nt communities thus
              influencing ecological succession, are an important prey species for many
              predators, and are known to be an important agricultural pest.  Determining how
              meadow voles respond to habitat quality and resource distribution could
              therefore lead to a better understanding of ecological succession, how predator
              assemblages respond to resource and prey abundance and distribution, and help
              design new agricultural practices that can help reduce vole damage.
