Title       : Combined Research-Curriculum Development: Indoor Wireless Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9700866

Award Number: 9700866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrianos Papamarcou adrian@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Tretter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nariman Farvardin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leandros Tassiulas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evaggelos A. Geraniotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                CDA-9700866    Papamarcou, Adrianos   Farvardin, Nariman   Geraniotis,
              Evaggelos   Tassiulas, Leandros   Tretter, Steven     University of
              Maryland-College Park    Indoor Wireless Project    This project addresses the
              problem of effectively educating seniors and beginning graduate students in the
              fundamentals of wireless communication technology.  The project will provide
              hands-on learning in the context of a course title Indoor Wireless Project. 
              The course will be taught by the team of PI's who are actively engaged in
              research in wireless communications and have significant experience in hardware
              implementation of communication and digital signal processing systems.  The
              project will carry two credits per semester and will require a two-semester
              commitment from participants.  It will be offered in two sections accommodating
              a total of 24 students, who will be working in teams of three.  Graduate
              students involved in parallel research efforts will also participate.  The
              overall goal will be to design, implement and test an indoor wireless network
              for two-way voice communication, data transfers and (eventually) video
              transmission on an adaptable hardware platform based on programmable digital
              signal processor chips.  The first-year goal will be to implement and test a
              simplex wireless link between two portables, i.e., one transmitting and the
              other receiving.  For the second year, the goal will be to implement a working
              wireless network consisting of a base station and four portables in a star
              configuration.  For the third year of the effort, the goal will be to refine
              the platform to enable simultaneous real-time voice, data and video transfers
              among the portables, possibly using different system implementations.  The
              project will continue evolving after the third year as a regular course in the
              electrical engineering curriculum.  The Indoor Wireless Project will generate
              software and written reports which will be electronically disseminated to the
              academic community.  It will also result in  the creation of a virtual wireless
              lab site on the World Wide Web.  The effectiveness of the project will be
              evaluated in terms of the project's output, the participants' subjective
              evaluation and long-term career profiles, and the project's impact on the
              academic community at large.
