Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Precision Semiconductor Parameter Analysis
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9700111

Award Number: 9700111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnost Neugroschel neug@.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Tang Sah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9700111  Neugroschel  The Solid-State Electronics laboratory at the Department
              of Electrical and Computer Engineering of the University of Florida proposes to
              purchase semiconductor parameter analysis stations to support fundamental
              research in deep-submicron transistors for advancement of future technology of
              American integrated circuit manufacturers.  The equipment will be used for
              several projects, such as the NSF grant (ECS-9220382) supported investigation
              on the properties of thin Ge(x)Si(1-x) layers for state-of-the-art GeSi
              heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTS) for analog-digital telecommunication
              applications beyond the 2GHz bands.  A follow-on proposal to NSF on this
              subject is being prepared to meet the NSF-GOALI initiative with industrial
              partners.  Another current research project that will use the equipment is a
              Semiconductor Research Corporation contract on investigating the fundamental
              reliability limits of deep submicron silicon metal-oxidesemiconductor and
              bipolar junction transistors (MOSTs and BJTS).  Other ongoing and planned
              investigations include deep submicron thin-film silicon-on-insulator (TFSOI)
              MOST and BJT technology for low power applications, fundamental limits on
              extending Si MOSTs to <0.1-micron and <IV, and fundamental reliability limits
              in support of the development of high-voltage and smart power integrated
              circuits.  These projects are all undertaken in close collaboration with Texas
              Instruments, Motorola, Intel, and several other American manufacturers.  The
              proposed instrument stations are not available and are unique.  With this
              equipment, we expect to significantly improve the understanding of the
              fundamental limits imposed on future transistors at smaller dimensions.  In
              addition, we expect the results obtained from the proposed equipment to
              contribute significantly to the advances of future manufacturing technology. 
              ***
