Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics, Cladistics, and Biogeography of the Genera
               of the Abariform Generic Complex (Coleoptera: Carabidae, Pterostichini)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9700764

Award Number: 9700764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7175               (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Liebherr jkl5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9700764  LIEBHERR    Ground beetles, those classified in the family Carabidae
              and tribe Pterostichini, often are large and may have unusual shapes and
              striking colors.  Moreover, these beetles are often very abundant, and as
              generalized predators constitute essential regulatory components of ecosystems
              in which they are found.  Numerous general principles of phylogenetic history,
              ecology and animal behavior have been developed from studies of these beetles. 
              A group of ground beetles, classified in a set of four genera known as the
              abariform generic complex and most commonly found in Central and South America,
              share a combination of features (metallic color, pectinate claws, large eyes)
              that is unique within the tribe.  These features suggest that the abariform
              beetles are diurnal, visually oriented predators, a mode of life, not often
              found in the Pterostichini, that may have a different history from that of
              diurnal beetles belonging to other groups.    In this research, James Liebherr
              and doctoral candidate Kipling Will are to conduct a taxonomic revision and
              phylogenetic analysis of species in the abariform generic complex.  Characters
              from adult and larval morphology will be analyzed; morphological characters of
              the female reproductive tract and larvae will be investigated for the first
              time for these taxa.  The resulting hypotheses of relationship will be utilized
              to develop classifications, to determine whether diurnality has appeared in one
              lineage of these beetles or in more than one, and to test historical
              biogeographic hypotheses that try to explain the distribution of these beetles
              in Central and South America.  Broader investigations of exemplars from the
              tribe Pterostichini will focus on defining the limits of the tribe, generic
              relationships within the tribe, and testing biogeographic patterns at the
              continental level.
