Title       : A Diffusing Wave Spectrometer for Studying Complex Fluids in their Quiescent
               State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9700170

Award Number: 9700170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. van Zanten   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY     Complex fluids, which are solutions containing surfactants,
              polymers, colloids or a combination of these components, are ubiquitous
              throughout the chemical and materials processing and biotechnology industries. 
              These fluids often display unusual dynamical properties, typically probed by
              mechanical rheometry.  However, since the shearing forces induced by a
              mechanical rheometer can lead to gross structural changes, techniques are
              lacking to probe biologically and industrially relevant complex fluids in their
              quiescent state.  Optical techniques offer a noninvasite, accurate approach to
              fill this void. The objective is to construct a diffusing wave spectrometer
              (DWS) for performing these quiescent measurements.     The experiments will
              focus on five model systems in the initial studies to be conducted with this
              instrumentation.  These systems include: (1) wormlike surfactant micelles or
              'living' polymers with an eye towards investigating their high frequency
              dynamical properties; (2) polymer gels and (3) solutions with the goal of
              establishing a means of determining the relaxation time spectrum and the
              effective mesh size, each of which have great implications for separations
              applications (i.e. electrophoresis); (4) colloidal dispersions, especially the
              onset of glassy behavior, and (5) actin filament networks where our interest
              lies toward determining the validity of mechanical rheometry measurements of
              such systems and whether our optical technique is capable of resolving
              biologically important dynamical processes which may also occur in vivo.
