Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Anatomy of the Radula Apparatus in Gastropods
               in a Phylogenetic Context: Testing Parameters in Models of Formation of Complex
               Morphologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9700728

Award Number: 9700728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4388               (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Lindberg davidl@ucmp1.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9700728  LINDBERG  The radula is a feeding structure (much like a tongue
              with small teeth embedded in its supface) found in most molluscs (snails,
              octopus, etc.).  Like mammalian claws and fingernails, the radula is constantly
              being produced and worn away.  This characteristic, combined with the
              complexity of the radular teeth and the variations in this complexity between
              different mollusc groups, make it an important source of characters for
              unraveling the geneaologies (phylogenetic histories) of organisms.  The radula
              is commonly used for this purpose in molluscan taxonomy, but little is known
              about the development of this organ as the mollusc passes from larva to adult
              form.  In these taxonomic studies, much information may have been missed or
              misinterpreted because only the adult anatomy of the radula has been examined
              and not its development.  In this research, David Lindberg and doctoral
              candidate Robert Guralnick will study the development of the radula in several
              species of snails (gastropod molluscs) representing several major taxonomic
              groups.  Every stage of development will be studied from examinations of whole
              radulae, microscopic sections of radulae, and three dimensional image
              reconstructions of radulae based on sectioned material.  Highly sensitive
              algorithms will be used to describe the changing shapes of the radula during
              development as well as the differences in comparable developmental stages
              between snail species.  Phylogenetic analyses including these developmental
              data will be compared with those based only on the adult morphology of the
              radula.  The investigators expect to establish a testable and flexible model of
              the formation of the gastropod radula, and determine, more generally, the
              significance of using the development of a structure, rather than just the end
              point of its development, to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of living
              organisms.
