Title       : MOTI: Innovation and the Transformation of Clean Technologies: A Life-Cycle
               Approach to the Management of Gas Turbine Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9700218

Award Number: 9700218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald Senich                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Meo mmeo@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Anex  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark P. Sharfman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rex T. Ellington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9700218  Meo  This investigation will test the effectiveness of a modified total
              physical system, total life-cycle assessment (LCA) framework as a guide to the
              management of technological innovation of environmentally clean systems through
              a two-phase study.  The first phase consists of a retrospective analysis of a
              series of commercially successful gas turbine technologies and the management
              strategies that guided their development and application in different markets
              and system configurations.  In cooperation with the General Electric Company
              (GE), the investigators will construct a set of retrospective tracks that
              document key developments leading to GE's efficient combined-cycle gas turbine
              and its systems.  It is hypothesized that the environmental benefits that
              accrue from innovations in the design, manufacturing, and deployment processes
              can be adequately accounted for by a series of individual tracks.  The research
              on units upstream and downstream of the focal combination in any system is
              extremely important because any configurations that are especially
              environmentally unclean, costly to erect and/or operate, or profligate in
              energy consumption can markedly degrade the attractiveness of the focal units. 
              Transferability of the technologies, including GE's gas turbines and the fuel
              supply elements developed both privately and with government-sponsored
              research, represents a tremendous opportunity for generating power and
              mitigating environmental impacts in developed and less developed countries
              (LDCs).  In the second phase, the researchers will critically examine typical
              systems to identify core innovations and resulting configurations with respect
              to potential use by LDCS.  The studies will be carried out with GE and based on
              studies currently underway such as those at the Battelle Columbus Laboratory,
              the Institute of Gas Technology, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 
              These research findings will improve the understanding and application of an
              LCA framework to guide improve ments in environmentally friendly technology
              management, public and private sector R&D partnerships, and the development of
              innovative clean technology configurations applicable to a broad number of
              other industries.
