Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Quasicrystalline and Crystalline Intermetallic
               Compounds with Bandgap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1997   
File        : a9700584

Award Number: 9700584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Joseph Poon sjp9x@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9700584  Poon    A comprehensive study of electronic properties in 
              intermetallic alloys is proposed, the goals are to  understand the nature of
              the insulating state, the metal-  insulator transition and  the strong
              electronic anisotropy  recently observed in some quasicrystalline alloys as
              well as  to explore the roles of atomic-scale order and chemistry in  electron
              transport and bandgap formation in inermetallic  compounds.  The spin-off of
              the project will be to  identify  new thermoelectric materials for
              high-temperature  applications.  The project is a widely collaborative one, it 
              involves experts from several areas to study structure-  chemistry-property
              relationships.  The principal  investigator will carry out synthesis and
              structural  characterization of alloys, measurements of conductivity,  specific
              heat, Hall effect, and thermopower.  Other  collaborators will utilize optical
              conductivity, x-ray  spectroscopy, electron tunneling, and nuclear magnetic 
              resonance to probe electronic structure.  Effects of  structure on properties
              will be studied by advanced electron  microscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance
              techniques.  %%%  Physicists and materials scientists are interested in 
              unusual crystal structures because unusual atomic  arrangements in solids
              provide new challenges for  understanding organization and order in nature. 
              Equally  important, unusual physical properties are expected to be  seen in
              novel materials.  Our research project focuses on  comprehensive study and
              further exploration of electronic  properties of metallic alloys including
              those that exhibit  noncrystalline structures, known  as quasicrystals.  The 
              project is a widely collaborative one, involving several  groups world-wide to
              contribute to a variety of experimental  measurements.  It has been shown that
              some of the titled  alloy compounds based on metals can become nonmetals, 
              several of them even exhibit electronic phenomena similar to  those observed in
              semiconductors such as silicon and  germanium.  The re are indications that the
              new alloys are  potentially good thermoelectric materials.  ***
