Title       : Varieties Related to Algebraic Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9700884

Award Number: 9700884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerzy M. Weyman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT, WEYMAN      This proposal consists of several parts. They are all
              connected to   the study of varieties related to algebraic groups and
              representation theory.  The first part is to study  equivariant modules
              supported in  varieties related to algebraic groups, like determinantal
              varieties and  the closures of nilpotent conjugacy classes in simple Lie
              algebras.  The investigator proposes to investigate the Grothendieck  groups of
              categories of such modules and to apply these results to study  the coordinate
              rings of orbit closures by means of degeneration sequences.   The second part
              is the study of    singularities of generalized discriminants and resultants.  
              The investigator proposes to extend his classification ( with Zelevinsky )  of
              irreducible components of hyperdeterminantal varieties  to arbitrary
              homogeneous spaces for the reductive group.   The third part is concerned with
              representations of Z_2 graded Lie algebras gl(m,n).  The investigator proposes
              to study the connection of such representations with syzygies  of equivariant
              ideals in the polynomial ring of generic $m\times n$ matrices.      The subject
              of this proposal is the study of the varieties related to classical groups.  In
              general terms they can be described as the varieties with a lot of symmetries. 
              These varieties play an important role in Commutative Algebra, serving  as
              basic examples and also providing links to other fields, like Combinatorics, 
              Representation Theory and Singularities. Historically many important  general
              theorems were proved first for these kinds of varieties.  The investigator
              proposes to study  the algebraic invariants associated to these varieties, in
              particular the structure   of equivariant modules supported in them.
