Title       : Measurements and Analyses of Marine Boundary Layer and Aerosol Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9700845

Award Number: 9700845
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Wang qwang@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Durkee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    831/656-2099

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9700845  Wang     The objective of this study is to quantify the boundary layer
              cloud and turbulence processes that affect the evolution of atmospheric
              aerosols and precursors using aircraft observations. The project is part of the
              North Atlantic Regional Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2) which will
              be conducted in June and July, 1997, over the subtropical Northeastern Atlantic
              Ocean as an international collaborative effort. The main objectives of ACE-2
              are to study the properties of atmospheric aerosols relevant to radiative
              forcing and climate using aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based measurements. 
               The Pelican, an aircraft from the Center for Interdisciplinary
              Remotely-Piloted Aircraft Studies (CIRPAS), Naval Postgraduate School, will be
              the major measurement platform for this project. The aircraft is equipped with
              instruments measuring meteorological parameters, radiation, aerosol properties,
              and some chemical constituents. The UK Meteorological Research Flight C-130
              will be the other aircraft participating in the Lagrangian experiments, where
              nearly continuous measurements will be made following a tagged air column for
              two to three days. A special circular flight pattern, tested during ACE-1, will
              be implemented for the Pelican measurements in ACE-2 to obtain accurate
              entrainment velocity and representative turbulence statistics that characterize
              aerosol transport in the boundary layer and between the boundary layer and the
              free troposphere.    This study will emphasize the boundary layer and cloud
              evolution during the Lagrangian measurements and how the evolution affects
              aerosol dynamics and chemistry. The specific focus will be on entrainment
              measurements and analysis, transport of moisture and cloud nucleating particles
              in the decoupled boundary layers, the role of small cumulus and the organized
              mesoscale flow associated with penetrating cumulus in aerosol evolution. Cloud
              microphysics and aerosol characteristics will be studied in relation to the
              above boundary layer dyna mical processes.
