Title       : The Dynamics of Structures With Tuned Subsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9700143

Award Number: 9700143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Shaw shawsw@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. Haddow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with developing a deeper  understanding of the
              behavior of systems with multiple tuned  vibration absorbers and to use this
              knowledge to offer  improved guidelines for the design of absorber systems.
              From  a fundamental dynamics viewpoint the work concerns the  dynamic response
              of structures to which are attached  multiple tuned subsystems for the purpose
              of vibration  attenuation although the focus of research is on  applications to
              rotating machinery, the techniques developed  are more widely applicable, for
              example, to translational  vibration absorber systems. In the area of multiple 
              absorbers, recent results for a special absorber system have  shown that the
              desired unison motion can become dynamically  unstable, resulting in a drastic
              reduction in operating  range. The thrust of the analytical portion of the
              proposed  work will focus on the dynamic performance of more general  multiple
              absorber systems, including: the dynamic  performance of multiple
              absorber:systems with general paths  (including: the mistuned circular paths
              most commonly found  in industrial applications), the effects of imperfections
              in  the absorber paths, and the effects of rotor flexibility.  this research
              will significantly expand the knowledge base  for tuned absorbers as applied to
              rotational systems and  will offer an improved understanding of the dynamics of
              a  general class of systems which have attached tuned  substructures. Such
              understanding can be distilled into  improved design guidelines that will
              include dynamics of a  general class of systems which have attached tuned 
              substructures. Such understanding can be distilled into  improved design
              guidelines that will include dynamic  bifurcation's and their effects on system
              performance.  Exchange of information with  industrial liaisons will be 
              carried out in order to focus the research in the proper  direction and to
              transfer the understanding gained by the  proposed research. Specifically,
              manufactures of automotive  engines (Ford Motor Company) and light
              aircraft/helicopter  engines (Textron Lycoming) will be kept appraised of the 
              results of this research and consulted for direction.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
