Title       : Pilot Projects to Explore Large Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9700867

Award Number: 9700867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $810582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome Sacks sacks@niss.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan F. Karr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Inst. of Stat. Sci.
	      PO Box 14006
	      Research Triangle Pk, NC  277094006    919/685-9300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large data sets are a given in modern industry, technology and  science, and
              demand statistical attention to treat such central  issues as detecting new
              patterns and relationships in a reliable  and computationally feasible way. 
              While the need is apparent,  paths to bringing statistical science to bear on
              large data sets  are not clearly mapped, in part because the sheer volume of
              the  data prevents direct use of standard techniques.      This proposal
              comprises a pair of interconnected pilot projects  targeted to stimulate
              statistical science entree to this rapidly  changing terrain.  Each has a major
              industria;l partner, which  has committed substantial resources.  The projects
              and partners  are Drug Discovery (Glaxo Wellcome, Research Traingle Park, NC) 
              and Telecommunications Fraud (AT&T Laboratories, Murray Hill,  NJ).  In both
              instances there are specific scientific isues with  high-stakes implications
              for the industry at large; each is  speculative, in the sense that the path
              from data to information  to knowledge is not known in advance.    In drug
              discovery, the critical problem is to find new potent,  non-toxic compounds. 
              New statistical methods will be developed  to search substantial data sets
              generated by recent advances in  robotic synthesis and screening in order to
              identify key features  of compounds, leading to better ones, in the presence of
              highly  complex (and very high-dimensional) descriptions of the  molecules.   
              Within the hundreds of millions of long distance calls per day a  small
              fraction are illegal or unauthorized, but result in costs  of hundreds of
              millions of dollars annually.  The problem is to  detect and characterize, as
              rapidly as possible, patterns of  transactions that are unusual, and
              potentially fraudulent, with  special attention to controlling error rates
              (false alarms,  failures to detect), an issue exacerbated by the enormous 
              multiplicity of decisions made on a continual basis.    The two problem areas
              have common features: sequential  statistical  search for important or unusual
              patters in the data;  data that are highly complex in sheer quantity, in
              high-dimensional description of each data point, or in the diversity  of their
              sources.  Approaching these issues will be done by teams  of cross-disciplinary
              researchers at distributed sites and  closely managed by NISS.    This GOALI
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
