Title       : Using Adaptive Computer Technology to Help Educators Prepare K-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9700134

Award Number: 9700134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Gilbert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman R. Coombs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc for Higher Educ
	      One Dupont Circle Suite 360
	      Washington, DC  200361110    202/293-6440

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 P. I.:  Steven Wolfe Gilbert    Children who do not get a solid foundation in
              science and mathematics during their K-12 years will not be properly prepared
              to study science, mathematics, engineering or technology (SMET) successfully in
              college.  Too often students with disabilities fall into this group of being
              under-prepared for SMET study in higher education.  This project is designed to
              help educators prepare K-12 students with disabilities for further study and
              work in the SMET fields.  The project includes a component that focuses on
              transitions from high school to post-secondary institutions so reference is
              frequently made to K-16 students as well as K-12 students.    The mission of
              EASI (Equal Access to Software and Information) is to develop, organize, and
              disseminate information and provide guidance about using adaptive computing and
              electronic information resources to help students and faculty with disabilities
              participate fully in academic life.  EASI has acquired an almost ten-year
              reputation for compiling and distributing the latest information about adaptive
              technology for people with disabilities.    Since January of 1995, EASI has
              been working on an NSF project that compiled and disseminated the best
              available information about adaptive computer technology use in the SMET fields
              in post-secondary education.  EASI is now extending this previous work, with a
              strong focus on K-12 and the transition between secondary and post-secondary
              education.  Additional consultants with greater expertise in K-12 adaptive
              computing and SMET teaching strategies are helping to build a new foundation of
              information and create new dissemination materials and services.  Outcomes will
              include conference presentations, print materials, online workshops, etc.
              focusing on:      Adaptive computer technology appropriate for use with
              effective teaching      strategies for students with disabilities in SMET
              courses in K-12;    Teaching strategies that help students learn both the
              adaptive technology and th e  academic disciplines;    Motivating K-12 students
              with disabilities for success in SMET;    Providing information on strategies
              and tools that will help students with  disabilities meet the emerging national
              standards for K-12 mathematics and  science; and    Promoting better transition
              from high school to post-secondary education for  students with disabilities.  
               The materials that AAHE/EASI develops for this project will be designed
              primarily for the use of K-12 Individualized Education Plan coordinators, SMET
              faculty, K-16 administrators, and special education coordinators (and for those
              schools of education who work directly with current and potential K-12
              teachers).
