Title       : Ultrasound-Based Osteoporosis Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9700490

Award Number: 9700490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peder C. Pedersen pedersen@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen H. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9700490  Pedersen  Osteoporosis is the most common systemic bone disease which 
              causes an increased fracture risk in especially older women.  It is a
              debilitating and costly disease which a decade ago  was estimated to cost to
              the US society $6 - $7 billion.  Osteoporosis affects primarily the trabecular
              bone which is  the mesh-like structure in the center of a bone.  A  clinically
              accepted measure of the degree of osteoporosis is  the bone mass density (BMD),
              and so all instruments in  clinical use attempt to estimate BMD.  The
              dual-energy x-ray  absorptiometry (DEXA) technique is considered the most 
              accurate technique today, but an ultrasound transmission  technique, referred
              to as broadband ultrasound attenuation  (BUA), is also widely used.  Among the
              limitations of the  current techniques are: i) difficulty in diagnosing 
              osteoporosis in its early stages, ii) inability to carry out  localized
              measurements, and iii) only modest correlation  with fracture risk.    The goal
              of the proposed research is to generate preliminary  data based on a new
              ultrasound system which will utilize  both transmission and reflection
              measurements.  The  motivation for the research is to develop a technique which
               can provide information about both the architecture of the  trabecular bone
              and BMD and thus be more sensitive to  changes in the trabecular bone structure
              and to changes in  bone mass density, i.e., to the degree of osteoporosis, than
               existing techniques.  The attractiveness of ultrasound for  assessing
              osteoporosis lies in the relatively low cost, its  portability and the absence
              of ionizing radiation.    The measurements will utilize cow bone samples chosen
              to  cover a range of bone mass densities corresponding to the  densities from
              normal to osteoporotic bone in humans.  Several ultrasound parameters will be
              measured, such as  sound speed, absorption, and scattering in different 
              directions.  The ultrasound results will be compared to  results obtained with
              DEXA measurements which will be  carrie d out at Univ. of Massachusetts Medical
              Center.  ***
