Title       : On Edge: Places and Practices in Field Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9700645

Award Number: 9700645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kohler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to produce a book on the history of field
              biology in the United States between 1890 and 1940, focussing on the continuing
              tensions between laboratory and field.  In the 1890s and 1900s, field
              biologists, spurred by their recent loss of status in comparison with
              physiologists and morphologists, borrowed laboratory methods and applied them
              to field work.  At the same time they reasserted their belief that authentic
              knowledge of plant and animal life could only be produced in nature.    In its
              methods this project extends the tools of environmental historians to the
              history of science.  Environmental historians know how to treat the varied ways
              in which humans inhabit, use, change and understand the natural world.  They
              restore to history a powerful sense of natural places and their effects on
              human actions, but without losing sight of `Nature` as a cultural
              representation.  They study how people know the natural world by making a
              living from it.  These methods are ideally suited to the history of field
              biology.  Several specific topics will be treated in the book.  First,  how did
              ecologists and evolutionary biologists devise ways of experimenting in nature
              without losing the rigor and control that experimentalists expect of authentic
              knowledge?  Second, how did field biologists invent the instrumentation
              (vivaria, field stations, biological farms) necessary for their research? 
              Finally, how was the work of these biologists shaped by cultural factors,
              including the nature movements of the early 1900s and the problematic cultural
              meaning of field work (which appears unscientific as it takes place outside the
              clean, well-lighted laboratory).  This project extends the well-developed study
              of laboratory life and experiments to the less-studied field sciences.  It
              enriches the history of science and environmental history by bringing them
              together.  And it contributes to our understanding of the field sciences as a
              cultural and social activity.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
