Title       : The Central Derivatives of Automorphic L-Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9700777

Award Number: 9700777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Murray M. Schacher                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tonghai Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Yang  9700777    Since Gross and Zagier proved their celebrated formula ten
              years ago, a lot of applications have been found, including to the Birch and
              Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture and to  Gauss's class number problem.  The
              Gross-Zagier formula has been extended to  the p-adic case and to higher weight
              case.  One of the main purposes of this project is to prove the Gross-Zagier
              formula without any restriction on the ``imaginary quadratic field'' using 
              Kudla's recent results on the central derivative of Eisenstein series.  This is
              a joint project with Kudla.  Kudla's idea is quite conceptional and should be
              able to work on other classical groups.  From that point of view,  it seems
              also possible to extend the Gross-Zagier formula to Shimura varieties of type
              O(n,2) or U(n, 1).  This will be a long term goal of the Principal
              Investigator.  In the second part of this project, the Principal Investigator
              plans to continue his study of the leading coefficients of Hecke L-functions of
              CM number fields.  The concerned Hecke characters have a center of symmetry and
              have root number  1 or -1.  When the root number is 1, the PI has proved a
              formula to express the central Hecke L-value as the inner product of some theta
              lifting from U(1) to itself, and applied the formula  to prove that a family of
              elliptic curves have  rank 0.  When the root number is -1, the central L-value
              is 0 automatically.  The PI plans to prove a Gross-Zagier formula to relate the
              central derivative of the concerned Hecke L-function to height pairing of two
              distinct cycles on some Shimura variety associated to U(1) by adapting Kudla's
              idea.  Furthermore, the PI plans to apply the formula to prove that the central
              derivatives of the Hecke L-functions do not vanish in some special cases.  In
              particular, he wants to prove that certain CM elliptic Q-curves have rational
              rank 1.  When significant progress is made in the first two parts, the PI will
              start  o tackle similar questions on the Picard modular surfaces.    This
              proposal is an th e part of mathematics known as the Langlands program.  The
              Langlands program is part of Number Theory.  Number Theory is the study of the
              properties of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics.  From
              the beginning problems in number theory have furnished a driving force in
              creating new mathematics in other diverse part of the discipline.  The
              Langland's program is a general philosophy that connect number theory with
              calculus; it embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers. 
              Modern Number Theory is very technical and deep, but it has had astonishing
              application in areas like theoretical computer science and coding theory.
