Title       : Fluctuations and Structure at Liquid-Liquid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a9700975

Award Number: 9700975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Schlossman schloss@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9700975 
              Schlossman    Technical:  This  is  a  new  project  in  which  synchrotron 
              x-ray  surface  scattering will be used to investigate fluctuations and
              structure  at  the liquid-liquid interface in multi-component fluids.  These 
              experiments will probe the role of molecular ordering and thermal  fluctuations
              in determining interfacial phenomena .  The areas of  interest  are as follows.
               (1)  Study of interfacial profiles  at  the  oil-microemulsion and
              microemulsion-water  interfaces as the  degree of internal order in the bulk
              phases is varied. (2)  Study  of  the behavior of fluctuating interfaces
              interacting over short  distances  in thin wetting films. (3)  Study of the 
              behavior  of  the  binary  alkane-water interface over a wide  range  of  chain
               lengths and for temperatures near the melting temperature of  the  bulk
              alkane.  (4)  Study of surfactant organization at the liquid-  liquid 
              interface  in  a  well defined  chemical  system  as  the  amplitude of
              interfacial fluctuations is varied over one  to  two  orders of magnitude.  %%%
               Non-technical  The  existence of a surface tension is evident by  poking  a 
              pin  into  the  surface of water.  This tension is determined  by  the  free 
              energy  required to take molecules from  the  bulk  of  the  liquid  and 
              create  a unit area of surface or  interface.   This  energy  depends upon the
              molecular organization at the interface.  Many  processes that depend upon the
              interfacial structure  occur  at  liquid-liquid interfaces, such as the
              transport of  molecules  across  the interface.  These processes are important
              for  making  new  materials,  understanding  interfacial  chemistry,  and   in 
              biological  interfaces  such as membranes.   Unfortunately,  very  little 
              experimental information about this interfacial structure  is  available.   We 
              propose  to use powerful  synchrotron  x-ray  sources  to  study  this 
              structure at liquid-liquid  interfaces.  These  st udies will include
              measurements on oil-water  interfaces  commonly   encountered   in  daily  life
                (and   in   industrial  manufacturing) and also on some exotic interfaces
              that  fluctuate  wildly on their own.  ***    p:\toulouse\abs98
