Title       : Synthesis and Studies of Lanthanide-Transition Metal Complexes (Extended
               Arrays); Reactions of Metal Complexes with New Borane Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9700394

Award Number: 9700394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon G. Shore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sheldon G. Shore, Department of Chemistry, Ohio State University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division to synthesize and study lanthanide-transition   metal
              complexes that form extended arrays and for the study of the   reactions of
              metal complexes with new borane ligands. Materials that have   direct
              lanthanide transition metal bonds and a series of compounds with   cyanide and
              cyanate bridged lanthanide-transition metal backbones will be   prepared. This
              phase of the program is designed to develop and expand   avenues for the
              synthesis of polymeric, extended array complexes that   incorporate both
              lanthanide and transition metals into a one, two, or   three dimensional
              arrangement of metal moieties. Secondly, the reactions   of lanthanide ions
              with new borane anions that are isoelectronic with   nitrogen donors and that
              can function as ligands will be examined. This   aspect of the program will
              uncover a new aspect of borane chemistry and   yield routes to new types of
              lanthanide boranes.   Lanthanide-transition metal complexes can be or can serve
              as precusors to   electronic, superconducting, and magnetic materials. In
              addition there   are a number of commercially important catalysts that contain
              both types   of metals. Nonetheless, complexes containing both lanthanide and  
              transition metals are not common. This project aims at extending the   number
              and types of compounds that contain these types of metals joined   to each
              other in unique large `arrays,` designed to be logical forms from   which the
              materials or catalysts mentioned above may be obtained.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
