Title       : MOTI: Innovation under Technological Confluence Managing the Converging Flows of
               Technological Tributaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9700797

Award Number: 9700797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Varghese P. George   (Principal Investigator current)
              Parry M. Norling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandeep Bhatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9700797  George    A clear understanding of the processes of innovation is an
              imperative precondition for improving performance in technology-intensive
              environments.  The ability of researchers to analyze these processes, and
              practitioners to manage them, has been steadily improving over the last few
              decades.  The confluence of multiple technologies in a single product stream
              and consequent cross-organizational locus of innovation is acknowledged as
              important in managing the processes of innovation.  Such technological
              confluence occurs, albeit at differing intensities, in all technology-intensive
              fields.  The objectives of this study are: the development of measurements for
              representing technological confluence, and related coordinational,
              informational and synergistic interactions within and across organizations; the
              adoption of available network visualization techniques for innovation studies;
              the development of structural parameters using a combination of algorithms for
              directed graphs and general heuristics, and the testing the usefulness of the
              visualization and structural parameters and the validity of the analytic
              approach using the data collected at a research site with the managers at the
              site.  The practice of management of technological innovation is expected to be
              significantly enhanced by the use of technology confluence diagrams. 
              Visualizations of interdependencies of associated processes, and parameters
              that characterize their structures will be of additional help in influencing
              these processes to one's advantage.  Use of methods based on directional
              networks and new techniques in visualization adapted to the processes of
              innovation will generate a new class of literature bringing with it new
              insights.  The linking of overall technological confluence to internal
              processes of the firm will encourage new trajectories in research that would
              bring together works of scholars who have examined separately issues internal
              and external to the firm.  These new methodological approaches an d its
              insights "ill be taken into the educational process where instruction related
              to innovation and social network analysis will include these concepts.
