Title       : Molecular Nanocrystals and their Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9700562

Award Number: 9700562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Whetten robert.whetten@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Robert Whetten of Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his studies of gold   nanocrystals
              passivated by a monolayer of n-alkylthiol(ate) groups.  The   major objectives
              of this work are to (a) determine the structure of a   passivated
              nanocrystalline substance; (b) quantify the solubilities and   miscibilities of
              a mixture of molecular nanocrystals; (c) develop a   technique for generating
              beams (and thus mass spectra) of nanocrystals   with the passivation layer
              intact; (d) study the etching and annealing   processes; (e) determine the
              energy-level patterns of small metal   particles of previously determined
              structure; (f) measure the kinetics of   annealing, etching,
              adsorption-passivation in nanocrystalline processing;   and (g) create
              conducting arrays from molecular nanocrystal solids.    Finally, these studies
              will be extended to cesium iodide nanocrystals   passivated by alkyl-chain
              organic acids/salts.    These studies will have a tremendous impact in the area
              of materials   research.  Nanometer-scale single crystallites can be prepared
              in such a   way that they retain a near-ideal structure yet are stable against 
               dissolution or further growth, even when in contact with each other.    This
              stability is due to the adsorption of `surfactants` that form   compact and
              ordered monolayers on the crystalline surfaces.  With   techniques developed in
              Whetten's lab, he is able to make a beam out of   these nanoparticles and then
              mass-select them, necessary steps for full   characterization of these
              materials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
