Title       : Achieving Institutional Reform: The Full Integration of Science into the General
               Education Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9850054

Award Number: 9850054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald G. Deeds ddeeds@lib.drury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Callen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hue-ping Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drury University
	      900 North Benton Avenue
	      Springfield, MO  658023712    417/865-8731

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With support from NSF, we will initiate and implement an institution-wide reform
              that will infuse mathematics and science into the heart of our liberal arts
              education. Previous support from NSF allowed us to develop a truly innovative
              integrated math and science program for non-science majors that has enriched
              both our students and faculty. Our evaluation of this work has made it clear
              that more must be done: that scientific ideas must be valued throughout the
              academic community if our students are to find them relevant and important.   
              The profound impact that science has had on culture, and that our cultures have
              had on science and technological development, is not often given central
              attention in college curricula. Yet it is imperative that our students, who
              will shape the social and political fabric of the 21st Century, understand both
              scientific initiatives and their social and political consequences. Having
              built a science and math program that gives students "direct experience with
              the methods and processes of inquiry," as recommended by a recent NSF study
              group, the faculty at Drury are poised to take up the challenge of integrating
              into our core courses the methodology and ideas that give understanding to the
              complex connections between the sciences and humanities.    Drury College is
              uniquely equipped to undertake this task. Over the last four years, faculty
              have designed and implemented a new interdisciplinary general education
              curriculum. Building upon this momentum, we now seek to make it truly
              integrated by conducting seminars for faculty development and construction of
              materials for our general education core courses. The success of this project
              will fully empower our faculty and graduates to confront the social and
              scientific challenges of the 21 st Century, and we believe it will serve as a
              model for other institutions as they strive to educate students who are
              scientifically literate.
