Title       : Project COMPACT (Career-Oriented Materials for Physics and Contemporary
               Technology )
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9850326

Award Number: 9850326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doyle V. Davis ddavis@nhctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yakov E. Cherner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NH Tech Col At Berlin
	      2020 Riverside Drive
	      Berlin, NH  035703717    603/752-1113

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project COMPACT will develop, test, and disseminate a new type of
              application-oriented, integrated curriculum software for introductory physics.
              This material will be designed to address a wide audience including:  (1)
              two-year college students enrolled in science, technology and engineering
              programs,  (2) non-science majors seeking scientific and technology literacy in
              anticipation of workplace demands, and  (3) high school students taking
              physics--in particular those in Tech Prep or vocational education programs.    
              The software will have a multilevel structure and flexible format to
              accommodate students with poor backgrounds in science and mathematics, those
              with some knowledge of algebra and geometry, as well as advanced students.  The
              project materials, developed from our existing prototypes, employ a "learning
              situation-focused" approach rather than a conventional domain-centered approach
              to involve students of various backgrounds and abilities in learning physics,
              science and technology. The goal is to engage students in exploring learning
              situations associated with their career goals. Each lesson will start with an
              exploration phase where students will see a real world example of applied
              physics. They will then enter a theory phase where they will be presented with
              the underlying physics concepts and laws related to the example. The learning
              cycle will be completed with an "application" phase where they will learn a
              systematic, expert-like approach to solving scientific and technical problems. 
                The initial software packages will focus on three broad career-oriented
              themes. It will include eight interconnected components:  (1) Simulation,
              Virtual Experimentation,  (2) Problem Solving Tutor,  and (3) Assessment Tool,
              etc., as well as collection of problems, tests, and questions.  Teachers can
              modify and expand an open-ended collection of problems, solution plans, tests,
              queries, and leading questions using their own experience or incorporating
              diverse curriculum resources, including tho se available on the Web.
