Title       : A Mathematics, Science and Technology Program for Non-Technical Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9850039

Award Number: 9850039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn C. Thornton kt4n@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred A. Diehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren D. Pitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary A Mathematics, Science and Technology Program for Non-Technical
              Majors The University of Virginia is a vigorous, modern institution whose
              purpose is to enrich young minds by stimulating a spirit of inquiry directed
              toward understanding the nature of the universe and the role of mankind in it.
              U.S. News and World Report has ranked the University of Virginia as the best
              public university for four consecutive years, and has also ranked UVa eleventh
              among a peer group of "top national universities" where faculty have "an
              unusually strong commitment to undergraduate teaching."   Liberal education,
              which includes scientific and technological literacy, is the central
              intellectual concern of the university, not only in the curricula of the
              College of Arts and Sciences, but also as a foundation for professional
              undergraduate programs.  The goal of the project is to improve the scientific
              literacy of students at the University of Virginia on two fronts: by  preparing
              prospective K-8 teachers in SME&T content and best teaching practices;  and to
              provide future business, law, and government leaders with a broad background in
              SME&T disciplines so that they are better able to evaluate scientific
              information and make informed judgments about technical issues.   All graduates
              should leave the university with a basic understanding of SME&T, but the need
              is most critical for those students who will teach the next generation.  As
              part of this project, three mathematics courses and one science course will be
              developed to complete a coherent sequence of mathematics, science, and
              technology courses that will give prospective K-6 teachers both the content
              knowledge and pedagogy necessary to become leaders in educational reform
              efforts.  The courses will use hands-on activities and technology as part of a
              well thought-out plan for active learning.   A two-semester capstone course
              will integrate math, science, and technology concepts as students work in
              groups on research projects with mentors from the m athematics, science,
              engineering or medical faculty.  Science and math methods courses taught in the
              Curry School of Education will complement the content courses.   The
              high-technology business sector is growing at a phenomenal rate, creating an
              urgent need for a technically literate work force.  A steering committee with
              representatives of the professional schools of law and business, local school
              divisions, as well as business and government leaders will study requirements
              and propose a course of study for an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary
              major addressing the emerging high-technology needs of today's work force. A
              science, mathematics, and technology major within the College of Arts and
              Sciences will  provide a broad background encompassing several disciplines in
              mathematics, science and engineering.  This new major will also serve the needs
              of prospective middle school teacher science and mathematics teachers. 
              Finally, seminars and workshops for faculty and graduate teaching assistants
              sponsored by the University of Virginia Teaching Resource Center will encourage
              more effective teaching for all students, but particularly for non-technical
              majors in science and mathematics courses.  A new position will be established
              within the Teaching Resource Center  for a faculty consultant who will work
              with faculty and graduate teaching assistants on best teaching practices for
              small laboratory classes as well as large lecture  classes.
