Title       : The Consortium for Statewide Biotechnology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9850289

Award Number: 9850289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Burkett tburkett@ccbc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane A. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
              Karen Dalton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CCBC, Catonsville
	      800 South Rolling Road
	      Catonsville, MD  212285317    410/455-6050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will develop and implement a statewide support system focused on
              bioscience technician development. This project focuses on the development of a
              coordinated response to the statewide need in Maryland for programs to prepare
              students at the community college level for technician careers in
              biotechnology, one of the most rapidly growing industries in the state. The
              rapid expansion of the biotech industry, the specialized focus of different
              aspects of biotechnology within the state, and the essentially local nature of
              community college programs require the development of a consortium to establish
              cost-effective introduction of biotechnology courses at several locations, and
              an articulated program in cooperation with high schools in each community
              college primary service area.     Catonsville Community College will coordinate
              the development of a powerful consortium comprised of four community colleges
              with their articulated high school tech prep partners, four University of
              Maryland Biotechnology Institutes and statewide biotechnology industry
              representatives. The unique component of the  project is the development of a
              cooperative relationship between the world-class University of Maryland
              Biotechnology Institutes, regional community colleges, and biotechnology
              industry partners. This consortium will provide community college teaching
              faculty and their high school teacher partners (hereafter referred to as "the
              teaching faculty") with rich opportunities to upgrade skills, increase their
              depth of scientific background, and acquire computer technology skills in order
              to infuse biotechnology into existing bioscience programs at their schools
              and/or to develop a comprehensive biotechnician training program. A three-year
              phased implementation plan ensures a viable model for replication and provides
              structured opportunities to adapt or customize the program to meet the needs of
              the individual educational institutions. Effective components resulting from
              the project will be nationally diss eminated as models for integrated yet
              differentiated curricula and training programs preparing the future workforce
              for jobs in the biotechnology industry.
