Title       : Integrated Human Movement Visualization and Biomechanical Analysis Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9850782

Award Number: 9850782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Schleihauf rschlhof@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Students in Kinesiology, in preparation for graduate study or careers in
              Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Exercise Science and related fields
              must become adept in the analysis of human movement. The ability to analyze
              human movement requires a solid foundation in basic science. Such a foundation
              contributes to a thorough understanding of the biomechanical factors that
              concern movement organization and is essential for an appreciation of movement
              in the context of human behavior. This project is developing a model
              computer-based laboratory and a progression of laboratory exercises that
              facilitate the development of skill in quantitative movement analysis and which
              fosters an understanding of biomechanical concepts. Using the latest multimedia
              equipped PCs and custom designed software, students perform kinematic and
              kinetic analyses of movement sequences captured on videotape or collected via
              electrogoniometers. Because the software allows integration of video images,
              stick figures, and parameter plots, movements can be "brought to life" and a
              much deeper conceptual understanding of the mechanical bases of human movement
              can be developed. A progression of labs that increase in sophistication and
              difficulty is being established within and across courses in the Kinesiology
              curriculum. Distribution of our software, model data sets, and laboratory
              exercises via CD-ROM and the World Wide Web provides an invaluable service to
              Kinesiology students everywhere. Furthermore, this project provides an
              innovative model for any curriculum involved in the analysis of biological
              motion.
