Title       : Plant Physiology Packages for Investigative Labs Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9850544

Award Number: 9850544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane C. Robertson robertdc@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Biology at Grinnell College has recently introduced a
              revised curriculum that emphasizes the process of science through investigative
              laboratories. Courses have been shifted from content-based teaching to
              inquiry-based teaching. These changes have highlighted some serious
              deficiencies in the area of plant biology, specifically students' lack of
              understanding or misconceptions about basic plant physiological processes such
              as photosynthesis, respiration and nitrogen fixation. We propose to address
              these deficiencies with an integrated approach that would introduce
              increasingly sophisticated treatments of these subjects starting with the first
              course in biology through a sophomore-level cell biology course and culminating
              in advanced work in upper level courses and independent research. To reinforce
              their work in these areas we want to provide students with ample 'hands-on'
              experience by allowing them to conduct physiological experiments of their own
              design using whole plants rather than plant extracts. This would require the
              purchase of eight physiological workstations and two growth chambers. Each
              workstation would include a PowerMac computer and three physiology packages
              containing equipment and software that will allow the measurement of 02
              production with an 02 sensor, of CO2 utilization with an infra-red gas
              analyzer, and of nitrogen fixation with a H2 sensor. Students would be
              introduced to computer-based data acquisition and analysis, which are becoming
              standard methods for physiological studies. Students would also improve their
              quantitative skills by using computer software that will provide a variety of
              types of analyses of their data sets. The economy and versatility of these
              packages would make sophisticated methodologies available to a large number of
              students at every level of our curriculum, helping them integrate and master
              plant physiological principles, from the introductory student to the advanced
              research student.
