Title       : Direct Digital Field Mapping Using Pen-Based Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9850980

Award Number: 9850980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75500              (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brimhall brimall@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Dilles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funds amounting to $80,000 are requested from the NSF ILI-LLD program in support
              of a 2-year project to incorporate rugged, field portable, pen-based computers
              in the sequence of field geology courses in order to modernize undergraduate
              instruction. The new pen-based mapping stations are about the size of a typical
              map board. But instead of using colored pencils to map, a stylus is used to
              select from a legend showing lithology, structural symbols, and faults. Global
              positioning systems (GPS) provide location data when necessary. A digital map
              is made directly in the field in real time eliminating the need for later
              scanning and editing using geographic information systems (GIS). At both UC
              Berkeley which is the lead institution and OSU at Corvallis which is the test
              site where Professor John Dilles is a Collaborating P.l., we have demonstrated
              long-term expertise in instruction of geologic mapping. We believe we can
              develop a new instructional program which can serve as a national model for
              mapping from basic field methods through advanced summer camp. Advanced
              electives (ore deposits, geomorphology and structural geology) will also
              benefit. Towards this end, we will develop a program which is transportable,
              adaptable, and adaptable at other institutions. By the end of the 2-year
              program, we will evaluate the program for ease of use, equipment maintenance,
              reliability, data management and completion of professional maps. An Advisory
              Panel will assist us to broaden the realm of users. National degree trends
              which indicate dramatic acceleration of students in bachelor's programs and
              increased enrollments in field classes coupled with the recent availability of
              integrated GPS-GIS systems with pen computer based software indicate that this
              is a timely endeavor. Therefore, adoption of this approach can serve national
              educational needs to more effectively integrate direct observations of
              geospatial phenomena with modern computing tools at the bachelors level. We
              also wish to develop effective demonst rations for the Middle School level.
              Towards this end we have designed a technology acquisition and training
              sequence which begins with purchasing and instructor testing of 2 alternative
              computer platforms, GPS and mapping software packages during the first year at
              UCB and OSU. After testing is complete, we will purchase the integrated system
              which proves to be most cost effective and implement it in teaching using about
              18 pen-based field portable computers each with GPS units. We will develop,
              implement and refine full direct digital mapping capabilities. Pedagogically,
              instruction will begin with traditional mapping of geologic features using
              pencil and a paper copy of a topographic map. The students will then move to
              computer-based mapping also using a topographic base illustrated on the
              computer screen. With this revolutionary technology, which initial testing
              suggests that students can learn quickly for real-time mapping to solve diverse
              geologic field problems, the conversion from classical mapping to full on-site
              real time digital mapping is natural. It requires exactly the same analog
              eye-hand coordination skills we presently use in training students. Our plan of
              direct digital mapping in the field is an exciting advance over the past
              methods of map making which has involved taking paper maps back to the
              laboratory and spending weeks digitizing them to produce a digital map.
              Exploration and environmental industries are already using this type of GPS-GIS
              mapping technology and we must prepare students for these rapidly-developing
              career opportunities.
