Title       : Development of a Neuroscience Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9850780

Award Number: 9850780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40553              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malinda E. C. Fitzgerald malinda@cbu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Christian Brothers Univ
	      650 East Parkway South
	      Memphis, TN  381045568    901/278-0100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a neuroscience laboratory course in the Department of
              Biology at Christian Brothers University. The neuroscience laboratory equipment
              will be used in the study of the nervous system using morphological,
              pharmacological and physiological laboratory techniques. The equipment
              purchased for this project will not only provide for this laboratory course,
              but it will enhance five courses currently offered within the Biology
              Department, at all levels.  Not only will the education of the students be
              enhanced at all levels from freshman to senior, but also the accessibility of
              this equipment will enable both undergraduate students and faculty to
              participate in projects outside the classroom environment. The instrumentation
              will allow students an opportunity to obtain first hand experimental results
              that they will be able to manipulate and analyze.     The project plans to
              acquire two computer work stations that will have both Internet capabilities
              and CD-ROM. These will be used in conjunction with current equipment available
              within the department and in the wider campus Computer Assisted Learning
              Environment (CALE) structure. Captured images obtained in class and data
              collected from physiological experiments will be placed on a secure CBU server
              which is accessible from throughout the campus CALE structure and remotely from
              off-campus.   This will allow for internal collaboration among the students and
              the creation of a virtual laboratory for student use beyond the available hours
              of the physical laboratory.  Thus, the equipment purchased as part of this
              project will maximize the time that students have to analyze their data and
              will encourage communication.     This project will acquire an ultramicrotome,
              laminar flow culture hood, and inverted microscope to be used by neuroscience
              students to investigate the response of cultures cells to growth factors and
              other experimental conditions. The ultramicrotome will be used to obtain
              plastic embedded sections of tissue and cells to b e analyzed at the light
              microscopic level using NIH Image. Data will be obtained on cell structure and
              area occupied by the cells as well as number of immunocytochemically labeled
              neurons or glial after experimental manipulation to determine morphological
              changes that are representative of physiological alterations within the nervous
              system.     Evaluation of the effectiveness of this modification of the
              curriculum will be conducted with assistance from other faculty members,
              students, and colleagues at the Neuroscience Center of Excellence located at
              the University of TN at Memphis.
