Title       : Enhancing Environmental Geology Courses Through Development of Laboratory
               Exercises and Field Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9850891

Award Number: 9850891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredrick J. Rich frich@gsaix2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The main goal of this project is to provide a framework within which a
              significant number of Georgia Southern University undergraduates can achieve
              basic literacy through the study of geology. We seek to accomplish this goal
              through enhancement of an existing environmental geology course. This course
              constitutes an element of GSU's new core curriculum that will be required of
              all students, including science majors, non-science majors, and future K-12
              teachers. The new course will utilize environmental issues to introduce and
              discuss relevant scientific concepts, providing in-context instruction with a
              substantial amount of field experience. Distinctive features will include: an
              approach that makes students aware of local, regional, and global environmental
              problems which relate to the earth sciences; a focus on hands-on laboratory
              activities; and involvement of advanced science and science education majors in
              the laboratories as faculty-mentored interns in the Undergraduate Teaching
              Internship Program (UTIP). Expected project outcomes are: graduates who possess
              the knowledge to engage in environmentally-aware behavior and informed
              citizenship; improved scientific and environmental knowledge among future K-12
              teachers; appreciation by students of the connections between science and
              "real-world" problems; and teacher training for UTIP participants. A specific
              request is made to provide funding for on- campus installation of three
              piezometer nests, with each nest consisting of two to three monitoring wells.
              The wells will be equipped with continuous water-level recorders which will
              record the hydraulic head in separate shallow aquifers as a function of time.
              With this system of monitoring wells, the students will learn how subsurface
              water levels can vary with time, how multiple "water tables" may exist in the
              subsurface, and how groundwater moves both vertically and laterally. In
              addition, students will learn fundamental aspects of water quality and chemist
              through the sampling and analysis of w ater from the monitoring wells.
