Title       : HCC Interdisciplinary Live Rock Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9850291

Award Number: 9850291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297906             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Falls wfalls@hcc.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela S. Stinnette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Nicholas Ehringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hillsborough Cmty College
	      P O BOX 22127
	      Tampa, FL  336222127    813/879-7222

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to create a practical, hands-on applied learning 
              experience for students enrolled in courses of aquaculture, environmental
              science  technology (EST), economics/business and humanities programs of the
              College. This  experience will involve students, under the direction of
              participating faculty in: the research  of the culture of aquarium live rock;
              the environmental monitoring of live rock culture and  harvesting activities;
              the aesthetics of live rock presentation; and the economics and  marketing of
              live rock aquaculture. Recent federal and state restrictions have constrained 
              the collections of natural live rock (a $10,000,000 year business) in all state
              and federal  waters. Only aquaculture offers a viable solution to revitalizing
              this business in the  continental United States. Students and faculty, with the
              assistance of partners, will work  in three teams (Aquaculture, Environmental
              and Marketing) over a three year period to  address the research concerns
              mentioned above. Students working in each team will not  only gain applied
              experience of the particular team discipline but will be provided with the 
              opportunity of transferring and applying what they learn in the classroom to an
              applied  project. They will also not only gain the cognitive knowledge/skills
              of the other team areas  but will gain interpersonal/team working skills by
              working closely with the members of the  other teams and partners. Evaluation
              of the project will be accomplished by: traditional  and alternative assessment
              measures of student achievement such as grades, project  assignments, field
              assignments, testing, etc; student satisfaction surveys; responses to  research
              questions and reports; and by yearly reviews by the HCC Aquaculture and EST 
              Advisory Committees, and the project partners. Knowledge gained from the
              results of this  project will be made available to the aquaculture industry,
              the regulatory community and  educational community by workshops, reports and
              other publications .
