Title       : Building Bridges: Science Education Reform at Bryn Mawr College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9850090

Award Number: 9850090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso M. Albano aalbano@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal B. Abraham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Grobstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle M. Francl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Cook-Sather  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building Bridges: Science Education Reform at Bryn Mawr College is an
              institutionwide effort at science teaching reform in a liberal arts setting. It
               addresses the national need to provide consistently effective models for
              science and mathematics teaching at a time when students come with increasingly
              varying pre-college preparation. The program builds upon a wide array of
              efforts previously undertaken at Bryn Mawr, with the support of various private
              and federal funding sources, and is informed by national efforts in
              undergraduate science education reform.    Building Bridges seeks: to improve
              the teaching of math and science through efforts that bring together
              scientists, humanists and social scientists; to infuse the inquiry-based and
              cooperative pedagogical methods of the teacher education program into
              math/science teaching; and to encourage greater interaction among college
              faculty members, precollege teachers, and students. Specific activities will
              include: workshops for faculty members teaching in a new cross-disciplinary
              College Seminar program, required of all undergraduates; a discussion series on
              science pedagogy for faculty members, graduate students, and precollege
              teachers; support for the development of courses incorporating new pedagogical
              approaches, the revision of introductory science courses, and the development
              of courses bridging math/science and teacher education; and a peer tutoring
              program for math and science students. The results of Building Bridges will be
              evaluated both quantitatively, in terms of the extent of faculty participation
              in the project, and qualitatively, through an existing student course
              evaluation program and an assessment of the impact on faculty/student attitudes
              toward and sense of competence in science. The work undertaken through Building
              Bridges will be institutionalized at the end of the three-year grant period,
              and its results disseminated through Serendip, a College Web site, and through
              presentations at national science and science education  meetings.
