Title       : Introducing ICP-MS to Enhance Environmental and Analytical Chemistry Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9850742

Award Number: 9850742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86871              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Omar Zahir omar.zahir@csun.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the use of an ICP-MS system. The determination of trace
              levels of toxic metals is a critical issue in the fields of environmental,
              analytical, and clinical chemistry. Therefore, introduction of ICP-MS in the
              environmental and analytical chemistry curricula is essential in order to keep
              our students abreast of the latest developments in metal ions analysis.
              Students benefiting from this project are those taking senior level
              environmental chemistry courses required for our B.S. Environmental Chemistry
              degree, and those taking instrumental analysis courses required for all
              Chemistry majors. In addition, the system is available for directed
              undergraduate research in environmental chemistry and geological sciences. 
              Four new experiments had previously been designed and tested using the ICP-MS
              of a commercial environmental laboratory. These experiments are being
              introduced into the undergraduate environmental and analytical chemistry
              curricula in order to enhance the two curricula and to provide students with
              hands on experience in the use and application of ICP-MS. Students analyze a
              variety of samples including ground and drinking water, urban particulate
              matters, human hair, and other clinical samples. When appropriate they follow
              E.P.A. approved methodologies and protocols to carry out their analyses. The
              theory, principle, and hardware of ICP-MS are discussed in the analytical
              chemistry lecture course. This project facilitates the learning of a technique
              which can be used as a powerful analytical tool for scientific inquiries in
              environmental and biological chemistry as well as in geology.
