Title       : Development of an Advanced Physics and Instrumentation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9850732

Award Number: 9850732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M University
	      Capital Campaign
	      Commerce, TX  754294505    214/544-3866

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project continues development of an advanced physics and electronics
              laboratory for upper-level undergraduates majoring in science and engineering.
              The project directly impacts (1) a laboratory course in modern physics and (2)
              the laboratory for a course in electronic instrumentation. Additional courses
              in physics and computer engineering will also benefit from this facility.  The
              guiding theme for the project is to provide skills needed to design and
              implement virtual instrumentation for experiments involving real time signals
              and to perform computer assisted analysis of these data.  As students learn
              fundamental concepts in modern physics and electronic instrumentation, they
              gain first hand experience in hardware interfacing to standard laboratory
              transducers, control of laboratory instrumentation, and graphical programming
              modern data acquisition systems.  The students design their own virtual
              instruments for these experiments.  A laboratory manual is being prepared and
              distributed on-line as a guide for future students both on this campus and at
              other schools.  The equipment includes (1) eight high-speed microcomputers with
              data acquisition interfaces and supporting instrumentation software, and (2) an
              instructional x-ray diffraction apparatus. This equipment complements the
              advanced physics laboratory apparatus constructed over the past three years. 
              Additional experiments housed in remote laboratories will be placed on-line and
              will be accessible in the advanced laboratory through the university's local
              area network.  Several of these experiments will be on he Internet for others
              to use. All codes and laboratory documents will also be distributed on-line.
