Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory for Machine Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9850660

Award Number: 9850660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanqi Zhuang zhuang@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R Sudhakar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Process automation through machine vision applications has dramatically
              improved cost effectiveness and hence the competitive edge of many
              manufacturing industries.   Ironically, undergraduate machine vision education
              in most universities still stresses more on theory and piecewise algorithms
              with insufficient emphasis on the integration of these components to industrial
              automation.   Florida Atlantic University proposes to develop an undergraduate
              laboratory that supports a number of machine vision experiments.  The
              laboratory will have six workstations, each of which consists of a PC with a
              frame grabber, a CCD camera, and a lighting setup.  The workstation will be a
              stand-alone system since all experiments can be run on it.  The six
              workstations will also be linked by a local area network so that lab resources
              can be shared for remote users.  This will be very convenient for commuter
              students who work full-time or part-time.   A total of seven experiments and a
              project will be developed mainly for a 3-credit senior-level machine vision
              course.   Many of the proposed lab experiments will be design-oriented and
              hence open-ended. After learning the basics, the students will devise their own
              schemes to accomplish their tasks using the available lab equipment and
              software packages.   The course will emphasize an integrated system approach
              rather than specific algorithm implementation.   By doing so, we hope that it
              will greatly enhance the students' ability to solve real-world engineering
              problems.   Once the laboratory is established, we will reinforce the process
              by  (a) seeking the participation of other faculty in lab development, (b)
              introducing evening/weekend classes for industrial participants and summer
              programs for high school students, and (c) setting up an internet home page to
              provide course materials such as lab manuals, video demonstrations and
              software.
