Title       : Multidisciplinary Membrane Process Laboratory Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9850535

Award Number: 9850535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81535              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Stewart Slater slater@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kauser Jahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zenaida O. Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The effective teaching of membrane processes is an important issue to be
              addressed by the academic community. Leading-edge industries are using membrane
              technology for new gains in processing. Students need training in this rapidly
              growing field. Educational initiatives are crucial to the continued technical
              growth and wide-scale commercialization of membrane processes. The development
              plan involves the innovative use of membrane technology, integrating it both
              vertically and horizontally throughout the engineering curriculum and expose
              students from other disciplines to it through the use of team-oriented
              experimental projects in multidisciplinary engineering clinics. The
              experimental areas addressed are hands-on lecture and small-scale mini labs for
              Freshman Engineering. Students will be introduced to membrane separation
              principles laying the foundation for more advanced experiments. The integration
              of membrane process experiments for multidisciplinary team projects will be
              integrated into the Junior and Senior level Engineering Clinic courses. These
              realistic and challenging experimental projects will examine topics including
              reverse osmosis system design and function in water purification, gas
              permeation processes, membrane bioreactors and membrane gas transfer for
              environmental control, pervaporation systems for solvent recovery, cerarnic
              membrane reactors used in petrochemical processing, and the analysis drying in
              hollow fiber production. In these projects students will learn how to function
              in a team to solve complex problems, interpret and analyze data, utilize modern
              technologies, and understand environmental issues. The experimental experience
              will greatly benefit students in related coursework. To broaden the impact of
              the project, the Rowan team will also use membrane technology to help attract
              high school students to engineering through the development of innovative
              demonstration modules. We also plan to develop new educational methods and
              share them with faculty from 2-yr colleges  to research universities.
