Title       : A Model for Research Training in Psychology, from Classroom to Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850590

Award Number: 9850590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta L. Klatzky klatzky+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. MacWhinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We will provide instruments in a new 3600-square-foot teaching laboratory
              located in the Department of Psychology at Carnegie Mellon University, in order
              to develop state-of-the-art facilities for the teaching of research methods in
              psychology. The educational process will occur both in formal classes, largely
              conducted in a new classroom facility, and in individual student projects,
              conducted in independent-study rooms within the same area.     Our model is for
              students to take courses in the teaching laboratory that will prepare them for
              subsequent independent work. Instrumentation will comprise both software and
              hardware. A principal goal of the planned curriculum development is to enhance
              the department's research methods courses, which are a cornerstone of our
              undergraduate program.     We currently teach research methods in cognitive
              psychology, developmental psychology, and social health psychology. New
              instrumentation will greatly improve those courses and allow us to add a
              methods course in cognitive neuroscience. Other curricular developments will
              occur in courses utilizing brain images, courses teaching computational
              methods, and faculty-supervised independent research projects. Course materials
              and tools that are developed will be disseminated over the internet, as a model
              for the application of particular tools to teaching of research methods.     A
              Web site will be created to publicize results from classroom curricular
              development and, when appropriate, tools developed in student projects. The
              site will provide information about each methods course, including the
              syllabus, assignments that use the instrumentation (software and hardware), and
              faculty-developed tutorials for using the instruments. Local and national
              outcomes will be assessed.
