Title       : Capillary Electrophoresis in the Undergraduate Curriculum in Chemistry and
               Biological Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9850730

Award Number: 9850730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Wenzel twenzel@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Capillary electrophoresis will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum
              in chemistry and biochemistry at Bates College.  Electrophoretic techniques are
              of growing importance in chemical analysis, in large part because of the
              increase in work at the interface of chemistry and biology. Students at the
              undergraduate level should therefore be introduced to the theoretical and
              practical aspects of electrophoresis, and particularly capillary
              electrophoresis.  The instrumentation will be utilized in undergraduate
              laboratories associated with courses in analytical and biological chemistry.
              The lab experiences in these courses are project-based, so the experiments that
              will be added to the curriculum utilizing capillary electrophoresis are
              ambitious in scope. Examples of the types of projects that will be undertaken
              include the analysis of neuropeptides in brain tissue, hemoglobin variants in
              blood, DNA restriction fragment analysis of human DNA, and protein mapping to
              confirm the effectiveness of protein modification through site selected
              mutagenesis. Capillary electrophoresis will complement the methods, techniques
              and experiences that are already provided in undergraduate courses in
              analytical and biological chemistry. Capillary electrophoresis equipment will
              also be beneficial to students conducting research projects at the interface of
              biology and chemistry.
