Title       : Materials Science and Nonlinear Optics in Physics and Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9850824

Award Number: 9850824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37494              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. McGee   (Principal Investigator current)
              R. D. Libby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moravian College
	      Main Street & Elizabeth Avenue
	      Bethlehem, PA  18018    215/861-1300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Moravian College seeks to add novel experiments in nonlinear optics to its
              physics curriculum; in addition, the fabrication of the nonlinear optical
              materials will add an important material-science component to both the physics
              and chemistry curricula. Recently developed polymer composites that exhibit
              photorefractive nonlinear optical properties have been fabricated at Moravian
              College; our goal is to merge the synthesis of these materials into the organic
              chemistry lab the study of their thermal and material properties into the
              physical chemistry lab, and the study of their nonlinear optical properties
              into the optics lab. Novel experiments in optics will include the generation
              and probing of dynamic diffraction grating, the study of laser beam coupling
              via propagation through a grating, the storage and retrieval of optical images
              in nonlinear optical materials, and the study of optical oscillators with
              photorefractive amplifying elements. Students in chemistry courses will
              synthesize the polymer composites used by the optics students and have an
              opportunity to learn how material and physical properties of the composite are
              by changes in their components. Organic students will study the relationship of
              the chromophore structure to its UV-Vis spectrum, and physical chemistry
              students will examine the phase behavior of the components in the polymer
              matrix. The equipment requested in this proposal will allow Moravian College to
              establish a suite of experiments in physics and chemistry that explore
              nonlinear optical behavior and its relationship to material properties.
