Title       : South East Advanced Technological Education Center for Communications Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9850307

Award Number: 9850307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1629004            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney U. Rogers rogers_s@nsti.tec.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Collin T. Ballance  (Principal Investigator former)
              Claudia House  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Cicirello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Van H. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              James L. Barrott  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Marguerite Jackson-Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nashville St Tech Comm Col
	      120 White Bridge Rd
	      Nashville, TN  372094515    615/353-3236

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The South East Advanced Technical Education project is a consortium of five
              two-year colleges in Tennessee with their associated school districts along
              with four year universities and communications industries that have already
              worked together to develop and implement case studies.  The goals of the
              project are 1.) to provide national leadership in the development and
              implementation of case studies for technological education; 2.) to provide
              professional development of participating faculty; 3.) to evaluate the
              effectiveness of the case study method in teaching technology-related content;
              4.) to disseminate nationally information about the case studies and the
              outcomes of their use.  The project will assemble experts in case studies and
              their use from different disciplines to inform the project.  The case studies,
              that mirror real-world workplace problems from industry, are created by
              interdisciplinary faculty teams that include faculty from science, mathematics,
              engineering and computer technologies, and communications with input from the
              industry.  Professional development of faculty includes field trips, three-week
              internships in communications industry to keep abreast of recent developments
              in the industry and workshops to learn to teach using cases. Dissemination
              includes professional development for faculty in two-year colleges in other
              areas of the nation and publication of both the forums on case studies and of
              the case studies themselves.  The use of the case study method is extensively
              evaluated.
