Title       : Improving the General Chemistry and Environmental Science Laboratory Curricula
               Through CBL and Computer Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9850789

Award Number: 9850789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Donnelly aw_donnelly@awc.cc.az.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred W. Croxen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Sparks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Michael Conway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona Western College
	      P O BOX 929
	      Yuma, AZ  853660929    602/726-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We will use this grant to improve the Arizona Western College (AWC) General
              Chemistry Laboratory curriculum and the AWC / Northern Arizona University-Yuma
              (NAU-Yuma) Environmental Science program by augmenting and expanding
              lab{laboratory activities through the use of Calculator Based Laboratory (CBL
              units) and Macintosh computers. Faculty and students from the Departments of
              Chemistry, Environmental Science, and Geology along with scientists from the
              U.S. Bureau of Reclamation will participate.    The proposed laboratory
              projects will incorporate 20 CBL units interfaced with pH, conductivity,
              colorimetric, and temperature probes and 2 Macintosh computers into both the
              AWC General Chemistry laboratory curriculum and the AWC / NAU-Yuma
              Environmental Science program. The CBL is an automatic data collection device
              from Texas Instruments that collects and stores data in a laboratory
              environment. The Macintosh computers will allow for a more sophisticated,
              graphical and statistical analysis of the experimental data.    Use of CBLs and
              Macintosh computers will expand the range and type of laboratory activities,
              shift student focus from tedious data collection to its interpretation and
              hence conceptual relevancy, allow faculty to teach topics previously never
              taught, allow students to conduct experiments that previously could not be
              done, and give new options for student learning and participation.  The
              successes of the project will be shared with the Yuma County Educational
              Consortium, which includes AWC, NAU-Yuma, the Yuma Union High School District
              as well as nine public school districts the Yuma Math and Science Consortium,
              and regional and national Science education communities through workshops,
              presentations at professional meetings, and journal publications.
