Title       : Science Education for Tomorrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9850035

Award Number: 9850035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Boylan eboylan@barnard.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funding will support planning and initial implementation for Barnard's proposed
              Science Education for Tomorrow (SET) Program. The SET Program will develop or
              revise curricula at three levels: 1) introductory, discipline-connected
              courses; 2) mid-level interdisciplinary electives for both majors and
              non-majors; and 3) advanced, interdisciplinary, off-campus research projects
              for majors. New pedagogical materials and methods from the SET project will be
              disseminated on the Web through the College's existing Barnard Electronic
              Archive for Teaching and Learning and through professional
              meetings.

Introductory science and statistics courses will be modified by
              incorporating of "real world" data available through the Internet; expanding
              multimedia technology as a teaching tool; and providing peer mentors for
              entry-level students. Mid-level curricular modules will be developed on issues
              at the intersection of science and public policy. These modules will make use
              of role-playing as a learning technique; they will be prepared by
              interdisciplinary teams of faculty. Junior and Senior majors will be urged to
              explore the professional world of science through interdisciplinary, off-campus
              research opportunities.

This combination of reforms will build upon a strong
              commitment to educate women for the sciences and an ongoing review and
              adaptation of the College's science curriculum and pedagogy to maintain and
              strengthen Barnard's record of successful science education. The SET Program
              will expand and reinforce the College's efforts to create a new generation of
              scientists and scientifically literate citizens who will understand more
              completely the implications of science for society and the significance of
              public policy for science.


