Title       : Optical Communication in Undergraduate Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9850470

Award Number: 9850470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wing C. Kwong eggwck@hofstra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Weissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      128 Hofstra University
	      Hempstead, NY  115501030    516/560-6820

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Engineering Department is seeking support from NSF-ILI for development of a
              program in the science and technology of optical communications. In addition to
              providing matching funds, Hofstra University realizes the importance of optical
              technology to our students and allocated $9,000 of seed money last year for
              this pilot program. The support sought from NSF will be used for creating a
              series of experiments that teach the skills and demonstrate the potential of
              fiber-optic communication techniques, preparing students for employment and
              graduate study in this critical field of telecommunications. A comprehensive
              plan is outlined for integrating fiber-optic communication technology into our
              Electrical Engineering (EE) curriculum. The subject matter which ranges from
              optical fiber and laser diode theory to advanced fiber-optic communication
              systems will be phased into the EE program as modifications of existing
              laboratory and lecture courses. Students will integrate materials from a broad
              range of courses and learn how these basic subjects impact the design of
              state-of-the-art communication systems. With the requested equipment, students
              will acquire hands-on experience in fiber-optic components (e.g., optical
              fibers and laser diodes), measuring equipment (e.g., optical power meter and
              spectrum analyzer), and recently developed technology (e.g., optical computing
              and photonic switching, subcarrier- multiplexing for cable TV distribution,
              wavelength-division multiplexing for computer networks, and erbium-doped fiber
              amplifiers for long-haul transmission). A student textbook and manual will be
              published; it will contain a theoretical background and the broad concepts
              relating to the specific procedures for configuring the hardware and performing
              observations. This project can serve as a model for other institutions wishing
              to begin an optical fiber communications program, or it may serve as a guide to
              augment their existing laboratories in this area. It is the collective,
              synergistic combination o f all these experiments that provides the potential
              for emulation at other schools.
