Title       : Establishing a Mathematics Education Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9850981

Award Number: 9850981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsa Medina medi5454@blue.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin A. Ward  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rex L. Hutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this grant, a Mathematics Education Center is being established.  The
              Center will consist of a computer enhanced classroom, an activity area, a
              material storage area, and a curriculum development area.  The Center will be
              used to improve the preparation of both pre-service and in-service teachers and
              serve as a model for Centers at other universities. Pre-service teachers will
              learn mathematics in ways consistent with the California Mathematics Framework
              and with recommendations of groups such as the National Council of Teachers of
              Mathematics and The National Research Council. In-service teachers will have
              access to the Center through activities organized by the Central Coast
              Mathematics Project and will be able to upgrade their mathematical knowledge
              and acquire and construct appropriate learning experiences for their students. 
                The classroom area, which will be equipped with a computer and appropriate
              display devices to allow rapid and accurate dissemination of information, will
              be used for lecture, discussion, and testing. The activity area will be
              equipped with six networked computers for student use and tables for small
              group hands-on experiences and discussions. The curriculum development area
              will house two computers, one which will be available to instructors for lesson
              preparation and to Senior Project students, and the second computer will be a
              server for the network, allowing for the dissemination materials to teachers 
              through a World Wide Web site.
