Title       : Development of an Interdisciplinary Environmental Studies Geographic Information
               Analysis (GIA) Program at Montclair State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9850835

Award Number: 9850835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35469              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Solecki soleckiw@mail.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Lincoln  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhaodong Jordan Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The project objective is the integration of geographic information analysis
              (GIA) methods and techniques into the undergraduate environmental studies
              curriculum in the Department of Earth and Environmental Studies at Montclair
              State University. The rationale for the project is that GIA will facilitate the
              restructuring of selected courses around a more active-learning, hand-on
              approach to interdisciplinary environmental study. The interdisciplinary
              framework to be developed is defined as the examination of phenomena and
              systems from a holistic perspective including an analysis of de character and
              integration of the scientific and societal dimensions of contemporary
              environmental issues and problems. It can be argued that although many academic
              programs and curricula have been developed in recent years which either
              explicitly or implicitly address environmental issues and problems from an
              interdisciplinary perspective, a significant deficiency in the standard methods
              and techniques available for interdisciplinary instruction has been identified.
                 The project proposes that GIA is a central tool in the development of a
              truly interdisciplinary curriculum. GIA allows for the intensive investigation
              of the spatial relationship among variables. GIA enables one to display spatial
              environmental data, such as land use, and geology, and to ask questions about
              how and why these phenomena interact.    The integration of GIA will foster
              interdisciplinary study among the department's students in three ways: 1)
              changing environmental issue and problem identification as a consequence of
              enhancing overall understanding and conceptualization of environmental issues;
              2) strengthening analytical thought by encouraging alliterative problem-solving
              approaches which recognize key interactions between natural systems and
              societal systems; and 3) focusing on differing perspectives in addressing and
              evaluating environmental issues that emerge from student/group dynamics.    The
              acquisition of the requested equipment a nd resulting development of the
              department's enlarged GIA laboratory will allow the reworking of three sets of
              traditional lecture and lab courses: 1) courses for non-majors; 2) methods and
              techniques courses for majors; and 3) interdisciplinary courses for majors. The
              project results will be assessed by a new departmental outcome assessment
              committee which will evaluate student success through a review of their
              portfolios and exit interviews. The results of the project will be disseminated
              to the academic community through publications in journals focusing on
              environmental studies, geology and geography education. The project results
              should be of significant interest and impact given that Montclair State
              University is defined as a teaching university with a large number of students
              involved in teacher-training and that a significant portion of the students in
              the restructured courses (approximately 1000 per year) will be non-science
              majors.
