Title       : Building A National Employer Based Technical Education System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9850299

Award Number: 9850299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monika Aring monikaa@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok K. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Milissa A. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel St
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                PROJECT SUMMARY    Technician
              education for the electronics industry at community colleges in the United
              States faces multiple challenges including: inadequately prepared high school
              graduates; the need for more and higher quality business-education
              partnerships; and rapidly changing industry requirements. All of these would be
              improved by activities which would build a system from the many fragmented
              programs and projects currently in place. With the support of industry
              associations such as the AEA and NACFAM, as well as many educational
              organizations, Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC) will work in
              collaboration with two community colleges and their feeder high schools at the
              Siemens Youth Partnership Sites in Alpahretta, GA to conduct a project that
              will improve the education of electronics technicians. With our partner schools
              and Siemens experts, EDC will be responsible for producing curriculum modules
              in a standardized format for possible dissemination. EDC will accomplish this
              by forming teams of industry experts and secondary and post-secondary educators
              at the sites. EDC will coordinate the development of instructional strategies,
              teacher guides, and staff development activities to support implementation of
              the new curriculum materials. The products and processes developed in this
              project will be useful in technician education projects throughout the United
              States. Finally, it promises to deliver a new and exciting model for
              collaboration between a multi-national employer and public schools and
              community colleges.
