Title       : Investigative Approaches in the Natural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9850079

Award Number: 9850079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183579             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Usis jusis1@excite.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen D. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Singler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/941-2377

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the problem of science education reform for non-science
              majors, as part of larger general education and pedagogical reforms already
              underway at Youngstown State University.  The current general education
              requirements at YSU specify only a certain number of hours in science, with no
              attention to the connection between the objectives of general science education
              and the choices of content and methods of the courses available to satisfy the
              science requirement.  The objectives of this institution-wide reform are to
              ensure that all graduates of Youngstown State have an understanding of the
              scientific method, the ability to formulate and test hypotheses, an awareness
              of the relationships between science, technology and society, and an
              understanding of the natural environment and the processes that shape it. 
              General science education should provide students with critical thinking and
              analysis tools, basic knowledge, and investigative skills needed for career
              preparation as well as to make informed decisions about scientific and
              technological issues that affect their personal lives and their communities. 
              To achieve these objectives, the science departments are filling a gap in their
              current general education offerings by creating new investigative laboratory
              courses for non-science majors in each of the disciplines, and by reforming
              existing non-laboratory science and mathematics courses.  Each of the new
              collaborative laboratory courses shares the common goals of providing students
              with experience in formulating and testing hypotheses, collecting and analyzing
              data, critical thinking, and working in cooperative groups to solve problems
              through their active participation in a scientific investigation.  The other
              non-laboratory courses are being restructured to provide meaningful choices for
              general education that complement the laboratory courses with relevant and
              appropriate content, and additional training in critical thinking and problem
              solving.
