Title       : Incoporating Experimental Results into the Undergraduate Mathematics Curriculum
               Using Web-Based Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9850850

Award Number: 9850850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Rogers rogers@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Beattie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will improve and extend the facilities of the Mathematical Modeling
              Laboratory in Virginia Tech's Mathematics Emporium to provide the capability to
              produce, monitor, transmit, and display experimental results as an integral
              part of a mathematical modeling component in the undergraduate mathematics
              curriculum.     The equipment will also provide the capability to produce high
              quality web-based products featuring streamed video and data sets that can be
              downloaded and analyzed by computer. This will be the primary means for making
              the experiments available to large groups of students at Virginia Tech and
              other institutions.     The new equipment will enable a series of three
              expanding circles of students to work with mathematically and scientifically
              rich experiments.  The first and smallest circle will participate in hands-on
              experimentation in the Mathematical Modeling Laboratory.  A second and larger
              circle will participate in a "live" demonstration in the Emporium's 100 seat
              presentation room.  The largest circle will participate asynchronously via
              videotapes and the World Wide Web or synchronously using videoconferencing
              equipment and networked computers.       Experiments will be designed to be
              used as modules in  a wide range of large enrollment undergraduate courses:    
              Sophomore-level Ordinary Differential Equations,   Junior-level Modern Algebra,
                Senior-level courses in Dynamically Systems and Chaos, Partial Differential
              Equations, Operational Methods for Engineers, Numerical Methods for Engineers.
              We request experimental/visualization equipment for:   Vibration analysis of
              mass-spring systems, pendulums, strings, beams, plates, and membranes,  
              Visualization of group theoretic concepts,    Fluid-flow and mixing problems.
