Title       : Concurrent Laboratory Improvement for a Revised Mechanical Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9850704

Award Number: 9850704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Gibson gibson@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean F. Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry C. Ku  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chin-An Tan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Golam Newaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Chia D. Lai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raouf A. Ibrahim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel O. Ayorinde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In 1998, the undergraduate Mechanical Engineering curriculum at Wayne State
              University will undergo major revisions aimed at increasing class scheduling
              flexibility for students, reducing the number of required courses, increasing
              the number of technical elective credits, combining and reorganizing a number
              of courses, and integrating laboratories with lectures. This proposal was
              developed on the basis of the unique opportunity presented by the
              implementation of this new curriculum. The proposal presents a plan for
              concurrent laboratory improvements which will significantly enhance the revised
              curriculum and have a strong impact on student learning. The proposed project
              will make it possible for the eight participating Mechanical Engineering
              faculty members to more effectively integrate laboratory experiences into
              coursework, to develop more relevant and realistic experiments based on faculty
              research and/or industry input and to introduce state-of-the-art PC-based
              virtual instrumentation technology in our laboratories. Nine new experiments
              are proposed, and funding is requested to purchase personal computers, special
              PC boards, virtual instrumentation software, special software and hardware,
              transducers, and materials for apparatus construction in order to implement the
              experiments. University commitments for matching funds have been secured and
              the evaluation of the project and the dissemination of its results are
              described in detail
