Title       : A Concrete Multi-Level CIS Laboratory Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9850752

Award Number: 9850752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. Doran doran@cis.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy J. Daigle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Ryder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marino J. Niccolai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Heisterkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Students often view courses in isolation and seldom get the 'big picture" of
              the overall focus of the curriculum. This problem is compounded when the
              concepts and theory is not reinforced by concrete laboratory experiences
              throughout the curriculum. Previously funded projects at the University of
              South Alabama have successfully addressed these problems at the freshmen level.
              It is recognized that these advantages gained, by the prior funding, are not
              fully capitalized upon if the efforts are not continued in subsequent courses.
              The activities needed to extend this prior successful funding effort includes a
              hands-on laboratory experience at the upper levels of the curriculum. The role
              of this lab will be two fold: (1) provide a project environment where juniors
              and seniors can reinforce course concepts and (2) provide projects which will
              then be integrated back into sophomore and freshmen courses to serve as
              concrete examples of future expectations of the students. This concrete
              laboratory experience at multiple levels of the curriculum will provide a
              unique opportunity to overcome the curriculum problems identified above. At the
              sophomore level, software engineering students will use these projects as a
              practical test bed to consider the concepts of that course. The completed
              projects will then be integrated into the existing laboratory environment of
              the freshmen sequence. This final integration will provide an alternative
              breadth view of programming and problem solving not currently present in the
              sequence. By the integration of these projects into the lower levels courses,
              students will be shown the expectations of later courses. It is also
              anticipated that this inter-class synergy would serve to motivate and excite CS
              students. This multi-level concrete laboratory experience provides an overall
              vision of the CS discipline. The projects developed and the subsequent process
              of integration into the lower level courses would serve as a model of how to
              overcome the course isolation problem.
