Title       : Discovery Learning with Case Studies for Undergraduates Electromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9850896

Award Number: 9850896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40328              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Beggs beggs@ece.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Donohoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Students in Electrical Engineering have a difficult time visualizing and
              understanding the abstract and complicated nature of three-dimensional,
              vector-valued electric and magnetic fields. Thus, the objective of this project
              is to obtain instrumentation for an undergraduate electromagnetics laboratory
              that will be integrated into a two-semester electromagnetics course sequence
              and into senior-level Antennas and Microwave Theory courses. The overall
              pedagogical goal of this project is to use the equipment to develop a set of
              experiments that will provide a discovery learning and case study approach to
              undergraduate electromagnetics-related instruction. Each experiment will be
              preselected and predefined to illustrate a physical law or concept (i.e. the
              "case") and the experiments will be outlined in a laboratory manual. The
              students in these courses will be divided into groups and each group will
              perform one experiment during the semester. The experiments will also be
              designed to teach concepts that were not discussed in the class- room so the
              students have an opportunity to learn and discover material as a team and
              independently of the instructor. That group will then prepare a lecture to
              present their findings and the additional concepts to the other students and to
              demonstrate their experiment. There will be discussions and questions during
              this session to complete the "case-study" approach The laboratory will allow
              the students to use dedicated experimental apparatus and state-of-the-art
              instrumentation to discover and analyze electromagnetic fields and related
              phenomena and compare with the analytical theory. This provides an excellent
              opportunity or the students to learn, interact, visualize and completely
              understand the abstract concepts associated with electromagnetic theory. These
              experiments re intended for junior and senior Electrical Engineering majors and
              will affect approximately 1,500 students over the course of 10 years, an
              estimated lifetime of a majority of the equipment.
