Title       : Enhancing the Roanoke College Curriculum with an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9850796

Award Number: 9850796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack K. Steehler jsteehler@roanoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon R. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roanoke College
	      221 College Lane
	      Salem, VA  24153    540/375-2409

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Environmental analyses have become increasingly important at Roanoke College,
              due both to the introduction of an Environmental Science program and to
              extensive use of multi-week applications based projects throughout the
              curriculum. This new emphasis has created a need for trace analysis of metals,
              which will be met using a combination flame/furnace atomic absorption
              spectrometer. The new instrumental features include the improved detection
              limits of the furnace method, background correction capabilities, and a higher
              temperature burner for flame analyses.  New experiments and research projects
              will be developed in the context of a comprehensive four year instrumentation
              training curriculum. A multi-level sequence of instrument experiences will be
              used to educate students on basic operations, advanced techniques, and
              fundamental principles. Interesting experiments will include air, water, and
              soil analyses, forensic investigations, and a statistically designed
              optimization. The new Environmental Science program is also creating a variety
              of undergraduate student research opportunities for which the availability of
              trace metal analysis is critical.  Outreach activities will be an integral part
              of this project. A multi-year series of instrumentation workshops will
              introduce advanced modern instrumentation to a large group of secondary level
              teachers and students. Workshops will emphasize basic principles, in-depth
              hands-on instrument experience, and real life applications. Additionally, the
              new spectrometer will be extensively used for high school student research.
