Title       : Incorporation of Computational Chemistry into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9850645

Award Number: 9850645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31183              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott H. Northrup snorthrup@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey O. Boles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The hands-on student use of computer technology in chemical education is
              mandatory in preparing undergraduate students for careers in the basic sciences
              and technology. This project addresses this need by incorporating several novel
              computer exercises into our present undergraduate curriculum in general
              chemistry, physical chemistry, biochemistry and senior seminar.  We are using
              18 high performance personal computers and molecular modeling software
              HYPERCHEM and CHEMOFFICE to establish a student molecular graphics and modeling
              laboratory. This equipment provides: (i) upper division physical chemistry,
              biochemistry, and senior seminar students in-depth meaningful training
              exercises in the use of computer modeling of atomic and molecular structure and
              dynamics, (ii) general chemistry students an initial taste of the power and
              insight afforded by the visualization capabilities of modern molecular
              graphics, and (iii) the chemical education community at-large with tested tools
              and strategies for incorporation of computational chemistry into the
              curriculum. The project is broken down into several subprojects entitled (a)
              Introduction to Atomic & Molecular Orbitals (AMO), (b) Advanced Visualization
              of Atomic and Molecular Orbitals (AVAMO), (c) Molecular Graphics of
              Macromolecular Structure (MG), (d) Molecular Modeling of Macromolecules (MM),
              (e) Kinetic Molecular Theory Simulation (BOLTZ), (f) Spreadsheet Applications
              in Chemistry (SPR~AD), (c) Gas Phase Reaction Dynamics Simulations (RXDYN), and
              (h) Accessing Chemical Data Bases (CHE~FO).  Results of the project and
              corollary instructional materials are being disseminated to the chemical
              education community via the WWW, publication in ACS journals, and presentation
              at national and regional meetings. Additional exercises will be incorporated
              later pending the success of this venture.
