Title       : Cross-Training Technicians & Engineers for Semiconductor Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9850310

Award Number: 9850310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Wood wood@me.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bassam Matar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis E. Frenzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juergen Przyllas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The semiconductor (S/C) manufacturing sector of the U.S. economy is growing
              rapidly. However, the ability to supply a well-trained workforce for this major
              economic sector is severely lagging the demand. Furthermore, as the technical
              and role demands for technicians increase, their core knowledge in the areas of
              statistics and unit-process operations increasingly overlaps that of engineers
              in an S/C plant. Conversely, new engineers, who may become responsible for
              technician oversight in a factory setting, need to better understand the job
              scope of technicians, as well as receive more hands-on training during their
              academic program. It is thus advantageous to cross-train S/C engineers and
              technicians in shared factory-like settings for selected equipment-intensive
              courses, without artificially forcing complete articulation between respective
              curricula. Such side-by-side training, broken into unit modules, decreases
              per-student lab costs, and thus training costs, while also facilitating: (1)
              cross-training of existing factory technicians and engineers, for lifelong
              learning, (2) cross-training of community college and university faculty, and
              (3) academic migration of technicians who later choose to pursue engineering
              careers.    In this project, a consortium of three universities and three
              community college systems in three contiguous states, each having S/C
              manufacturing as an economic backdrop, is facilitating side-by-side training of
              technicians and engineers, bolstered by the development, utilization, and
              evaluation of computer-aided curriculum modules to be integrated into
              factory-like labs and related courses. These modules will cover S/C unit
              processes and their facility demands from both technician and engineering
              perspectives. The multimedia modules are being designed to function either
              independently or coupled to a multilevel manufacturing simulator package.  They
              can serve training needs in real, mock, or virtual factory-like labs, or they
              can be used for assessment.
