Title       : A Suite of Undergraduate Laboratories Focused on Surface and Interface Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9850822

Award Number: 9850822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Blanchard blanchard@photon.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Garrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley R. Crouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Merlin L. Bruening  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Many of the breakthroughs in modern interdisciplinary science occur at
              interfaces between two phases of matter. Unfortunately, the undergraduate
              chemistry laboratory curriculum at many institutions offers little in the way
              of enhancing the student's understanding of interfaces. The MSU undergraduate
              curriculum offers a solid foundation in the traditional areas such as wet
              chemical quantitative analysis, instrumental analysis, a variety of
              spectroscopic measurements, chromatography and separations science and
              electrochemistry. At present, there is little opportunity for undergraduate
              students to gain experience in state of the art surface and interface science
              within the laboratory or course sequence at MSU.  An archetypal interfacial
              system is used for these undergraduate experiments; alkanethiols on gold. These
              compounds easily form highly reproducible interfaces. The initial adsorption
              process for the monolayers is rapid and is dominated by Au-S interactions while
              longer term monolayer structural formation is mediated by aliphatic chain
              annealing. Students perform a suite of experiments to access these separate
              monolayer formation steps as well as the steady state properties of the
              monolayers. The first experiment monitors the growth of the monolayer in real
              time using a quartz crystal microbalance. This technique also allows for the
              direct measurement of the Gibbs energy of initial adsorption of alkanethiols
              onto gold and demonstrates graphically the reversible nature of this
              adsorption. The second experiment measures the layer thickness and extent of
              organization using FTIR and optical ellipsometry. To relate these experiments
              to physical properties of interfaces, students characterize the monolayers
              using the traditional interface methods of cyclic voltammetry and contact angle
              measurements. These experiments offer  students an experience ranging from
              traditional characterization to state of the art monolayer spectroscopy on a
              single well-characterized chemical system.
