Title       : National Aeronautics and Space Administration-American Mathematical Association
               of Two-Year Colleges Project Coalition: Laboratory Technical Activity and
               Laboratory...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9850244

Award Number: 9850244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Pazdar pazdar@commnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Wursthorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Hirschy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Capital Community College
	      401 Flatbush Avenue
	      Hartford, CT  061063757    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the problem of increasing two-year college students'
              level of  mathematical learning and participation in mathematics.  The
              overarching goal is to  provide, in both near and long term, two-year college
              faculty and students with a range of  classroom materials that foster students'
               mathematical learning within a context of authentic applications.  The project
              is a collaboration among the National Aeronautics and Space  Administration
              (NASA), the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges  (AMATYC),
              and Capital Community-Technical College.  Twenty (20) two-year college faculty 
              grouped in two-person teams, will collaborate with Kennedy Space Center
              scientists and engineers to  produce ten (10) Laboratory Technical Activities
              (LTAs) and twenty (20) Spinoffs.  The LTAs are complete learning units that
              expose two-year college students to the interdependence of technology and
              mathematics within the framework of the Reform Principles expressed by AMATYC's
              Crossroads in Mathematics.  The Spinoffs range from class-ready learning units
              to vignettes connecting snapshots of the technological world with mathematics. 
              The development process begins with a 1998 summer workshop at the Kennedy Space
              Center, extends through four drafting stages with associate reviews, and
              culminates with dissemination.  Dissemination will include presentations at
              meetings organized by professional associations and via  a Web-based electronic
              book project.
