Title       : Instrumentation for Vehicle Handling, Performance, and Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9850665

Award Number: 9850665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Nye ahneme@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Hennessey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wayne W. Walter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin B. Kochersberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The expanding automotive industry in the US needs Bachelor of Science
              degree-level mechanical engineers who have specialized in automotive
              engineering.  In recent years, within the Mechanical Engineering, Department at
              the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), there has been an intense interest
              by students, faculty, and staff in automotive engineering related areas. One
              manifestation of this is RIT's impressive record in national collegiate
              automotive competitions such as the SAE Formula competition in which individual
              teams design and build a race car to compete in various autocross events.  In
              response to the employment need and local interest, an official automotive
              option (one of the few in the country) was recently approved and is currently
              under development.  While faculty expertise exists, state-of-the-art laboratory
              equipment is not available for curricular usage.  The objective of this project
              is to strengthen the laboratory component of the automotive option. Because of
              RIT's participation in the SAE Formula competition, its close proximity to
              automotive organizations, and its large suburban campus, an initial laboratory
              focus on vehicle handling, performance, and navigation (e.g. vs. engines) is
              appropriate at this time.  Students will learn fundamental principles in the
              area of vehicle handling, performance, and navigation, as well as gain
              experience with instrumentation (including an optical based "slip angle"
              sensor) and data acquisition systems.   Steady-state handling experiments will
              be conducted on the instrumented "RIT car" based on testing industry standards.
               Vehicle performance experiments will characterize the longitudinal speed and
              acceleration.   By using principles of navigation students will be able to
              determine the instantaneous location of the vehicle and compare it to that
              provided by landmarks and accurate maps. Learning the above principles will
              provide students with the necessary laboratory skills to function effectively
              in a vehicle testing environment.
