Title       : Integrated Reform of MAT 102 - Intermediate Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9850966

Award Number: 9850966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda Chapman zpchapmanb@trident.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert H. Riedel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Trident Technical College
	      P O Box 118067
	      Charleston, SC  294238067    843/574-6195

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Trident Technical College's Intermediate Algebra is a math "bridge" course
              that prepares students for College Algebra. Most new students at Trident are
              required to take Intermediate Algebra because they lack adequate skills to take
              College Algebra. College Algebra is considered a 'gatekeeper" course since it
              is a requirement for many of the other math and engineering courses offered at
              Trident. Class sizes and limited technology induce Trident to use a lecture
              based instructional method for Intermediate Algebra courses. The lecture-based
              approach does not meet the needs of the various learning styles and
              mathematical ability levels represented by Intermediate Algebra students, thus
              only one in two students pass the course.    The College is eliminating the
              current lecture-based approach used in Intermediate Algebra and creating a
              learning environment to improve student success in Intermediate Algebra and
              better preparing students for College Algebra. By redesigning the delivery, the
              project is addressing major areas of mathematical reform and creating a
              Mediated Learning Mathematics Lab supporting interactive algebra software.   
              The mediated learning environment allows students with diverse learning styles
              to learn the material according to their individual learning styles and
              mathematical ability levels. Faculty utilize small group cooperative learning
              activities to support instruction. Faculty use specific writing activities to
              solicit student feedback through software "E-mail" and "on-line journal"
              features. Instructors use these features, other software management tools and
              increased student-instructor interaction to monitor student and adjust
              instruction to address problem areas. Faculty are receiving extensive training
              to prepare them to teach this newly designed course.    Project deliverables
              include a project Implementation Manual to be used by Trident faculty and other
              colleges interested in implementing the reform course, and a student training
              manual: How to Succeed in College Mat h to help students understand and use
              learning strategies.
