Title       : Electron Spin Resonance in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9850991

Award Number: 9850991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86505              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Collard david.collard@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angus P. Wilkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Kent Barefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Bottomley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The treatment of odd-electron species in the undergraduate curriculum includes
              discussion of radicals in organic chemistry and transition metal-containing
              compounds in both the inorganic and biochemistry lecture sequences.  Although
              discussion of inorganic compounds with unpaired electrons is a vital component
              of the undergraduate chemistry syllabus, radicals are often quickly dismissed
              in the undergraduate organic chemistry curriculum as short-lived intermediates,
              ignoring the existence of stable radicals, and missing the opportunity to
              reinforce concepts in structure and bonding.  Unfortunately, direct
              experimental evidence for odd-electron species and their reactivity are not
              usually presented at all.  The project will purchase an Electron Spin Resonance
              (ESR) spectrometer for use in the undergraduate curriculum.  This will 
              facilitate the development and demonstration of important ideas in physical
              chemistry (analogy between ESR and NMR), organic chemistry (interpretation of
              electron-nuclear spin coupling as an extension of the concept covered in
              discussion of NMR), materials chemistry (role and nature of unpaired electrons
              in conducting polymers and conducting metal oxides), inorganic chemistry
              (elucidation of molecular structure, bonding theory, stability and the 18
              electron rule) and biochemistry (redox behavior of metalloproteins).  The
              instrument will allow us to develop and implement new experiments that will
              enhance students' understanding of fundamental ideas in structure and bonding. 
              It will be used by 300 students per year in sophomore-level synthesis
              laboratory course, by junior and senior chemistry majors, and for undergraduate
              research.  New experiments for the undergraduate laboratories are being
              developed as part of a curriculum reform in response to a change from a quarter
              based system to a semester based academic calendar.  Treatment of ESR in the
              laboratory sequence offers a unique opportunity to explore new pedagogies for
              the treatment of odd-electron species, an area w hich we feel is currently
              lacking emphasis.  As experiments are developed they will be made available for
              adoption elsewhere.
