Title       : Molecular Modeling in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9850497

Award Number: 9850497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin B. Jones mbjones@adams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adams State College
	      208 Edgemont Blvd.
	      Alamosa, CO  81102    719/587-7341

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A chemistry student study room is being outfitted with computers and software in
              order to integrate molecular modeling throughout the chemistry curriculum.
              Students are learning techniques of and uses for modeling and computational
              chemistry at three class levels. Each level builds upon the previous one so
              that students gain both depth and breadth as they progress through the
              curriculum. Students at the beginning level use modeling to visualize molecular
              structure. Through the use of electron density models, students compare types
              of bonding. At the intermediate level, students in organic chemistry calculate
              conformational and configurational stabilities, predict reaction products and
              vibrational spectra, and use molecular modeling in independent projects.
              Students in analytical chemistry study competitive binding of EDTA to Mg and
              Ca2+ from heats of formation of complexes, predict electronic spectra, and use
              modeling to help solve "real-world" problems posed in lab practical
              examinations. At the advanced level, biochemistry students investigate
              conformational and spectral changes in proteins when ligands such as oxygen
              bind, and study effects of changes in competitive inhibition of enzymes when
              the structure of the inhibitor is altered. In physical chemistry, students
              correlate Huckel MO theory to spectra of polymethine dyes, study transition
              state structures, and add a computational component to their independent
              projects. Inorganic students examine the reactivity of metallocenes and the
              stereochemistry of metal-ligand complexes. Undergraduate research and seminar
              students apply techniques learned throughout the curriculum to their research
              and or seminar projects.
