Title       : Wireless Communications Systems Design Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9850785

Award Number: 9850785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred L. Fontaine fred@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Albert Nerken School of Engineering of The Cooper Union for the Advancement
              of Science and Art requests $63,780 to develop a Wireless Communications
              Systems Design Laboratory. This will make available facilities for
              undergraduate electrical engineering students to undertake design projects in
              wireless systems such as cellular telephony, personal communications systems
              PCS), indoor and outdoor radio, and mobile communications.    The laboratory
              will be used by undergraduate students in their Junior and Senior years. In the
              Junior year, students will be introduced to the analog and digital circuitry
              and the instrumentation used in wireless communications system design in
              well-defined projects of limited scope. In the Senior year, students will work
              in engineering teams on year-long design projects. The students will be
              involved with all aspects of engineering design, including preparatory
              theoretical studies and literature searches, hardware, software and system
              design, project management and scheduling, component selection and ordering,
              and written and oral presentation and demonstration, all under the guidance and
              oversight of an expert faculty advisor.    Cooper Union requests equipment
              consisting of test and measurement systems which accommodate the highly complex
              signal formats employed in wireless communications systems, and which can
              simulate and measure imperfections in the signal generation and reception and
              in the communication channel. In addition, the College requests equipment to
              establish a modular experimentation system based upon the VME bus standard,
              controllable by SUN workstations. This experimentation system will enable
              students to concentrate on only certain components and subsystems within a
              complete functioning wireless communications system.    Students will be able
              to undertake projects in wireless communications, a field fundamental to
              maintaining this nation's global competitiveness.
