Title       : Simulations and Data Processing as Aids to Instruction in Biological and
               Materials Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9850596

Award Number: 9850596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77798              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Gerig gerig@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alec M. Wodtke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Horia Metiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori A. Kohlstaedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey F. Strouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A new computer-based classroom is being established to support continued
              curricular developments in the undergraduate biochemical, materials, and
              analytical chemistry areas of the department, and to provide additional support
              for computer-based instruction in our introductory physical chemistry course. 
              Novel features of the developments include the use of actual experimental data
              from advanced research instruments in laboratory and classroom experiences that
              are designed to (1) provide appreciation of the roles of protein
              crystallography and NMR spectroscopy in the determination of biological
              structures, (2) allow students to perform homework in physical chemistry
              classes that is based on solving realistic problems, (3) support further
              development of the uses of simulations and data processing to provide more
              trenchant presentations of concepts in physical chemistry, and (4) provide the
              means to present more effectively essential concepts in solid state chemistry.
              Students impacted by this project include those majoring in chemistry, biology,
              and engineering; we estimate that about 400 advanced undergraduates in a dozen
              formal courses will be affected yearly by the project. Instructional materials
              developed will be freely distributed by means of the WWW. While intended to be
              used exclusively for the support of instruction at the advanced undergraduate
              level, the facilities of the classroom are being made available to
              undergraduate research students and to various K-12 outreach efforts operated
              by other units of the campus when the classroom is not being used for these
              purposes.
