Title       : Computer Modeling Experiments in the Physical Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9850700

Award Number: 9850700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9534               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Brown rebrown@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                An increasing number of publications utilize modern molecular modeling methods
              to supplement and lead experimental studies in the areas of chemistry and
              chemical engineering as well as the materials, biological, medicinal. and
              environmental sciences.  Yet students still receive little exposure to the
              application of modern quantum approaches.  This is true for both chemistry and
              chemical engineering students,  Some of the laboratories which often do offer
              such experiments do not use advanced computer simulations for calculating
              specific properties such as heats of formation, entropies and vibrational
              spectra and then applying these to determining reaction properties. A quick
              scan of text books for physical chemistry laboratory courses will quickly
              illustrate this fact.  Additionally, few laboratory courses cover both
              classical mechanical (molecular mechanics and dynamics and quantum mechanical
              MO methods.  Both are commonly used, depending on the size of the system and
              type of properties studied.  This proposal to equip the P-Chem laboratory at
              Michigan Technological University with modern graphical and computational
              hardware and software is an important step to remedy this problem.  The
              proposed hardware and software are similar to that used by researchers in the
              field.  It will expose the students to the methods and nomenclature encountered
              in the literature.  The students will gain enough experience to not only know
              how to apply the methods, but to understand the strengths and weaknesses of the
              computational methods, where they can be reliably applied, and where the field
              of applied quantum chemistry is moving.  Particularly relevant is that this
              P-Chem lab is one of the largest in the country with approximately 150 to 200
              enrolled students in chemistry. chemical engineering biochemistry, materials
              science and environmental science.
