Title       : Toxicology Bioassay System for an Environmental Toxicology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9850513

Award Number: 9850513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carolyn W. Meyers                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7934               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine H. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A Microtox bioassay system is being requested to allow the Environmental
              Engineering programs at Pennsylvania State Harrisburg (PSH) to implement a new
              course in Environmental Toxicology (ENVE 497A). This is a new development in
              undergraduate education both for PSH and for undergraduate environmental
              engineering programs throughout the nation which traditionally do not offer
              this type of course at the undergraduate level. The combined lecture and
              laboratory course allows PSH to offer courses in all areas of Risk Assessment
              (RA). Recently, RA has emerged as the organizing framework for environmental
              engineering, management, and regulation. In addition, the course will provide
              undergraduate students with hands-on experience in both whole effluent toxicity
              testing and toxicity reduction evaluations, essential tools in the control and
              abatement of pollution. The inclusion of an Environmental Toxicology course in
              our curriculum, to be offered as both a traditional course and as a
              short-workshop series for continuing education, will greatly enhance the
              ability of our students to meet the expanding needs of the environmental
              profession. The Microtox system also will allow the Environmental Engineering
              program at PSH to initiate an integrated collaborative research program
              involving our students, undergraduates at Dickinson College (a liberal arts
              college in Central Pennsylvania) and an active citizen's environmental action
              group. This collaboration, focusing on storm-water impacts on receiving
              streams, will provide interdisciplinary research experience to the involved
              participants and will serve as a model for the establishment of similar
              programs in other educational institutions.
