Title       : Introduction to Inquiry: An Investigative and Integrated Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9850585

Award Number: 9850585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Powell mpowell@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric E. Roden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Oppenheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As a first step in reform of its core undergraduate curriculum, the Department
              of Biological Sciences proposes a new thematic and discovery-based laboratory,
              "Introduction to Inquiry," to illustrate the integration of biology sub
              disciplines in studying real-world problems. Objectives are to increase
              students' active participation in experimentation and their understanding of
              science as a process, not just a list of facts. Through links of faculty
              research expertise with experiments conducted in the laboratory, entry-level
              Biology Majors (sophomores) gain an appreciation for and an identify with their
              teachers as scientists creating new understandings of life processes. Course
              objectives are achieved with hypothesis-driven experiments centered around
              unifying themes, as illustrated with "Stress in Biological Systems". Beginning
              with skill-based modules, students learn theory and application of techniques
              needed to conduct research projects. In the second phase, students construct
              researchable hypotheses and select proper techniques for experimental designs.
              Working in teams, students choose topics to investigate and use a variety of
              literature databases to acquire background information. In the final module
              students conduct experiments to test hypotheses, analyze data, draw
              conclusions, explore alternate hypotheses, and develop written and oral
              reports. Students constructively critique the work of other groups, reinforcing
              science as a self evaluating process. To identify modifications necessary to
              teach this course to general majors, we will pilot the course first for honors
              students. Assessment of effectiveness in increasing understanding in biology,
              in retaining majors, and in stimulating entry into research will include : (1)
              senior performance on the Educational Testing Service Biology Exam (comparing
              these students with those who did not take the course) and (2) comparative
              tracking of student career paths. Successful experiments and assessment results
              will be submitted to The American B iology Teacher and the Association of
              Higher Education Assessment Forum.
