Title       : A Computational Chemistry/Visualization Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9850679

Award Number: 9850679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53296              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia H. Reggio preggio@ksumail.kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Al M. Panu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon L. Combs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computational Chemistry (Molecular Modeling) has gained increased importance in
              chemical industry and in academia over the past decade. It is quite appropriate
              that undergraduate students be introduced to this emerging field. Furthermore,
              Molecular Modeling can be a great pedagogical tool to use with all chemistry
              students, For these reasons, a multi-purpose computational chemistry laboratory
              is being established. The facilities are being used for visualization,
              mathematical calculations and molecular modeling experiments. Molecular
              modeling is being integrated into our chemistry curriculum such that modeling
              techniques enhance learning for our chemistry majors and for the large number
              of students in service courses taught in the Chemistry Department.  The program
              is tailored to the unique needs of students on a commuter campus such as
              Kennesaw State University (KSU). A web-site is being created which makes
              available modeling software and data bases for at-home and in-lecture use by
              all chemistry students and faculty. The modeling laboratory is available for
              on-campus lecture and laboratory use. Specific modeling exercises being
              introduced into the Organic, Physical and Biochemistry sequences have been
              identified from the chemical education literature and from research projects at
              KSU. Many of these exercises have an experimental component. The exercises
              include novel uses of the World Wide Web, recent scientific advances and
              emerging new methodologies.  An upper level Molecular Modeling course is being
              developed which focuses on the theory, underlying assumptions and equations of
              molecular mechanics, semi-empirical and ab-initio quantum mechanics, and
              molecular dynamics/Monte Carlo methods. Advanced problems such as the multiple
              minimum problem with flexible peptides are being explored by calculation and
              correlation with experiment. Students are expected to build a sense of which
              method is most applicable to any given problem.
