Title       : Furthering Advances Toward Learner-Centered Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9850015

Award Number: 9850015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Governanti governmp@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances Baird W. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ Middletown
	      4200 East University Blvd
	      Middletown, OH  450423458    513/727-3200

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Miami University Middletown is in the midst of a campus-wide curricular reform
              initiative to create active learner-centered opportunities. To accomplish this
              goal, the reform initiative is providing faculty the knowledge, time, and
              resources to develop and test innovative learner-centered instructional
              strategies and to extend the most successful of these throughout the campus.
              Several innovations have been implemented across the campus in Phase One of
              this project. In Phase Two, those efforts related to the following three areas
              of priority needs will be extended throughout the campus: helping students to
              improve critical-thinking and decision-making skills through the use of
              inquiry-based materials, to gain and master skills in computer and
              communication technology, and to gain practical work experiences in their
              intended field that are integrated with their academic learning. The aims of
              Phase Two are a) to provide mechanisms for faculty, staff, and administrators
              to share and utilize successful reform efforts, and to mentor faculty as models
              of reform are expanded throughout Miami University Middletown; b) to provide
              technology enriched learning environments that emphasize the interdependent
              nature of academic studies and workplace principles; and c) to ensure that the
              educational processes being fostered meet the learning needs of diverse student
              populations. These aims are being addressed by multidisciplinary teams made up
              of faculty, staff, and students who are carrying out the following
              activities:

1.  Development of a Reform Resource Guide for faculty which
              includes successful models of learner-centered instructional strategies,
              assessment tools, and examples of successful reform efforts;

2.  Offering of
              minigrants competitively to faculty for application of innovative reform
              initiatives throughout the campus; and

3.  Provision of seminars and
              workshops for faculty, staff, and students to provide creative exchange of
              information with national leaders in the field of curriculum and institutional
              reform.




