Title       : Development of a Cell Culture Facility for Undergraduate Investigations in
               Eukaryotic Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9850427

Award Number: 9850427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23346              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl D. Davis cheryl.davis@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura S. Rhoads  (Principal Investigator former)
              Claire A. Rinehart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sigrid Jacobshagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The major focus of this project is an upgrade of existing laboratories for cell
              biology, virology and recombinant gene technology.  Other courses such as
              animal physiology, immunology, plant physiology, and independent undergraduate
              research projects also benefit from this facility.  With the new cell culture
              facility, students are able to use animal and plant cells to study cellular
              events and gene expression. Virology has added a laboratory component to its
              syllabus. Recombinant gene technology (RGT) is a specialized program; the only
              one of its kind in the state and one of a handful in the nation.  A cell
              culture facility supports laboratory study of  eukaryotic gene expression in
              the RGT course. Results are being disseminated through state and national
              meetings. Laboratory manuals, web-site and publications are being distributed.
              Current assessment tests for undergraduate biology majors and student
              evaluation/feedback surveys are being modified to analyze success of this
              project. The addition of this facility provides a greater breadth of experience
              for students, and especially prepares Kentucky students, who are often first
              generation college graduates, with the laboratory skills needed to compete for
              positions both within the state and across the nation.
