Title       : Field Programmable Circuit Boards in Design - A 21st Century Approach to Remote
               Distance Learning for a Rapid Turnaround Heterogeneous System Prototyping Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9850821

Award Number: 9850821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. McDonald mcdonald@unix.cie.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell P. Kraft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In the next century university education will be dramatically transformed by
              computer networks. Students may eventually be able to attend e university of
              their choice electronically while still living at home, something which could
              favorably impact families of modest means,. students with disabilities, or
              servicemen and women at military installations. Particular interest and
              attraction would be to work-at-home parents interested in pursuing a bachelors
              or advanced degree. Satellite transmission and multimedia displays have already
              begun this process. One difficulty that remains will be converting laboratory
              experiences to remote access. By their nature, laboratories remain in the
              curriculum because they teach the student many practical sills not found in
              other courses. Laboratories stress the importance of experimental methods such
              as instrumentation, measurement, and error control. This proposal focuses on
              one laboratory whose experiences could be encapsulated for remote leg. The
              approach is fairly generic and provides a model or how such techniques could be
              applied across a spectrum of laboratories. The courseware which we will develop
              will make the lab remotely accessible. This will enable students to create
              designs at home, implement them in a distant laboratory, and verify correct or
              incorrect operation with remotely accessible instruments. In the near term this
              will permit students on campus to have much greater access to the lab. but once
              the linkage works. students not on the main campus will be able to use it also.
              This remote distance access mode. long with various on line documents. will
              automatically guarantee that he concepts developed will be accessible to our
              colleagues over the internet. This will increase the impact of the SF
              investment, assuring that the results, code. and techniques would be readily
              disseminated to other institutions on a national scale, with man features of
              the approach being generic and applicable to other labs.
