Title       : A New Course Promoting Science as a Way of Knowing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850509

Award Number: 9850509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold B. Dowse dowse@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to create an exciting interdisciplinary
              laboratory experience for a course promoting science as an objective tool for
              understanding the natural world. Establishing in the minds of the students a
              level playing field on which true science competes successfully with
              pseudoscience is central. The core of the project is biology, but many
              disciplines are introduced, providing a focused introduction to the scientific
              method. The primary goal is not scientific literacy per se. It is, instead, an
              introduction to the methodology of science.  A select set of connected subjects
              were chosen for general interest, potential for exciting laboratories, and
              social relevance.  Each is in an area in which pseudoscience or media
              sensationalism is active.  We demonstrate the practical utility of critical
              thinking, experimental design, careful data collection, and objective analysis.
               Since most students are not very excited by a tube of colorless liquid, though
              told it is RNA, a high degree of showmanship is necessary and appropriate. 
              Subjects introduced include: the age of the earth, origin of life, nature of
              light, photobiology, molecular biology, genetics and reproduction, and
              biological diversity.  In the spring of 1995, the New York Academy of Sciences
              sponsored a symposium entitled The Flight From Science and Reason.  Its
              alarming theme was that objective science is increasingly perceived as "just
              one alternative" for understanding the natural world, and that many equally (or
              more) valid alternatives exist (magic, crystal power, shamanism, astrology,
              etc.). This course demonstrates in a convincing way that the scientific method
              is the most objective, self-correcting way of knowing.
