Title       : Hall Effect in a Semiconductor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850553

Award Number: 9850553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Falcone rwf@physics.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sumner P. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is constructing an experiment to measure the Hall effect in a
              semiconductor crystal. This experiment replaces the current experiment to
              measure the Hall effect in a plasma, which is seriously limited by the
              inability of students to evaluate their data accurately in the absence of an
              understanding of plasma hydrodynamics. In the Hall effect in a semiconductor
              experiment students make measurements of the resistivity of a germanium crystal
              and the Hall voltage that develops when a magnetic field is applied transverse
              to the applied current through the crystal. Taking these measurements at a
              variety of temperatures between liquid nitrogen and room temperatures, the
              students  determine the value of the band gap in germanium, the density of
              impurities in the crystal, the temperature dependence of the resistivity and
              the electron and hole mobilities, and the dependence of the magnetoresistance
              on temperature and applied magnetic field. Through the Hall effect experiment,
              students not only extend their knowledge of the fundamentals of semiconductor
              physics but also become better acquainted with the techniques used in modern
              condensed matter research. They learn how to measure and control temperatures
              between liquid nitrogen and higher than room temperatures and how to make
              electrical measurements, including null measurements, in materials. The
              experiment also improves their data reduction and analysis skills.
