Title       : Enhancement of Physiology Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9850658

Award Number: 9850658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26565              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. P. Fawley fawleyjp@westminster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westminster College
	      
	      New Wilmington, PA  16142    724/946-8761

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Biology Department is implementing a series of investigative laboratory
              experiences throughout its curriculum to enhance the critical evaluation skills
              of its students.  This project deals with the enhancement of the physiology
              portion of the curriculum.  The requested equipment consists of
              interface/amplifier units designed to sample a variety of signals and input
              these into a laboratory computer system.  The intent is to shift the emphasis
              from organizing pages of polygraphic printout to interaction with the data.  We
              want our students to develop testable hypothesis statements and carry out their
              own experimental design.  After the interface/amplifier units record the data,
              the students immediately analyze their results, reevaluate their hypothesis,
              and redesign their experiment, if necessary.  The units are easy to assemble
              and program and allow both the graphical display but also the statistical
              analysis of the material.  The efficiency of the system redirects the emphasis
              to developing critical evaluation skills.  The units are used at various points
              along the students' college program.  As students develop these thinking skills
              in the physiology laboratory exercises, we are expanding these activities in
              other laboratories.  Because this is the single biology course offered in the
              elementary education curriculum, this course and several laboratory exercises
              using the equipment have been carefully structured to help students develop an
              appreciation for the scientific process, encouraging students to think through
              a problem rather than look for the correct answer in a lab manual.
