Title       : The Introduction of Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy into the General Chemistry
               Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9850953

Award Number: 9850953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham F. Peaslee peaslee@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Seymour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to link several general chemistry lab experiments
              to a central theme: the weekly monitoring of aqueous metal ion concentrations
              in local surface waters. The current general chemistry lecture already
              introduces several popular topics early in the students' education to help
              capture their attention and demonstrate the relevance of learning the
              introductory material. This proposal would extend this concept to the
              laboratory, where environmental monitoring of chemical concentrations of metals
              will capture the students' attention. One of the most sensitive ways to measure
              these metal concentrations is via Atomic Absorption (AA) spectroscopy. Four AA
              spectrometers will be added to the general chemistry laboratory, and each
              general chemistry student will individually make several measurements of metal
              ion concentrations from local sites during their first year of general
              chemistry. These data would be used by the students for individual lab reports
              during the year, and they would also be posted on a weekly basis to a
              public-access fileserver. This constantly expanding database of student results
              will be available for a final "culminating experience" laboratory report at the
              end of the first year of chemistry, when each student will be asked to analyze
              the data and to look for patterns that relate the results to local weather,
              topography or land use. These weekly measurements will also be available to all
              upper-class students via fileserver, and to other institutions via the WWW. The
              addition of a sophisticated chemical analysis with obvious ties to local
              environmental problems will heighten student appreciation and interest in all
              aspects of the laboratory course, and strengthen ties to the lecture component
              of general chemistry. Also the data analysis skills acquired at the general
              chemistry level will allow the students to attempt more sophisticated analyses
              in their upper-class courses.
