Title       : Establishing a Precision Machining Measurement Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9850832

Award Number: 9850832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Koster koster@ped.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim H. Sung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johnny R. Merck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Piedmont Tech College
	      Emerald Road
	      Greenwood, SC  29646    803/223-8357

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Problems:  Steady improvements in machine tool technology equipment,
              processes, and quality standards have outstripped the practical capabilities of
              traditional manual measurement of products.  This creates three urgent problems
              for Piedmont Technical College's MTT program (and many MTT programs):  problems
              of quality (students can no longer measure reliably to expected tolerances),
              problems of complexity (current equipment cannot even measure some of the
              newly-important dimensions), and problems of quantity (traditional measurement
              to more precise tolerances takes too long, allowing fewer rather than more such
              activities of our students).    The Objective.  To alleviate these problems
              through creation of a Precision Machining Measurement Center which contains
              fifteen pieces of equipment within five systems designed to measure linear,
              surface, angular, coordinate, and optical dimensions of machined products.   
              The Methods.  To redesign all seventeen current MTT courses (and add an 18th)
              to:  (a) teach and reinforce application of this equipment in all courses; (b)
              redesign student projects to include explicit, graded in-process measurement of
              products (to supplement current end-process measurement); and (c) modify
              capstone courses to expect students to independently select and use appropriate
              measurement equipment.  These activities will, in effect, add quality
              measurement to the curriculum's current emphasis on quality production.    The
              Impact.  Eight integrated activities will answer three questions:  how much,
              and how, did the MTT instructional program, and with what impact?  We will
              disseminate the PMMC model statewide through presentations, a report and the
              S.C. ATE Center for Excellence, and nationally through presentations and
              letters to the chairs of all 233 similar MTT programs.
