Title       : Enhancing Undergraduate Curriculum Reform with an Interdisciplinary Science
               Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9850643

Award Number: 9850643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Belanger pbelange@lakeerie.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sipra Saha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Benz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Yachanin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Erie College
	      391 W Washington Street
	      Painesville, OH  440773309    216/352-3361

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Lake Erie College is establishing an Interdisciplinary Science Computer
              Laboratory to significantly facilitate NSF-funded campus-wide undergraduate
              science reform currently underway.  The computer laboratory fills a serious
              need to provide future K - 12 teachers at a small liberal arts college with 73%
              women students, the opportunity to become more engaged in problem-based
              learning using current technology. Our plan is to change, in a major way,
              pre-teacher laboratory experiences to incorporate the simulation and modeling
              ability of new science software.  This modification is critical in an
              institution with limited laboratory facilities. Students in biology, chemistry,
              physical science, mathematics, environmental management, psychology, and equine
              studies courses will benefit from the 18 computers, software, and related
              "smart classroom" equipment by becoming more actively engaged in the scientific
              process.  The computer facility is to be the focus for teacher preparation in
              science.   Workshops utilizing new programs such as Geographic Information
              System software will be developed for pre-college students and teachers in the
              region as well as students at nearby two-year colleges.  The laboratories allow
              students to provide data to and interact with professionals in local
              environmental organizations.  A World Wide Web page will highlight the uses of
              interdisciplinary computer facilities by a small liberal arts college.  Faculty
              are to share their experiences with colleagues through presentations at
              conferences and workshops.
