Title       : Learning for All Through Laboratory Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9850570

Award Number: 9850570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa L. Hein thein@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah E. Irvine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The "Learning for all Through Laboratory Enhancement " project has been
              developed to strengthen and enhance the curriculum for the laboratory portion
              of the introductory physics class for non-science majors at American
              University. A serious need exists to update the existing curriculum to include
              technology currently available. The introductory lab as it currently exists is
              equipped with new computers. However, auxiliary equipment such as
              micro-computer based laboratory tools are not currently available. The proposed
              project outlines a strategy by which current technologies could be integrated
              into the laboratory curriculum. The strategy outlined in this proposal involves
              the adaptation of currently available technologies and teaching innovations
              into the laboratory portion of the course for non-science majors. In addition,
              emphasis will be placed on the development of inquiry-based and interactive
              laboratory activities. A key component of this project involves the assessment
              and evaluation of these various technological tools and teaching innovations in
              terms of student learning styles and current physics education research
              regarding how students learn physics. The anticipated outcome of this project
              is a package of laboratory experiments whose foundation is built on the
              philosophy that enhanced learning can occur when students are a more active
              part of the learning process. This package of laboratory activities and
              experiments would be disseminated to other physics educators who could then
              adapt the materials for use in their own curriculum. An additional anticipated
              outcome is that improvements and enhancements made in the introductory course
              for non- science majors would be the catalyst for systemic change throughout
              all introductory physics courses taught at American University.
