Title       : Southeastern Massachusetts Advanced Technological Education Project in
               Environmental Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9850318

Award Number: 9850318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232179             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Curran mjcurran@capecod.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret E. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret M. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cape Cod Cmty College
	      Route 132
	      West Barnstable, MA  02668    617/362-2131

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  In 1994, the Massachusetts Legislature responded to the serious
              environmental issues which threaten Cape Cod and southeastern Massachusetts
              when they funded an education and training program that would supply a
              workforce to deal with these issues. This fragile coastal area is threatened by
              intensive development which has resulted in groundwater, septic system and
              transportation problems, but the Cape is most seriously threatened by the
              extensive pollution at the Massachusetts Military Reservation Superfund site on
              Cape Cod. Since 1994, three higher education institutions, Cape Cod Community
              College (CCCC), Massachusetts Maritime Academy and University of Massachusetts
              at Dartmouth, have collaborated to offer students an environmental technology
              career path that includes a four-year degree, a two-year degree, and three
              year-long certificate programs. Now Cape Cod Community College and Upper Cape
              Cod Regional Technical School propose an ATE project that will complete this
              Environmental Technology education career ladder with an articulated
              environmental curriculum at the secondary level. The high school students will
              acquire college credit through Tech Prep courses that will be co-developed by
              high school and college faculty. These students will have the opportunity to
              continue their education at CCCC within an AS Degree Program or a transfer
              concentration that will articulate to a four-year program at Mass. Maritime
              Academy or U. Mass. Dartmouth. The project will also develop a mentor/mentee
              program which pairs the college and high school students to receive the field
              experience recommended by all employers. This mentoring program will be built
              upon CCCC's well-established internship program, which emerged through the
              strong support and commitment of local private and public industry
              representatives. The final project component will be the Sumrner Institute and
              follow-up workshops, which will provide other secondary teachers in
              southeastern Massachusetts with the opportunity to receive the me ntor/mentee
              training and curricula for duplication at their high schools.
