Title       : A Laboratory Environment to Support Software Process Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9850486

Award Number: 9850486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Joyce joyce@vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This grant will allow us to equip a new projects lab with a Unix-based LAN of
              10 Sun Sparcstations and a Windows-95 based LAN of 10 PC workstations, plus
              appropriate support equipment and software. This lab will support the
              foundations of our curriculum, by housing tools and a metrics repository for
              use in introductory classes, and the capstone of our curriculum, a new senior
              projects course. We find ourselves in the situation where the software
              development approaches that we use in our courses lag behind those used in
              industry. This grant will allow us to aggressively address this insupportable
              position, and show others how they can do the same. A key goal of this project
              is to allow our students to practice, and grow to appreciate, process
              improvement methods. These methods can be viewed as a meta-technology, which
              transcends the current hot topics in computer science, and provides a basis for
              continual use throughout a student's professional career. Using Watts
              Humphrey's work on the Personal Software Process as a guide, we will get our
              students involved in effort estimation and process and product measurement from
              the very start of their academic careers. A key part of this effort is the
              ability to track metrics across projects. To aid in this metric tracking, both
              at our university and others, we will develop a metrics repository that will be
              available over the World Wide Web and will be housed on one of the servers
              acquired through this grant. Another goal of this project is to provide our
              students with a meaningful capstone experience. The projects lab will allow
              students enrolled in our new projects course to work together in teams, in a
              realistic environment, on real world projects. The lab will provide the
              equipment, the tools, and the space for a meaningful project experience.
              Finally, creation of the senior projects course allows us to move our classic
              software engineering course earlier in our program. We can then add modern
              software development topics such as the use of component  libraries and user
              interface design to our curriculum at the point where they will do our students
              the most good.
