Title       : Composite Material Fabrication and Evaluation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9850560

Award Number: 9850560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald B. Bucinell bucinelr@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks funds to purchase a hot press, autoclave, and vacuum bag
              system for the fabrication of composite coupons for undergraduate course
              laboratories and student projects. Funding is also being requested for the
              purchase of an acoustic emission instrument that will give students the ability
              to evaluate the properties of composite components and to monitor the integrity
              of composite structures. Additionally, funds are requested for the purchase of
              a freezer that will be used for long term storage of composite materials prior
              to fabrication. The principal purpose for all of this equipment is to develop
              hands-on laboratory experiences for students in the mechanics courses
              laboratories that will develop the physical intuition in students that is
              necessary to effectively utilize composite materials in engineering
              applications and to provide students the opportunity to integrate composite
              materials into freshman, course, and capstone design projects. This project is
              proposed as a model for the incorporation of composite materials throughout an
              undergraduate curriculum with minimal impact on the curriculum. The project use
              course lectures, laboratory experiences, and design projects to develop the
              students understanding of this class of materials This project gradually
              introduces students to composite materials starting in the freshman year and
              continues through to the senior capstone project. This equipment allows the
              Union College Engineering Division's strategy of reinforcing lecture material
              on a phenomenon with quality laboratory experiences and design projects to be
              extended to composite materials. This equipment will also provide undergraduate
              students with more research opportunities on the Union College campus.
