Title       : Toward Widespread Geographic Information Literacy: An Undergraduate Computer
               Laboratory for Geographic InformationScience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9850763

Award Number: 9850763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31462              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Kumler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jenny J. Zorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Hackel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore R. McDowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this project is to enhance the geography curriculum by
              providing undergraduate students greater access to and instruction in the use
              of current technology -- computer applications in courses in Statistics,
              Geographic information Systems (GIS), Cartography, Remote Sensing, and Research
              Methods. This would be achieved by converting an existing mixed-mode
              lecture/lab classroom into a state-of-the-art instructional lab.    The lab
              will consist of eighteen Pentium II computers with high-resolution monitors,
              one large-format digitizing tablet, two laser printers, a color scanner, and an
              XGA-class projector and screen. Some of the peripheral devices are already in
              place, (he tablet, scanner, and one laser printer), and would be accessible
              from all computers. The lab will enable each student to have access to a
              workstation.  It has a projection system to provide students with
              easily-followed instructional demonstrations, and it is fully networked so that
              students have access to data on a central server as well as full access to the
              internet.    The lab employs appropriate software for teaching undergraduates
              the principles of geographic information science, including traditional and
              spatial statistics, cartography, geographic information systems, and remote
              sensing. Students will learn these tools in the techniques courses, and then be
              able to apply them in other more systematic courses, including Geographic
              Research Methods, Weather & Climate, Urban Planning, and Geo-morphology.    The
              lab will dramatically increase the number of students who would receive some
              instruction in computer-based concepts and techniques, from approximately 40
              per year to over 200.  Also, the quality of instruction is expected to improve
              as the our students no longer need to share workstations during class
              instruction time.  Furthermore, our students will now be able to do a much
              greater variety of applications than possible with the computers in the current
              lab.
