Title       : A Program to Educate Technicians for the Wood Products Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9850317

Award Number: 9850317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Weidhaas n weidhaas@mwcc.mass.edu                Ext.320  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Wachusett Cmty Col
	      444 Green Street
	      Gardner, MA  014401337    617/632-6600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The wood products industry in the United States repeatedly points out with a
              sense of urgency the pressing need for more technicians and skilled employees.
              The Advisory Board of the Forest and Wood Products Institute at Mount Wachusett
              Community College (MWCC) and the Wood Products Manufacturers Association
              (WPMA), a 650-member organization, concur. This project is developing
              Technician Certificate, Continuing Education, and Contract Training programs
              that efficiently provide wood products industry employers with productive and
              well trained employees. This pilot is resulting in the design and development
              of a unique Certificate Program for Woodworking Technicians at Mount Wachusett
              Community College, with the ultimate goal the creation of an Associate Degree
              program. Both the Certificate and the Associate Degree Programs are being
              linked to regional high school and vocational school programs, and regional
              universities and colleges, particularly the Building Materials and Wood
              Technology Program at the University of Massachusetts. One of the unique
              components of this program is the creation of a Corps of Craftsmen, which
              consists primarily of retired persons who, through their vast experience, are
              bringing hands-on instruction and mentoring capability to this educational
              effort. The program consists of a combination of in-plant, classroom, and
              multimedia/distance learning. The program initially targets companies and
              students primarily located in rural areas of the Northeast, in cooperation with
              the Wood Products Manufacturers Association, with national dissemination to
              follow the evaluation of the results of this pilot program. The project also
              serves as a model for application in other industrial sectors, such as the
              plastics and metal working industries.
