Title       : Computerized Freshman Physics Laboratories: Learning ThroughApplications and
               Open-Ended Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850687

Award Number: 9850687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29534              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Forgacs   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Wick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dipankar Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Privman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is growing evidence that passive listening in class or the mere
              verification of the laws of nature in the laboratory are inefficient ways of
              learning physics.  This project modifies the freshman laboratory based on the
              success of a special laboratory initiative, the Clarkson Team Design Program
              introduced in 1996 by the department.  Currently the program targets only
              academically strong students (the upper 10% of the class).  Some of the
              elements of the project being implemented in the traditional laboratory
              environment are: open-ended problems, project-based learning, flexibility for
              the students to design their own experiments, team work-based activity.    This
              project allows the whole freshman class to participate in the positive
              experience of the Team Design Program. Specifically, students are engaged at an
              early stage in all aspects of the scientific enterprise through computerizing
              the major portion of the laboratory experiments. This facilitates students'
              ability to generate a hypothesis, design experiments, and analyze, interpret,
              and present data. The lab stations are set up with the intention of challenging
              the students with real world problems, shifting the emphasis from grades to
              project success. Such an approach allows students to gain important experience
              developing theoretical models and experimental procedures with state of the art
              data acquisition systems, while fostering technical creativity and encouraging
              students to sharpen their analytical skills.
