Title       : Collaborative Undergraduate Mesoscale Meteorology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9850459

Award Number: 9850459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23050              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Diercks dierks@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The NWS Modernization Program and increased capabilities in computer power and
              vis software have played major roles in the advancement of our understanding of
              mesoscale processes during the decade of the 90's. These rapid advancements in
              technology knowledge, however, leave a fundamental problem: How do we transfer
              this knowledge undergraduate students in preparing them for their future
              careers within the constraints of typical 4-year undergraduate education? One
              approach is to equip classrooms with workstations for instruction which are
              capable of displaying imagery and forecast fields, and a second approach is to
              provide a learning environment and courses which encourage students to think
              independently and critically about atmospheric processes that they can observe
              through technological advancements. The Department of Meteorology at Penn State
              has met the first approach by providing a modern classroom with advanced
              workstations for use with our synoptic and mesoscale courses and has initiated
              action to attack the second approach by introducing a Topics in Mesoscale
              Meteorology Course to challenge students in an independent study environment.
              The objective of this proposal is to strengthen the learning environment for
              independent thinking in conjunction with our collaborative undergraduate
              research program with the NWS. One significant deficiency in fully implementing
              the second approach has been the absence of Departmental workstations for use
              by students in our collaborative research facility collocated with the State
              College NWS office. This proposal requests resources for equipment to correct
              this deficiency and to strengthen our undergraduate collaborative research
              program in mesoscale meteorology. One of three workstations will be configured
              to process NEXRAD level II data from the Central Pennsylvania NEXRAD radar and
              the other two workstations will be configured with software for observing and
              visualizing mesoscale processes.
