Title       : A New Biology Lab Curriculum for Nursing Students Emphasizing Investigative
               Learning Through the Use of Computer Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9850635

Award Number: 9850635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Schlosser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Justine M. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major restructuring of biology laboratory courses for nursing students is
              being undertaken so that these students can better meet the challenges they
              will be faced with later in their clinical/professional careers. With the
              recent changes and cuts in the health care system, nurses are taking on more
              and more responsibilities that were previously assigned to physicians.  Nurses
              must have additional skills than their predecessors to accommodate their
              changing role and status.  The objective is to lay a solid foundation for our
              students so that they will develop critical thinking and problem solving
              skills. To achieve this goal we are incorporating an "Active Learning/
              Investigative" approach to laboratory experimentation. The computerized
              instrumentation acquired with the grant funds is allowing the students the
              flexibility to access background information about the subject being
              investigated, design the experiment with parameters that they have chosen and
              communicate with students at Penn State Abington via a server to share and
              analyze data.  Students are encouraged to make initial observations and
              formulate hypotheses, then by using computers, computerized data acquisition
              and statistical analysis in the experimental process, they learn how to
              organize and analyze their raw data just as individuals involved in clinical or
              basic research.  Our aim is to get away from "cookbook" type experimentation by
              encouraging students to design a series of innovative lab exercises based on
              the biological principles learned in the corresponding lecture component of the
              courses.  Our approach is on investigative learning and: a) Develops
              problem-solving and critical thinking skills; b) Enhances communication skills,
              both written and verbal; c) Enhances computer competency; d) Encourages
              teamwork between students at Frankford and Abington; e) Helps students acquire
              a general understanding of scientific methodology and its implication in the
              clinical setting.
