Title       : Advanced Technological Education Program in Composite Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9850351

Award Number: 9850351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Abrate abrate@engr.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Rivers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Weston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Dill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jefferson F. Lindsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During this two year project, two community colleges (John A. Logan College
              (JALC) and Rend Lake College (RLC) and Southern Illinois University (SIU) are
              engaging in activities designed to promote technology and improve technological
              education in the southern part of the State of Illinois. The focus of these
              activities is the composite manufacturing industry that is both new and
              economically important to the region.      Rend Lake College is playing a
              leading role in this project by introducing High School students and teachers
              to state of the art composite manufacturing processes used in the boat building
              industry. This is done in a  modern facility recently developed using major
              industrial support and a staff with extensive industrial experience.
              Participants in these courses have a hands-on experience with these processes. 
              Teachers receive kits and instructions to be used in their classes the
              following year.    JALC has a major role in promoting careers in Technology in
              secondary schools using modem, interactive, audio, video and computer
              communication facilities. JALC is offering summer camps for students and summer
              courses for teachers in Computer Aided Drafting, Robotics, and Electronics.
              These topics are directly relevant to the overall theme of the project since
              most products are designed on computers, manufacturing processes are highly
              automated, and sensors and computer data acquisition systems are used
              extensively to monitor manufacturing processes.  High school teachers are
              developing lesson plans to incorporate what they learn into their own teaching
              the following year. They are able to borrow computers and robots for three-week
              periods for class demonstrations.    SIU is taking the lead in promoting this
              project and technological education from High School, through two-year programs
              at community colleges, four-year programs and Master's degree programs at the
              university level. This is being accomplished through several means, including
              presentations using a distance learning facil ity that provides two-way audio
              and video interactive communication with virtually every High School in the
              Southern part of the state. SIU is offering summer camps for High School
              students, short courses for High School teachers and a course for SIU students.
                 The three institutions are working together in promoting technological
              education in the region and are offering complementary courses and summer camps
              making the best use of their facilities and the expertise of their staff. This
              project is affecting a large number of students and teachers directly through
              the presentations, the summer camps, and the summer courses. In following
              years, other students will be indirectly affected as teachers will incorporate
              new materials in their courses and will share their knowledge about career and
              educational opportunities in Technology.
