Title       : Environmental Science Instrumentation for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate
               Research Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9850877

Award Number: 9850877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Bodenbender Bodenbender@Hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham F. Peaslee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan W. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Hope College has recently developed an environmental science minor. Now in its
              second year, the new minor program has experienced a tripling of the total
              number of students (from 8 to 24).  This positive sign supports our decision to
              provide for an expanded capability to perform analytical testing of field
              samples and to develop a means to organize, analyze, archive, and disseminate
              the environmental data collected by students.    Acquisition of a FTIR
              spectrometer allows students in early stages of the environmental science minor
              to learn about pollutants in air and water by, for example, conducting
              experiments on the effectiveness of exhaust emission controls on carbon-based
              gases. A UV-Vis spectrophotometer adds the ability to evaluate emissions of
              nitrous oxides in a companion comparison, so that students can explore and
              understand factors involved in air pollution.     Both instruments have the
              capability to analyze a wide array of other environmentally important chemicals
              at naturally occurring background concentrations. This enables students in the
              capstone course for the minor, the Advanced Environmental Seminar, to pursue
              independent research projects on the impact of humans on the local watershed.
              These research projects are designed and executed by the students, who work in
              interdisciplinary teams.    A new student computer facility with Geographic
              Information System (GIS) capabilities gives students the means to organize and
              analyze the data they gather in combination with data from previous classes and
              local and state environmental agencies. The GIS system also facilitates sharing
              raw data and analyses with collaborators from the Macatawa Area Coordinating
              Council, a metropolitan planning organization, local decision makers, and the
              public.
