Title       : Instrumentation for a New Experimental Biochemistry Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9850778

Award Number: 9850778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Brenner henry.brenner@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Pape  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves undergraduate students in experiments using modern
              methods of analysis of biomolecules. In particular, a series of integrated
              experiments are being developed that assess the activity of proteins known to
              bind genomic DNA at specific sequences. These proteins are critical for
              regulating the information flow from DNA to RNA and on to polypeptides.
              Equipment enables students to spend more time thinking about the experimental
              results and analyzing the data.  An example of this is the determination of
              protein concentrations in fractions following chromatographic separations via
              gel exclusion chromatographic matrices, hydrophobic interaction matrices, and
              affinity matrices.  A method for non-radioactive, non-enzymatic detection of
              the activity of sequence specific DNA binding proteins is being developed that
              can readily be used in undergraduate teaching laboratories. A family member of
              the group of proteins related to the Myb oncogene binds telomeric DNA sequences
              specifically, and a recombinant DNA molecule are being constructed that will
              also allow expression, purification and analysis of its DNA binding activities.
              This course is geared to helping students experience first-hand the excitement
              of scientific inquiries and to relate their experiments with current
              investigations in basic biochemical and biomedical research.
