Title       : A Spiral Approach to Chemical Concepts Using GC/MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9850580

Award Number: 9850580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34519              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Forsyth d.forsyth@nunet.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Vouros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A distinct need in modern chemistry curricula is to integrate the learning of
              chemical concepts with the use of modern instrumentation. The instruments can
              be used to teach chemical concepts and, at the same time, learning the chemical
              concepts makes the instruments more than magical black (or beige) boxes. A
              specific need in teaching organic chemistry is to have an effective laboratory
              approach to communicate the concepts of chemical structure, especially the
              concepts of constitutional isomerism and stereoisomerism. In analytical
              chemistry, more emphasis needs to be placed on how analyses of biologically
              relevant samples are carried out, and, for chemistry and honors students from
              other majors, how experimental protocols are developed. The objective of the
              present project is to teach concepts of molecular structure and methods of
              analysis by application of modern gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)
              instrumentation in microscale experiments using a "spiral" approach. In the
              spiral approach, the relation between GC/MS experiments and molecular structure
              is re-visited in several laboratory courses spread out over one or more years.
              This objective is being accomplished by introducing five new experiments using
              GC/MS into introductory level organic and analytical chemistry courses. The new
              organic experiments are innovative approaches to the concepts of empirical and
              molecular formulas, constitutional isomerism, and stereoisomerism. The
              analytical experiments are part of a new approach to introduce student-designed
              protocols for the analysis of biologically relevant chemical samples. The
              proposed experiments are significant in illustrating chemical concepts that are
              I ) neglected in existing laboratory manuals, 2) otherwise difficult to
              illustrate in microscale, or 3) relevant to students more interested in
              biologically related subjects that are often neglected in traditional chemistry
              laboratory experiments.
