Title       : Instrumentation to Enhance the Chemistry Curriculum at Southwestern College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9850951

Award Number: 9850951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73426              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Brown dbrown@swc.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwestern College
	      900 Otay Lakes Road
	      Chula Vista, CA  919107223    619/421-6700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project is to enhance the learning of principles in chemistry, enable the
              learning of methods used in the local biotechnology industry, and support the
              developing Biotechnology Certificate program at Southwestern College (SWC) by
              including experimentation with modem laboratory instrumentation. As a result of
              departmental self-evaluation, a pressing need to improve of our  laboratory
              instrumentation has been identified. The complete laboratory curriculum has
              been overhauled to accommodate creative applications of FTIR, GCMS, HPLC, and
              NMR techniques into the experiments. Additionally, the new laboratory
              experiments have been developed to emphasize methods employed in the
              biotechnology industry, as SWC is located in a region where the market is
              heavily dominated by this industry. Furthermore, collaborative student research
              projects are planned between the Biology and Chemistry departments to stimulate
              activities like those that occur in the biotechnology setting. Ultimately, the
              new chemistry curriculum, strengthened by the addition of the new
              instrumentation, will be part of a proposed Biotechnology  Certificate program
              at SWC. Upon completion of the SWC chemistry curriculum, students bound for the
              primary four-year transfer institutions in the University of California and
              California State University systems will be well prepared for utilizing
              laboratory instrumentation at the level of sophistication found at those
              institutions. Moreover, those students studying to enter the biotechnology
              workforce as technicians, directly from SWC, will already have experience with
              the state-of-the-art techniques and instrumentation that they will encounter in
              the workplace, making them more competitive for employment.
