Title       : Competitive Assessment Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9850563

Award Number: 9850563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Marchese marchese@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kauser Jahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schmalzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravi P. Ramachandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jawaharlal Mariappan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In today's quickly changing and increasingly competitive market place, it is
              imperative that manufacturers keep abreast of the technological advances and
              design innovations incorporated into competing product lines. The term
              competitive assessment has been coined by manufacturers to describe the process
              of ethically acquiring, inspecting, analyzing, instrumenting and testing the
              product lines of other manufacturers. In the Competitive Assessment Laboratory
              at Rowan University, multidisciplinary teams of freshman engineering students
              from each of the four engineering departments will perform each of the above
              tasks on a consumer appliance. In addition to introducing students to the
              science and art of design, the Competitive Assessment Laboratory will allow
              multidisciplinary teams of faculty to assess the constantly evolving initial
              conditions under which the typical engineering student enters his or her course
              of study.  As described in detail in this proposal, the Competitive Assessment
              Laboratory will contain 5 consumer appliance test stations featuring PC-based
              data acquisition systems capable of measuring thermocouple and voltage/current
              signals. Each station will also be equipped with mechanical measurement
              equipment and portable materials testing equipment. The laboratory will also be
              outfitted with a materials testing station featuring a table top mechanical
              testing system and a Rockwell hardness tester. The objectives of the
              Competitive Assessment Laboratory at Rowan University are as follows:  1)
              Provide the launching pad for an innovative, four year design curriculum by
              introducing freshmen to the science and art of design by evaluating the work of
              practicing designers,  2) Introduce multidisciplinary groups of engineering
              students to unifying engineering science principles such as fluid mechanics,
              solid mechanics, thermodynamics, transport and electricity/magnetism using the
              consumer appliance as a test bed,  3) Enable students to determine how
              scientific principles, material propert ies, manufacturing techniques, cost,
              safety requirements, environmental considerations and intellectual property
              rights impact the design of a product,  4) Allow freshman students to actively
              participate in a meaningful design effort by instrumenting and evaluating the
              performance of a consumer appliance,  5) Provide faculty with the means to
              assess the engineering background of incoming students and address experiential
              deficiencies via hands-on experience with the tools of the trade.
