Title       : Modular and Versatile Spectroscopy Experiments for Physical Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9850895

Award Number: 9850895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55841              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Jones gjones@hdycross  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal outlines a series of modular experiments that would help
              "modernize" the Holy Cross physical chemistry laboratories in two respects. The
              first meaning reflects the change in content from covering almost exclusively
              the "classical" macroscopic physical chemistry topics of thermodynamics and
              kinetics to the "modern" microscopic subjects of quantum and statistical
              mechanics. This change parallels the sequence of topics covered in the physical
              chemistry lecture courses. "Modernize" is also used to mean "replace the
              existing outdated equipment" with instrumentation that will provide many
              additional years of service.  There are three groups of experiments that are
              proposed. The first revisits the atomic emission spectroscopy laboratory that
              the students perform in general chemistry. After covering the quantum
              mechanical treatment of atomic electronic structure theory, the students will
              be ready to truly appreciate the quantization of the emission and will be able
              to quantitatively predict the frequencies and qualitatively understand the
              intensities observed in the emission spectra. The second set of laboratories
              investigates the vibrational spectroscopy of diatomic as well as CHaXb
              molecules. These measurements involve use both infrared absorption and Raman
              spectroscopy. A full group theoretical normal-mode analysis is used to
              correlate he spectral transitions with specific normal vibrations. The last
              group of laboratories uses a study of electronic transitions in molecular
              iodine to gain an intuitive understanding of diatomic potential energy curves.
              The interpretation of UV-Visible absorption, laser-induced fluorescence, and
              multiphoton ionization spectra will help accomplish this important goal.  The
              equipment requested is sufficient for but in no way limited to making the
              proposed measurements. The nitrogen-pumped dye laser, detectors, and the
              computer-interfaced data acquisition electronics provide for a versatile set of
              components that can be arranged in many ways to accomplish d ifferent types of
              spectroscopy. The requested FT-Raman attachment for the chemistry department 
              completes the list of equipment needed for these laboratories.
