Title       : Fourier-Transform Raman and Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9850474

Award Number: 9850474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48259              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman C. Craig fcraig@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Q. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fourier transform-Raman spectroscopic experiments are being introduced into
              several laboratories for chemistry and biochemistry majors and other
              upper-level science students.  The higher resolution (about 0.1 cm-l) and
              near-infrared range of the new FT-Raman instrument permit more sophisticated
              experiments. For the biochemistry laboratory, students use Raman spectroscopy
              in a new experiment to study synthetic phospholipid bilayers dispersed in
              water. Students will monitor the change from ordered to disordered structure in
              the hydrocarbon chains in the interior of dipalmitoylphosphatidylchloine
              bilayers as a function of temperature by observing intensities in the CH and CC
              stretching regions. The effect of cholesterol as an additive is studied
              allowing students learn more about the structure of cell membranes. In the
              analytical chemistry laboratory students use Raman spectroscopy to study the
              composition of a standard xylenes mixture using the method of internal
              standards. They will also compare the ease of sampling for Raman and infrared
              spectroscopies. For the physical chemistry laboratory, the scope of analyzing
              vibration-rotation bands by infrared spectroscopy will be extended. As an
              alternative to the classic experiment of analyzing the rotational structure due
              to the two chlorine isotopes in HCl in the gas-phase vibration-rotation
              absorption band, it is now possible for students to do a similar experiment on
              the bromine isotopes in HBr. The improved near-infrared capability facilitates
              the study of overtones in the HCl or HBr spectrum and thus mapping the lower
              part of the potential well and finding how the bond length varies with
              vibrational excitation. For students in the advanced analytical and physical
              laboratory, a new experiment comparing the Raman and infrared spectra of the
              cis and trans isomers of 1,2-dichloroethylene provides data used to assign all
              twelve of the vibrational fundamentals of each of the isomers. Both the
              infrared and Raman features of the new instrument support und ergraduate
              student research. This instrumentation provides opportunities for students to
              have a broader, deeper understanding of the theory and application of
              vibrational spectroscopy.
