Title       : A Visual Introduction to Laboratory Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9850954

Award Number: 9850954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauri A. Ditzler mditzler@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As a result of a recent University-wide curriculum initiative, all Millikin
              students are required to complete at least one science course that interweaves
              experiential, reflective and theoretical elements. Faculty are developing a set
              of introductory, special-topics courses to meet this need. The goal is to
              develop focused courses that will allow students to experience the excitement
              of an in-depth study while simultaneously placing the study in the broader
              context of overarching principles of scientific inquiry. Each course will focus
              on a particular area of inquiry, such as molecular structure, stars, or prairie
              ecology. A set of common or shared laboratory exercises are being developed by
              the professors of the various sections; each exercise will present an
              interesting question from the contributing professors discipline while
              introducing a fundamental method of inquiry or principle that transcends
              disciplinary boundaries. Ultimately, each instructor will select a series of
              experiments from a range of disciplines to create a laboratory experience that
              supports her/his special topics course. While the goal is for each course to
              stand alone in relating the unique characteristics of a specific field of study
              to the common features of the scientists' way of knowing, students taking
              several courses will gain a special perspective. Notably, this will be the case
              for the twenty percent of Millikin students who become elementary or secondary
              teachers since certification requirements will be fulfilled by taking three of
              the courses. A team of faculty have identified ten overarching processes that
              will be covered in laboratory exercises to be shared by all of the courses.
              This project provides equipment that will support a three-week laboratory
              module designed to introduce two of the ten foundational processes. These are:
              The use of instrumentation to make observations that both extend and improve
              the accuracy and precision of one or more of the human senses; and The use of
              graphs and mathematical ex pressions to organize and simplify data, ideas, and
              concepts. These two principles will be introduced through a series of exercises
              that have students consider what they can say about objects on the basis of
              their color and then reconsider after evaluating with visible transmission and
              reflectance spectra, visible fluorescence spectra and infrared spectra.
