Title       : Environmental Engineering Laboratory: A Problem Solving Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9850673

Award Number: 9850673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9804               (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Saleh Keshawarz keshawarz@hartford  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Pines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is to develop an environmental engineering laboratory based on
              collaborative and active learning to provide undergraduate engineering students
              practical, hands on experience with topics and concepts typically not covered
              in undergraduate environmental laboratories. The laboratory will also be used
              for demonstrations to high school and first year engineering students so that
              they will be able to experience the practical side of engineering. Most
              environmental engineering laboratory exercises follow a simple one-two-three
              approach which neither stimulates critical thinking nor enhances learning.
              Practical aspects of topics which students are likely to encounter on the job
              are, at best, discussed only in the classroom and graduates reach the job
              market with limited practical experience. The proposed laboratory will engage
              groups of students in problem solving using four common conventional
              technologies in environmental engineering but seldom experienced during
              undergraduate education: Mixed tank reactors, Trickling filters, Growth
              kinetics of microbial decomposition, and Disinfection. Laboratory assignments
              will concentrate on one of the specific technologies. Students will work in
              small groups (3-4/grp) and will be presented with typical engineering tasks
              and/or problems, e.g., students may be asked to determine the optimum design of
              a trickling filter system, the extent of mixing in a mixed tank reactor, or how
              a certain variable, such as pH, affects microbial growth. Students will
              research the topic, discuss the problem in groups, and develop a procedure
              which will yield the desired solution. Students will develop a workplan
              intended to solve the problem, followed by a written formal laboratory report
              stating conclusions and detailed discussion of the final proposal, alternatives
              considered and possible modifications. As a result of this process, it is
              expected that students will be better prepared for the work place they are
              likely to encounter.
