Title       : A Cell Culture Core Facility and Equipment for InvestigativeExperiments in Cell
               Biology for the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9850614

Award Number: 9850614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Gillen gillenc@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Marcey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Haruhiko Itagaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Ottinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Undergraduate exposure to modern methods in cell biology is crucial to a sound
              biological or biochemical education because of the central, integrative role
              that cellular studies play in modern bioscience. At present, important aspects
              of modern cellular studies are missing from our laboratory curriculum. We
              propose to remedy this by the purchase of equipment that would allow the
              addition of investigation-based labs that utilize cell culture, substantively
              improving courses in the biology and chemistry departments at both the
              introductory and advanced levels. Many fascinating phenomena are readily
              approached using cells grown in vitro, and innovative lab additions will afford
              students new opportunities to conduct experiments in exciting areas of current
              cell biology, including investigations of dynamic processes in live cells.
              These activities will furnish striking insights into various cellular
              mechanisms, and will kindle student awareness of the relevance of cellular
              studies to diverse disciplines. This should lead more students to consider
              career paths in cellular bioscience. In addition to use in formal laboratory
              classes, proposed equipment will see further student use in honors research,
              independent research during the academic year, and summer research. This
              project will thus allow us to fill important gaps in our curriculum, and also
              to broaden the scope of undergraduate research at Kenyon. The project will be
              implemented by a team of four faculty from the biology and chemistry
              departments. We plan thorough evaluation of new labs and extensive
              dissemination of successful experiments through print and electronic media. In
              a novel use of student-generated data, we will with ongoing student
              involvement, create online notebooks that will allow any individual with WWW
              access to conduct investigations that mimic our students' experiences. We
              expect that our dissemination efforts will not only lead to emulation of some
              of our labs, but will stimulate remote, virtual investigations of exciting 
              cellular phenomena. Hence, this project has potential to furnish widely-used
              improvements in biology education.
