Title       : Valid Analytical Measurements in Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9850636

Award Number: 9850636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian F. Tyson tyson@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Uden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramon M. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marion B. Rhodes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Voigtman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves major changes in the laboratory component of three
              undergraduate analytical chemistry courses (the one-semester courses in
              quantitative and instrumental analysis for chemistry majors, and the
              one-semester course in analytical chemise for non-chemistry majors).  These
              changes are part of larger curricular reform in the Chemistry Department.  The
              changes include (a) the introduction of a role-based cooperative learning
              approach to much of the work and (b) the development and implementation of
              problem-based work of industrial relevance. The goal of these revisions is to
              redress the various short-comings in the education of BS chemists recently
              highlighted by the NSF and others.  The new laboratory content gives more
              emphasis to spectroscopy and chromatography. The following new techniques are
              introduced: microwave assisted digestions and extractions, ion chromatography,
              solid phase microextraction, automatic coulometric Karl-Fisher titrimetry, and
              FT-IR microscopy.  The acquisition of a capillary chromatograph with electron
              capture detection and a commercial integrated flow injection unit provides
              upgrades in the areas of gas chromatography and flow injection analysis,
              respectively. The approach to the teaching of some general principles of
              instruments, and of molecular absorption spectrometry in particular, is based
              on an integrated approach which starts with modeling and progresses though the
              construction of modular instruments to the evaluation of commercial
              instruments. Experiments on data handling and processing are included. An
              Industrial Advisory Board provides help in devising much of the experimental
              work, including the problem-based experiments. A web site has been established
              as part of the new teaching materials and information will be disseminated
              through educational conferences and journals.
