Title       : Preparing High-Performance Technicians in Distinctive Manufacturing: An
               Innovative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9850324

Award Number: 9850324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita Gordy-Watkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick R. Allison  (Principal Investigator former)
              John H. Cavanaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Today's global economy is increasingly more complex, technological, flexible,
              entrepreneurial and competitive. Many firms are turning to distinctive
              manufacturing, in which designers, engineers, and production workers
              collaborate in seamless teams to ensure that products and services meet
              consumer requirements, that new technologies are applied quickly, and that
              operations run at optimum efficiency to maximize return on investment. The
              catalyst is a new type of high-performance technician who employs buffering and
              brokering skills. A team of advanced technological firms, educational
              institutions, national resource organizations and minority alliances is
              re-engineering the failing traditional approach to preparing high-performance
              technicians for distinctive manufacturing by changing the paradigm from
              "providing instruction" to "producing learning." The project also pioneers a
              comprehensive strategy to recruit and retain underrepresented populations and
              others who typically overlook advanced technological career opportunities.   
              This innovative program:  * infuses the content of a 90-semester-credit-hour
              equivalent, AAS degree into metadisciplinary projects set in a real-world
              manufacturing environment which employs facilitators rather than intructors in
              a personalized, holistic program of learning;   * demands mastery of rigorous
              competencies in workplace effectiveness and personal productivity as well as in
              communications, mathematics, science and technology;   * ensures faculty,
              tutors and employer-based resource persons are competent in new roles of
              planning, facilitating, coaching, assessing and documenting learning;   *
              recruits and capacitates members of underrepresented groups; and   *
              communicates the project's deliverables and lessons learned.
