Title       : Integration of Digital Signal Processing into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a9850521

Award Number: 9850521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Hemminger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph M. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farid Ahmed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The use of high speed data acquisition and digital signal processing (DSP)
              technology has become the cornerstone of many areas of electrical engineering.
              This is particularly true in the fields of communications, controls,
              intelligent systems, signal and image processing. One of the driving forces
              behind DSP is the overwhelming interest in real-time processing as, for
              example, in high definition television, spread spectrum communications, and
              speech recognition systems. It is clear that DSP is instrumental in conveying
              the principles of many topics covered in electrical engineering particularly
              with respect to modeling and simulation. The objective of this proposal is to
              develop a multi-course sequence which employs DSP at many levels of the
              undergraduate curriculum for the purpose of enabling students to visualize,
              test, and implement concepts introduced in the classroom. This will be
              accomplished through the completion of special projects and laboratory
              exercises in multiple courses with the goal of developing a solid foundation in
              engineering principles by the time of graduation. All students will be required
              to take a core set of courses which introduce DSP concepts, including
              applications where DSP is not typically employed. The level of complexity will
              be increased as students progress through the curriculum, culminating in
              technical electives that will extend their knowledge in a particular area of
              interest. The objectives of the sequence will be realized through the
              employment of current as well as proposed equipment. This project is part of a
              plan to blend state-of-the-art technology with real world applications for the
              purpose of enhancing the undergraduate experience.
