Title       : Problem-Oriented Surface Analysis in the Junior-Senior Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9850719

Award Number: 9850719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dunn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Lunte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George S. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia K. Larive  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Recent technological developments have made it possible for chemists and
              biologists to 'visualize" chemical reactions and processes in new ways. In
              particular, improvements in the spatial resolution of scanning probe techniques
              permits the probing of primary chemical events at the microscopic level. This
              project will permit undergraduate students in our analytical chemistry
              laboratory to perform modern, state-of-the-art experiments aimed at probing
              some of these unseen microscopic aspects of chemistry.  The addition of atomic
              force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) instrumentation
              into our undergraduate curriculum will permit measurements which probe the mall
              size dimensions characteristic of much of the microscopic world of chemistry.
              These capabilities will be immediately incorporated into our recently revised
              advanced instrumental course to offer a focus in surface and materials
              chemistry. We have also outlined experiments for introduction into our advanced
              physical chemistry laboratories and an experiment designed for a microscopy
              course offered in the Biology Department. A total of approximately 125 students
              in four courses including all of our BA and BS chemistry majors, will benefit
              directly from the proposed enhancements. In addition, another approximately 15
              biology majors will get direct hands-on exposure to these new and  exciting
              techniques. This cooperative effort reflects the fact that there is a
              commonality of interest and need among our advanced undergraduate laboratories.
              The K.U. Chemistry  Department has begun to address this issue by the
              establishment of an undergraduate  Instructional Instrumentation Laboratory
              (IIL). The instrumentation proposed in this project will become a part of the
              IIL undergraduate equipment inventory and thus will be available for use by all
              of our advanced undergraduate students, including those performing
              junior/senior research and majors from other departments. We believe this plan
              is a cost- effective way of implementing  modern instrumental measurements.
