Title       : Incorporation of Imaging Techniques into Undergraduate Cell and Molecular
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9850762

Award Number: 9850762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Aronica aronicas@canisius.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Lein  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paula F. Dehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Grebenok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Canisius College
	      2001 Main Street
	      Buffalo, NY  142081035    716/883-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Recent Biology program revisions at Canisius College have placed a greater
              emphasis on cell and molecular biology. The objective of the proposed project
              is to enhance previously revised cell and molecular courses, by exposing upper
              division undergraduate students to advanced instrumentation and techniques
              integral to scientific experimentation in modern cell and molecular biology.
              These techniques will be presented in an investigative, student-designed,
              project-based laboratory designed to turn "Science students" into "student
              scientists". Requested instrumentation critical to the successful
              implementation of this project comprise an image analysis system that allows
              the capture, processing and analysis of images of either fixed or living cells.
              This instrumentation would allow visualization and quantification of the
              morphology and/or molecular composition of cells, and would facilitate the use
              of green fluorescent protein (GFP) technology to visualize and quantify gene
              expression in living cells.  he ability to observe and measure changes in
              living cells in real time will emphasize to students the dynamic nature of
              cellular responses to changes in the extracellular environment. By providing
              state-of-the-art technology and engaging students in the design and analysis of
              exciting, modern problems in cell biology, this project will increase their
              knowledge of the scientific process, and prepare them more completely for
              careers in modem science. We believe this approach will be of interest to
              colleagues in other undergraduate institutions, and a projected outcome from
              this project will be creation of laboratory materials that can be adapted for
              use in other programs.
