Title       : Applied Optics Laboratories in an Undergraduate Optical Sciences and Engineering
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850515

Award Number: 9850515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Johnson johnsona@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haim Grebel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Barat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Federici  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Applied optics is an enabling technology for engineers and scientists, becoming
              more widespread as a tool for teaching, research, and industry. Therefore,
              applied optics should be an integral component of undergraduate engineering and
              science education. To this end, the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
              currently offers its Optical Science and Engineering (OPSE) undergraduate
              curriculum. This program has been created by an interdisciplinary team of
              research faculty with a Combined Research-Curriculum Development (CRCD) grant
              from NSF. The OPSE teaching laboratory is also opened to pre-college students
              and high school science teachers through summer outreach programs.    Composed
              of junior and senior level courses, the OPSE curriculum teaches fundamental and
              applied optics to an interdisciplinary student audience. The courses combine
              lecture and experiments in which students are challenged to learn and apply
              optics within their own fields as well as others. Currently, the majority of
              experiments are performed with low power Helium-Neon lasers and photodiode
              detectors. Many important optical phenomena (e.g. Raman scattering in fibers)
              and applied techniques (e.g. laser surgery), however, require greater optical
              powers and detection with wavelength discrimination.    This project will use
              two higher power lasers -- specifically, diode-pumped Nd:YLF units -- and two
              monochromators with charged coupled device (CCD) detectors. This equipment
              facilitates several new experiments (e.g. harmonic generation,
              photorefractivity, dielectric breakdown) which employ optical phenomena that
              are often utilized in research, thus further fulfilling the CRCD mission of
              combining research with curriculum development. In addition, it allows
              undergraduates and even high school students and their teachers to use
              state-of-the-art lasers in exciting experiments which are usually only
              experienced by graduate students and their research advisors
