Title       : Rediscovering the Liberal Arts: Regaining Lost Linkages to Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9850084

Award Number: 9850084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Strickland rstrickland@colacoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie B. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia College
	      Columbia College Drive
	      Columbia, SC  29203    803/786-3012

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Rediscovering the Liberal Arts: Regaining Lost Linkages to Science

Columbia
              College is a liberal arts college for women with an enrollment of 1,100
              undergraduates, 30% of whom are African-American. Ten years ago, the curriculum
              was very traditional. Growing enrollments in the sciences and a new vision for
              the role of a women's college in the modern world led to a successful campaign
              to build a new science and mathematics facility. With a new physical space and
              an institutional commitment to mathematics and science, these departments are
              poised to expand their innovative teaching and curricular reform efforts.  The
              entire campus is committed to integrating the historical strengths in liberal
              arts with the tradition of teaching innovation in science and mathematics. With
              this grant, the faculty at Columbia College have initiated a bold new plan of
              faculty development and curriculum reform to infuse scientific inquiry into the
              curriculum, thereby creating linkages between and among disciplines and
              realigning approaches to all disciplines using modern science and its modes of
              inquiry. 

The program for institution-wide reform of undergraduate education
              consists of three phases: (1 ) a summer institute, designed for faculty in all
              disciplines, that will enable them to experience scientific modes of inquiry
              and scientific research; (2) the collaborative creation of two general
              education courses. (3) an outreach summer institute for teachers at local
              public schools and interested faculty in non-scientific disciplines. 

One of
              the two general education courses will focus on distinct modes of inquiry and
              the similarities and differences with which the sciences, the social sciences,
              the fine arts and the humanities approach problem-solving. This course will
              instill in first-semester college students the process of making linkages
              between branches of thought. The other course will be an opportunity for
              non-science majors actually to do science. The course will serve as an
              introduction to the study of science and will culminate with a scientific
              research project designed to connect with each student's major field of study. 
              Both discovery collaboratives will emphasize a problem-centered approach to
              learning, and we will utilize our working knowledge of collaborative learning
              and gender based learning to develop innovative learning components. 

The
              outreach summer institute will allow us to build on strong relationships with
              local school districts and public school teachers. It will also provide
              important professional development opportunities for elementary and middle
              school teachers, as well as high school teachers and college faculty from our
              own campus and from other colleges in the state. The college will commit to
              continuing to offer the institute on an annual basis after the funding period
              ends.


