Title       : Hands-On Modules for Use in a Chemistry of Materials Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9850825

Award Number: 9850825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Schadler schadl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this proposal is to complete the development of an active
              learning environment in the Chemistry of Materials course taken by all
              engineers at Rensselaer.  This goal can be accomplished by the acquisition of 
              a teaching optical microscope, table-top tensile machines, micro ohmmeters,
              pressure gages, temperature controllers, thermocouple readouts, and regulators.
               This equipment will enable us to develop hands-on experiments which we will
              use to teach the principles necessary for the Chemistry of Materials course.   
                The Chemistry of Materials course is being taught in an interactive format
              with 15 teams of four students per class.  The two 2-hour interactive sessions
              per week are broken up into modules.  Each module begins with the presentation
              of a concept / principle by the faculty member.  This presentation takes the
              form of a mini lecture by the instructor, or a demonstration, either "real
              time" or computer generated, or some combination of the two.  Students are then
              given either a "team problem" exemplifying the principle just covered or a
              hands-on experience that provides a practical application of the principle. 
              The problems or hands-on exercises are to be completed as a team with each
              member responsible for teaching to, or learning from the others on his/her
              team.  In a two-hour session, two or three of these modules are covered.    The
              course is taught in a multimedia room with a computer available to teach team
              of four students and the ability to project information from the computer onto
              a screen.  The computers are used to access the World Wide Web (WWW), run
              multimedia software, and solve simple problems.
