Title       : Developing a Computer Based Laboratory/Discussion Facility for General Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9850566

Award Number: 9850566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30019              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Tashiro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles P. Newcomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Sacramento
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  958192605    916/454-6011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional undergraduate Physics courses have been criticized for producing
              poor results in learning and understanding. Traditional pedagogy produces
              student learning characterized by memorization of vocabulary and problem
              solving algorithms rather than long-lasting conceptual understanding and higher
              order problem solving, critical thinking, and scientific inquiry skills. The
              goal of this project is to restructure the first semester of the general
              physics course by developing a laboratory/discussion facility that provides an
              active learning environment using technology to both facilitate integrated
              laboratory/computer simulation experiences for students and motivate
              constructive student discourse. Successful restructuring of this course and
              development of this lab facility will lay the foundation for change in the
              second semester of the course and serve as a model for all lower-division labs.
              Active learning methods combined with microcomputer-based laboratories (MBLs)
              are used to improve student learning and long term retention and conceptual
              understanding. In addition to adopting the best practice in MBL instruction,
              the facility enables us to seamlessly integrate data acquisition and analysis,
              simulations, computer-facilitated student discourse, on-line testing, and
              classroom management in a "studio" or discussion/lab setting. The technology
              will also allow us to utilize the growing availability of Web-based
              instructional materials.
