Title       : Laboratory for Engineering Design and Continuous Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850987

Award Number: 9850987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Macedo jmacedo@acusd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick T. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Lord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of San Diego
	      5998 Alcala Park M210
	      San Diego, CA  921102492    619/260-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will develop, implement and disseminate an innovative approach
              for conducting engineering laboratory projects. The innovation consists of
              having students continuously improve simple physical models of systems while
              emulating the methods followed by practicing engineers. The objectives of this
              laboratory approach are to introduce fundamental engineering  skills early in
              the curriculum, reinforce them at the senior level, and provide an entertaining
              yet challenging learning environment that will help retain and attract
              engineering students.    This laboratory approach will be implemented by
              assigning teams of two students to an operational electromechanical system with
              the open-ended task of improving it by following a systematic engineering
              process. The projects will be working models of real systems built by students
              using fischertechnik(R) construction components and controlled using a personal
              computer. Each design team will receive a complete system and all the
              documentation generated the previous semester with the assignment of improving
              the performance of the system. During their design process, students will
              execute the following steps: 1) Systems analysis to identify opportunities for
              improvement, 2) Evaluation of alternatives and selection of the improvements to
              be made, 3) Preparation of a project proposal for approval by the instructor,
              4~ Planning and execution of the approved modifications,      5) Verification
              and measurement of the improvements achieved and 6) Preparation of technical
              documentation. Student teams will be aware that their results and reports will
              be used by future teams, therefore they will understand the need to develop
              clear and complete documentation. This methodology, with variations in the
              specific equipment software, and complexity levels, will be incorporated into a
              freshman Computer Aided Engineering course required of all engineers and into a
              senior-level Computer Integrated Manufacturing course required of Industrial
              and Systems Engineering  majors.
