Title       : Wireless Communications as a Catalyst for Curriculum Integration: A New
               Microwave Measurement and Design Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9850988

Award Number: 9850988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Fay patrick.j.fay.9@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara E. Walvoord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                An innovative microwave design and measurements laboratory for undergraduates
              is being developed. This laboratory facility and its associated laboratory
              course is a highly multidisciplinary project that draws upon the fundamentals
              of semiconductor device physics, electromagnetic field theory, electronic
              circuit design, and communication system design. By integrating these four
              major areas into one laboratory course, this project directly addresses one of
              the most pressing problems in engineering education, the tendency of students
              to view their coursework as a collection of narrow specialties rather than an
              integrated whole. This course, in which the students will design, fabricate,
              test, and analyze microwave circuitry for wireless communication systems, will
              cut across these traditional areas of specialty and provide a broad based
              educational opportunity. State-of-the-art computer aided design and simulation
              software, coupled with modern computer-controlled microwave measurement
              equipment, will enable the students to learn the intricacies of microwave
              circuit design and testing while at the same time strengthening their grasp of
              the fundamentals of semiconductor device operation, electromagnetic field
              theory, and circuit design. The course will be taught in a full-time laboratory
              setting, with student measurements and demonstrations in every class meeting to
              infuse the students with enthusiasm for this exciting area of work.
