Title       : Institution-Wide Implementation of the Interprofessional Projects (IPRO) Program
               at Illinois Institute of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a9850064

Award Number: 9850064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Kallend kallend@charlie.iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Voland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Hites  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Jacobius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Barlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Illinois Institute of Technology is implementing the IIT Interprofessional
              Projects (IPRO) Program to integrate project-based team experiential learning
              across the entire span of disciplines encompassed by the undergraduate college
              curriculum, and involve the graduate programs across the university that
              include engineering, science, law, business, psychology, design and
              architecture. The distinctiveness of this learning model, tested over the past
              two years (via 47 pilot projects to date), is the formation of project teams,
              each with a mix of 5-15 students from across the professional disciplines and
              from multiple levels (sophomore through graduate), who are brought together
              under a three-credit-hour format at the rate of 30 project courses per
              semester. Organizations from the workplace (corporate, entrepreneurial,
              non-profit, government) supply multi-faceted current topics and support the
              teams in a co-mentoring role with the faculty and a graduate student project
              leader. This NSF project will: define the pedagogy, policy and practice for the
              IPRO Program through a consensus building process coordinated by a new Office
              of Interprofessional Projects; create an IPRO summer leadership institute for
              {graduate student project leaders and specialized IPRO Program development
              workshops for faculty; develop/test an evaluation/assessment methodology for
              the IPRO pedagogy; develop
colloquium n on project-based learning and
              multi-functional teams across the professions to attract faculty and otkeI
              specialists in academia and industry to share effective approaches to teaching
              and learning via team projects; develop a project sponsorship program with
              workplace organizations; and demonstrate a collaborative web based scientific
              laboratory virtual environment to bridge disciplines, campuses, and sponsors.
              IIT will explore the concept of a Center for the Study of Project-based
              Learning and Multi-Functional Teams Across the Professions to provide the IPRO
              Program with cohesion, coordination and resource support for academic units,
              develop a. concentration of scholarly research in project-based learning and
              teamwork that offiers a national forum for a and workplace organizations, and
              develop a strong empirical base for designing and implementing effective
              project team learning programs.


