Title       : Integrating Spatial and Temporal Variability in Ecology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9850868

Award Number: 9850868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47821              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Ehlinger ehlinger@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur S. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane De Steven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Whittingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Field research is fundamentally different from typical laboratory research.
              The data that students need to collect often exhibit stochastic variation or
              daily and seasonal trends. Taking a 'snapshot" on a single day at a single time
              is often of little use beyond simple demonstration of a technique. In addition,
              the environments of interest are usually some distance from campus. The goal of
              this project is to enhance Ecology laboratories and allow students to observe,
              question, hypothesize, design, and research real-world ecological problems .
              This will be accomplished by the incorporation of computerized environmental
              monitoring equipment into existing laboratory exercises.  The University of
              Wisconsin-Milwaukee Department of Biological Sciences possesses advanced
              laboratory facilities on campus, and has access to a wonderful variety of field
              sites through the UWM Center for Great Lakes Studies and UWM Field Station.
              However, we are severely handicapped in our abilities to carry out meaningful
              field laboratories with undergraduates because of out-dated or non-existent
              environmental measurement and monitoring equipment. Furthermore, in order to
              fully implement a research-based approach to teaching ecology laboratories, we
              must acquire the flexibility to gather data on a greater variety of spatial and
              temporal scales. We do not presently possess the equipment to collect the
              appropriate types of data to allow students to both ask and then attempt to
              answer meaningful scientific questions in our ecology labs. Instrumentation
              requested includes 16 terrestrial microclimate recording stations, 6 stream
              water chemistry multiprobes, and computer systems to access and analyze the
              data collected by these units. This equipment will allow students to follow up
              on initial observations early in the semester by asking and testing ecological
              hypotheses during the rest of the term. In addition to being used y other
              courses at UWM the data and project descriptions will be available on the class
              web site for use  by other universities and high schools.
