Title       : Optics Experiments in the Advanced Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9850709

Award Number: 9850709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy Perozzo perozzop@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The main objective of this proposal is to increase the number of advanced
              experiments offered in the Experimental Methods and Advanced laboratory courses
              in order to provide students with research experience in a variety of fields
              within physics, with an emphasis on optics. These experiments will also be made
              available to students enrolled in other physics courses currently offered in
              the physics program as well as courses to be offered through the Masters in
              Education with an emphasis on Physics program currently under development. In
              this way, the project will also allow the department to enhance and extend the
              knowledge base of physics teachers, both existing teachers and those currently
              enrolled in the education program.    The method to be employed is the
              implementation of several new laboratory experiments developed/modified by the
              principal investigator. Many of the experiments are directly related to optics,
              such as the speed of light in optical fiber and second harmonic generation in
              ADP. Other use optics to investigate a different topic, such as the infra-red
              link and the laser velocimeter. Each experiment can be tailored to suit the
              student's need. For example, a student intending to continue on in graduate
              school might focus on characterization and improvement of the infra-red link as
              a way to transmit information, whereas a prospective teacher might focus on
              simplification of the circuitry in order to demonstrate the concept of
              information transmission to secondary students.    The laboratory experiments
              will be accessible by others in the scientific community through the world wide
              web. A home page, linked to the GVSU web page, will contain a page for each
              experiment with a detailed equipment list, sources, approximate cost of
              implementation, and instructions.
