Title       : Western Arkansas Advanced Manufacturing Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1999   
File        : a9850334

Award Number: 9850334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney G. Connor sconnor@systema.westark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Stephens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gibson Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas at Ft Smith
	      P O BOX 3649
	      Fort Smith, AR  729133649    501/785-4241

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Located in an area where manufacturing employment is on the increase, Westark
              College, in concert with area manufacturers, realizes the critical need for a
              well educated workforce. This project is developing and delivering
              manufacturing instruction at the bachelor's degree level that is founded in the
              contextual application of mathematics, science and technology principles and
              which builds on the associate degree program already in place at Westark. 
              Collaboration with local public high schools is providing a pipeline for
              sharing project innovations with high school faculty.  A pilot program, the
              Ford Academy of Manufacturing Sciences (FAMS), will provide high school
              students a foundation from which to enter the manufacturing technology program.
               The result is a seamless 2+2+2 program which has strong industrial backing in
              the community and which is a national model.     Strong collaboration between
              Westark and the business community have resulted in numerous training and
              education activities that are the foundation from which to develop a program in
              manufacturing. Ongoing efforts have created significant interest among the
              manufacturers, public schools, and legislators for this program.     This
              unique program is developing curriculum based upon manufacturer identified
              competencies, and focuses on learning rather than teaching. Both high school
              graduates and current manufacturing employees are target audiences.  Breaking
              traditional paradigms of educational structure and delivery and contextually
              basing in manufacturing is causing great interest among potential students.   
              This proposal supports the development of learning modules that are both
              self-paced and team-based, maintaining a focus on the outcome competencies,
              rather than seat time. Pre-assessment tools for proper placement and the
              awarding of advanced credit upon demonstrated competency are components of this
              proposal. Small clusters of employer-identified competencies will be delivered
              as self-paced learning modules that include aut henticating activities allowing
              students to experience the manufacturing applications. Also supported is an
              advanced manufacturing laboratory in which many of the authenticating
              activities are taking place.
