Title       : Marine Information Processing Applications in Marine Science Undergraduate
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850863

Award Number: 9850863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn Kjerfve bjorn@.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dwayne E. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Stancyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose to improve the teaching of marine science to undergraduate students
              by acquiring the infrastructure necessary to integrate Marine Information
              Processing (MIP) equipment into the undergraduate Marine Science Program
              curriculum at the University of South Carolina. MIP is Geographic Information
              Processing (GIP) applied to marine problems, a combination of remote sensing,
              digital image processing, global positioning systems, geographic information
              systems, geostatistics, modeling, and telecommunications. In modern marine
              research, scientists utilize MIP for a variety of applications in the physical
              geological, chemical, and biological disciplines. Excellent basic GIP courses
              already exist in the Department of Geography at the University of South
              Carolina, and the Department of Geography will continue to teach all basic
              GIP/MIP courses. Marine Science majors interested in MIP will be encouraged to
              complete a newly instituted minor in Geographical Information Processing in the
              Department of Geography in preparation for upper level marine science course
              laboratory and exercises redesigned to take full advantage of the new MIP
              technology. A series of Geography courses will serve as prerequisites to select
              upper level Marine Science courses with MIP content, making sure that the
              GIP/MIP technology is integrated well into Marine Science lectures laboratory
              exercises, and undergraduate experiences. This will help Marine Science
              graduates from the University of South Carolina to become better prepared to
              enter the job market and participate in solving complex environmental and
              societal problems. With the full support of the Department of Geography, we
              propose to provide marine students hands-on experience utilizing MIP tools in
              lecture and lab settings by purchasing a turn-key High Resolution Picture
              Transmission (HRPT) acquisition and processing station, computer software and
              hardware necessary for processing marine data, and field-capable instruments,
              including laptop computers, radiometers a nd hand-held global positioning
              system (GPS) units. Although he basic GIP/MIP preparation will e offered by the
              Department of Geography, we will continue to develop innovative MIP laboratory
              exercises and applications within the Marine Science curriculum and publish
              these as exercise and laboratory manuals. The impact of integration of MIP
              technology in the marine science curriculum will be assessed via an exit exam
              and student course evaluations. Funding of this proposal will also help
              undergraduate students to gain valuable marine research experience by use of
              modern technology.
