Title       : Building a Teaching and Learning Community at Montana State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9850116

Award Number: 9850116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dooley dmdooley@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Malone  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeffrey P. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Marley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell B. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy F. Slater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth C. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

This institution-wide reform project comprises three vital
              initiatives that enable Montana State University-Bozeman to move from a campus
              with promising "hot spots" of innovation in undergraduate SME&T education, to
              an institution with truly campus-wide involvement in these efforts. The first
              initiative creates a Teaching & Learning at MSU (TL - MSU) Start-Up Program to
              provide professional development and mentoring support to recent hires in SME&T
              fields. New hires will be given incentives to form a teaching & learning
              support team with an experienced faculty member and a graduate student to
              participate in a variety of professional development activities. The second
              initiative creates a Teaching & Learning Campus Profile for campus-wide
              formative assessment of present and future reforms. This crucial resource
              aggregates qualitative and quantitative data to provide an accurate
              understanding of accomplishments and needs. The third initiative creates a
              Faculty Teaching & Learning Portfolio (TLP) model to support meaningful
              evaluation of the significant professional commitment many faculty are making
              to improve the scholarship of teaching and learning. MSU faculty have stepped
              forward to meet the challenge presented by calls for fundamental rethinking of
              the standard teaching and learning paradigm. This project provides a much
              needed evaluation tool engendering the richness of faculty teaching/learning
              efforts and redirecting attention to student learning--the ultimate goal and
              test of reform. Through these three initiatives startup program that brings
              teams of new faculty, experienced faculty, and graduate students together to
              improve teaching and learning; a strong assessment component to underpin reform
              efforts; and a new faculty evaluation model that facilitates rewarding the
              practice and scholarship of teaching this proposal creates tools for MSU to use
              and to share with other campuses nationally.


