Title       : Doing Science in the Undergraduate Classroom Using Rapid Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9850498

Award Number: 9850498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony A. Renshaw ar177@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Rapid prototyping equipment is requested for use in an introductory
              undergraduate course in which students design, build, and test their own
              experimental solutions to an on-going research problem at Columbia University.
              The course teaches CAD and CAD-based prototyping skills that can be quickly
              learned by students and then applied to a real world, scientific problem.
              Geometric and design aspects of the research problem are emphasized while
              technical aspects beyond the student capabilities are presented as fixed
              inputs. The cut-and-try philosophy of the course places a heavy fabrication
              burden on the professor and course TA because, by its introductory nature,
              students do not have prototyping backgrounds. The requested equipment will
              greatly reduce this burden and improve the linkage between the School' s
              existing CAD facilities and curriculum and its CAD-based prototyping
              capabilities. The course has no prerequisites and has attracted students from
              throughout the University. Although initially daunting, the challenge of "out
              designing" professors has been enthusiastically embraced by the students, and
              they appreciate that their efforts are being taken seriously despite their
              limited technical backgrounds. The course itself may serve as a national model
              for enabling undergraduates to perform original scientific work at research
              institutions, and may also attract new students to science and engineering. As
              part of this proposal, Columbia has committed funds for a comprehensive
              educational evaluation of the course by Teachers College and a documentary film
              about the course by the Graduate Film School. These concrete deliverables
              strengthen the proposed evaluation and dissemination plans.
