Title       : Improving Scientific Competence in Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9850071

Award Number: 9850071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan G. Forman sgforman@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George K. Horton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Herzog  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Potenza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monica A. Devanas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis L. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Greenfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To contribute to the development of science literacy in the general student
              population, a set of introductory core science courses is being developed that
              comprehensively address the factors that have been found to promote science
              interest and learning in undergraduates - namely linking science to important
              societal issues and minimizing lectures in favor of devoting time to discourse,
              minilabs, collaborative learning and "hands-on" problem solving activities. 
              The courses are being developed and taught by senior faculty members in the
              core science departments.  These faculty, designated Rutgers Senior Science
              Teaching Fellows, are also developing and organizing activities that bring
              information about best practices in science education to other faculty members
              in their departments.  To improve the education of students majoring in
              science, workshops in each of the core sciences are being developed to prepare
              students to participate more effectively in undergraduate research experiences
              with faculty mentors.
