Title       : NMR Spectroscopy in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9850540

Award Number: 9850540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford B. LeMaster clemast@tce.boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Chemistry Department is purchasing a wide-bore 300-MHz NMR spectrometer
              for use in laboratory courses and undergraduate research. Organic chemistry
              laboratories will use the instrument to identify compounds in reaction
              sequences, prove the structure of reaction products, and perform qualitative
              analysis. Proton and l3C spectra will be acquired by students in this course.
              In the second semester students will learn to use 2-D spectra for confirmation
              of synthesis products and for qualitative analysis. Organic Chemistry
              Laboratory will benefit from the automated acquisition and analysis software,
              which allows quick turnover of samples. Advanced laboratories will build on the
              basis developed in that course. Physical Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Advanced
              Chemical Preparations Laboratories will use the spectrometer for new
              experiments in chemical-shielding trends, thermodynamics, kinetics, relaxation,
              stereoselectivity of enzyme- catalyzed hydrogen transfer to NAD(P)+, energy
              transduction in mitochondria, and structure and molecular modeling. The
              Spectrometric Identification course will teach more advanced techniques such as
              DEPT, HETEROCOSY, HETCOR, 2-D INADEQUATE, and NOESY. Students will learn to
              solve real-world unknowns that are sufficiently complex to thwart complete
              assignment using any one technique. Finally, the undergraduate research
              component of the Chemistry Major will be significantly enhanced. The new
              spectrometer will be used by students doing organic and inorganic synthesis
              tesearch; in studies of the conformational behavior of soil organic matter and
              its interaction with mineral colloids and pollutants under changing
              environmental conditions; in gas- and liquid-phase dynamic NMR studies aimed at
              separating intrinsic and environmental effects on conformational exchange
              reactions, evaluating theoretical calculations, and generating force-field
              torsional parameters; and in 3Ip NMR studies that simultaneously determine
              changes in high-energy phosphate metabolism and cardiac function .
