Title       : A Bridge to Advanced Technological Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9850327

Award Number: 9850327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $968187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davis Jenkins davis@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The University of Illinois at Chicago and Wayne State University are leading
              teams of community colleges, community-based organizations, universities and
              industry groups in Chicago and Detroit to develop curricula for programs
              designed to provide a bridge to advanced technological education for adults who
              lack the requisite basic skills and knowledge.    An "Advanced Technology
              Bridge" program that prepares educationally disadvantaged adults for two-year
              college certificate and associate degree programs in Manufacturing Technology
              has been piloted in Chicago. The groundwork has been laid for a similar program
              in Detroit.    The NSF ATE project builds on the efforts to date in Chicago and
              Detroit to develop Bridge program curricula. The specific objectives of this
              three-year project are to (1) develop a model Bridge curriculum suitable for
              national dissemination; (2) produce multimedia instructional software to
              enhance learning of the fundamentals of technical literacy by ESL students; (3)
              pilot a curriculum for training Bridge program instructors; and (4) publish a
              Bridge program implementation guide.    Formative evaluation of the project is
              carried out by advisors from industry and from community college and university
              manufacturing and engineering technology programs, who will ensure that the
              Bridge curriculum provides the foundation for career-long learning both in
              postsecondary technical education and in the advanced technological workplace.
              A nationally known evaluation organization will be commissioned to conduct a
              summative evaluation of the project's outcomes and impacts. Dissemination is
              integral to the project, which will adapt for Detroit a model initially
              developed in Chicago and facilitate knowledge sharing between the "Bridge
              building" efforts in the two cities. More widespread dissemination is also
              planned.    The funds requested from NSF ATE for curriculum development will
              leverage more than $2.6 million already raised by the project partners for
              piloting of the Bridge curricu lum and other program operations.
