Title       : Urban Visualization Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9850555

Award Number: 9850555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Schmandt schmandt@koko.csustan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mel Aamodt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Stanislaus
	      801 W Monte Vista
	      Turlock, CA  953820256    209/667-3122

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The rapid urbanization in the Central Valley of California has led to a growing
              need for professionals with both the conceptual and technical expertise to make
              effective land use planning decisions. California State University, Stanislaus,
              in its Urban Visualization Initiative proposes to address this need through the
              implementation of pedagogical and curricular innovations that will better
              prepare students for urban-planning professions.     A concentration of
              urban-related courses will be developed that will give students a wide breadth
              of exposure to urban-related issues in seven social science disciplines.
              Analytical computer techniques such as GIS will be incorporated into a variety
              of curricular applications, so that students will have the opportunity to make
              the critical connections between curricular subject matter and workplace
              techniques.     Students will have access to fifteen computers installed
              running GIS software. A scanner, plotter, digital camera and two printers will
              allow students to engage in industry standard GIS applications.  Laptop
              computers, a projection unit and computer management tools will assist faculty
              and students in this project and campus-wide to more effectively access data
              and make presentations.     Faculty will receive training in GIS applications
              and will learn how to access GIS educational resources on-line to facilitate
              incorporation of workplace techniques and inquiry-based learning into their
              course curricula. Students will apply the knowledge gained in enhanced
              classroom and laboratory sessions through independent research and internships
              with local projects and agencies.   This initiative serves as a model for areas
              of the nation that struggle with urban planning strategies in the face of
              rising population growth, by addressing the need for urban planners with both
              conceptual and technological skills, and incorporating new curricular and
              pedagogical strategies to better prepare students to address this need.
