Title       : Computer Operated Undergraduate Chemistry Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9850875

Award Number: 9850875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46346              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Thomasson kthomasson@chem.und.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irina P. Smoliakova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The students n undergraduate chemistry courses need exposure to modem computer
              controlled instrumentation in order to be properly trained to enter the work
              force. Modernization of our undergraduate curriculum is planned concurrent with
              the implementation of such instrumentation. Experiments not previously possible
              should become routine for a wide variety of our undergraduate students both
              chemistry majors, and non-majors. This particular program is targeted toward
              sophomore, junior senior classes and undergraduate research students.  The
              curriculum will be developed by replacing or upgrading two different t o
              spectrometers. Funds are requested for the purchase of a ultraviolet-visible
              spectrophotometer to be used in physical and analytical laboratories for data
              acquisition and processing. This will allow the development of both kinetic and
              equilibrium experiments not possible currently through the computer interface
              of this instrument. The modernization of our superconducting nuclear magnetic
              resonance by replacing the controlling computer and modernization of the
              software will allow organic chemistry students to acquire spectra themselves or
              a number of organic experiments. This will also allow remote operation of the
              instrument and provisions are made so that our smaller sister institutions
              within the region will be able to carry out their own spectral determinations
              via the internet.  Integration of these instruments into our own undergraduate
              laboratory curriculum will significant facilitate the modernization of physical
              and analytical chemistry courses for both chemical engineer and chemistry
              majors students from the sophomore to he senior level. The development of hands
              on NMR spectral determination both here and by remote operation at smaller
              schools unable to afford NMR spectrometers, will significantly enhance organic
              chemistry for sophomore through senior students at all e schools involved.
