Title       : Weather Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9850924

Award Number: 9850924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecil S. Keen cecil.keen@mankato.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minn State Univ, Mankato
	      Research and Sponsored Programs
	      Mankato, MN  56001    507/389-5275

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This projects seeks to create an innovative weather analysis laboratory at
              Mankato State University. It builds upon the experience of our first NSF-ILI
              Grant (1988) and extends it to include better and cheaper options for data
              supply making the facility easier to sustain in the long run. In order to do
              this, we need to institute uniformity and compatibility between equipment. Our
              selection in 1988 of the Vista Display system from Kavouras Inc., a local
              manufacturer, has enabled us to maintain a high profile of weather information
              on this campus using the instant display features in classes, each quarter
              exposing 400+ students to the benefit of seeing and analyzing real-time data in
              a classroom setting. Now we want to build upon this beginning and update our
              laboratory.    This project enlarges the old Weather Facility into a Weather
              Analysis Laboratory bringing in a series of Radac Workstations, an integrated
              Graphics Workstation (low-end), capable of on-air quality TV graphics. With
              this facility we will be able to prepare students to integrate local weather
              data and provide a video recording, slide making and graphics production
              facility from the data sources.   In short, the laboratory will facilitate the
              teaching and learning of science through the principles and processes of
              weather.  Local weather data, along with national and international data
              streams received over satellite links, will be collected and displayed in an
              integrated series of workstations.  These will be connected to graphics display
              consoles to enable students to analyze, create, and present data in a variety
              of formats.  Real-time data will be captured digitally, and students will be
              encouraged to evaluate their real-time weather observations together with
              national data.  The use of mesoscale models will also be used and students will
              be taught to run and interpret these and other models.      Special
              consideration will be given to the preparation of K-12 teachers.  At Mankato
              State University, preservice teachers take we ather courses as part of their
              preparation for the teaching of the life sciences, geography and earth
              sciences.   This project also impacts directly upon enhanced classroom teaching
              and visual materials preparation and will further create a nucleus facility for
              teacher service workshops. It will also give opportunities for local schools to
              obtain this data through dial-in and Internet means.     Our standing as an
              educational institution will be enhanced as direct benefits accrue to the local
              community and commercial world. The payback from this high profile Weather
              Analysis Laboratory will be significant as it increases our service to our own
              community and our students will be sought after for internships and employment
              opportunities in a highly competitive area.
