Title       : Using Applied Geophysics to Improve Science Teaching and Involve Undergraduate
               Students in Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9850629

Award Number: 9850629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Revetta revettfa@potsdam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Potsdam
	      Pierrepont Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13676    315/268-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to improve science education at SUNY Potsdam by
              engaging students in hands-on field and community service projects utilizing
              seismic reflection equipment.  Since the seismic reflection method is the
              oldest and most effective method used by oil, environmental companies and
              geological surveys, we feel it is the best equipment suited for our growing
              needs. Reflection equipment will enable us to: 1) continue and enhance our
              current geological investigations, 2) expand the nature of our field and
              community service projects (as detailed in the Development Plan) and 3) better
              prepare our students for future employment in the environmental industry.   
              The geological problems facing our local communities can best be studied with
              reflection equipment and have the potential to serve as meaningful educational
              experiences for our students. Students will be exposed to real problems and at
              the same time will be learning the mathematical, physics and computer skills
              necessary to solve these problems. Students will conduct seismic reflection
              surreys, perform depth to bedrock measurements to install sewer lines, water
              lines and sewage systems, and depth to groundwater to locate water wells.   
              The impact of this project on science and non-science students will be immense.
              The equipment requested will also be shared with Clarkson University, St.
              Lawrence University and Canton Technical College.    Plans for evaluation
              include student and faculty comments and engineer and village evaluations of
              reports submitted by students. Dissemination of the results will include
              presentations at professional meetings and publications in professional
              journals.
