Title       : Ion Chromatography: Water Analysis in the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9850906

Award Number: 9850906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kumar Sinniah ksinniah@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Piers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                An ion chromatography system is being used to introduce experimental modules
              involving water quality measurements into the laboratory component of
              first-year General Chemistry, Fundamentals of Chemistry, Quantitative Analysis,
              and Environmental Chemistry. These applications are relevant to our
              undergraduate students since they involve direct measurements of how human
              activities affect the natural environment. First-year students are being
              introduced to a laboratory module whose theme is the analysis of natural
              surface water systems and they are using this module to develop analytical
              skills in the laboratory. Upper-class students are gaining knowledge of and
              experience with an important new analytical instrument which is widely used in
              industry, research, and government laboratories. Students also are being tested
              on their ability to apply basic chemical principles to complex systems, and
              their ability to process and interpret data.  Use of the ion chromatography
              system, fully capable of analyzing cations and anions in a variety of water
              samples, is enhancing the student laboratory experience since it supersedes wet
              chemical methods which are both labor intensive and time consuming. The impact
              that these modules have on our laboratory curriculum is being assessed by
              comparing the students' motivation and learning in such experiments with the
              learning which results from more traditional experiments.
