Title       : Extending Introductory Computer Science with Algorithmic Multimedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9850546

Award Number: 9850546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Rebelsky rebelsky@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Multimedia and hypermedia have brought many people to computing, and have shown
              them that computers are easy to use. At the same time, many students report
              that they no longer find the topics in introductory Computer Science courses
              interesting or pertinent. By using multimedia-based examples in our
              introductory courses, we can continue to emphasize algorithms while making them
              more interesting to a wider variety of students. This is particularly true for
              students from outside the sciences who are frequently daunted by the scientific
              and text-processing examples that still dominate many introductory courses and
              texts.  Many important algorithms and problems can be represented in terms of
              multimedia data. Rather than asking students to find the average element of an
              array, we could instead ask them how to blur or smudge part of an image. Rather
              than asking students to develop graph-reachability algorithms, we could instead
              ask them how to identify orphan nodes in a hypertext system. We can also use
              multimedia to introduce key concepts. For example, mapping might be introduced
              by relating image-based functions and video operations (as many video
              operations are the result of mapping an image-based function on a sequence of
              images).  Drawing upon our experience in multimedia research (Rebelsky) and
              improving CS pedagogy (Walker, Stone, Rebelsky), we will develop
              multimedia-based exercises and supporting libraries for four introductory
              courses. This project requires (1) a small (four-workstation) Macintosh-based
              multimedia installation, (2) modern projection equipment for our computing
              classroom and laboratory, and (3) upgrades to our laboratory and classroom
              workstations to support multimedia computing. With this equipment, we will not
              only enhance the undergraduate learning experience at Grinnell and make our
              introductory courses more widely accessible, but also provide a national model
              of algorithmic multimedia in introductory computer science.
