Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) to Enhance
               Analytical Capability and Improve Analytical and Organic Chemistry Instruction
               at Lawrence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9850795

Award Number: 9850795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold P. Lokensgard jerrold.p.lokensgard@lawrence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen S. Harpp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will purchase a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS)
              system for the chemistry department at Lawrence University. The chemistry
              department is committed to curricular reforms that will (a) expand the use of
              open-ended, student-driven laboratory projects that address real problems; b)
              increase the use of natural products, biologically relevant compounds, and
              environmental samples as the focus of such problems in the laboratory; and (c)
              continue our transition to smaller-scale laboratory manipulations. The GC/MS
              instrument will further these reforms principally by enhancing the department's
              analytical capabilities, greatly extending the range of concentrations at which
              students can detect, quantify, and identify organic materials, and enabling
              students to obtain crucial new (mass spectral) data on reaction products in
              course-related laboratories. As a result students in Analytical Chemistry and
              Instrumental Analysis will carry out projects involving environmental samples
              (surface water or pesticides on food) in which substances of interest are
              present at concentrations too low to quantify and identify by currently
              available techniques. Students in the Organic Chemistry laboratory, many of
              whom are not chemistry majors but are strongly interested in life sciences,
              will apply the techniques and reactions to more compounds of direct biological
              or biochemical interest, because the instrument will permit better separation,
              identification, and quantification of relatively complex substances. A new
              Environmental Chemistry course will use the instrument extensively in studies
              of a local, heavily polluted lake, contributing important new data on that
              problem to the local community. In addition, the instrument will broaden the
              range of undergraduate research projects accessible to Lawrence students. The
              courses most affected by this instrument enroll 50 to 70 students per year, all
              of whom will have repeated hands-on experience with it.
