Title       : Integrating Neuroscience in Psychology Laboratory Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9850652

Award Number: 9850652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy L. Hill hillw@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Neuhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mathew S. McGlone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Neuroscience has had an enormous impact on the field of psychology.  Recognizing
              this, Lafayette College proposes to add expanded neuroscience laboratory
              experiences to its psychology curriculum.  These laboratory classes will afford
              students extensive application of contemporary methods and techniques in
              behavioral neuroscience and hone critical thinking skills while exploring
              open-ended problems.  In particular, our development plan seeks to: 1) enrich
              the neuroscience experiences in two psychology laboratory courses  ("Cognitive
              Psychology" and "Perception"), 2) add a new advanced laboratory course 
              ("Advanced Behavioral Neuroscience'') so that students can better integrate
              knowledge derived from courses in biology, chemistry, and psychology, and 3)
              improve the capstone experiences in student-directed research courses.       In
              support of these laboratory experiences in behavioral neuroscience, we will add
              additional equipment to our undergraduate laboratory, including
              electroencephalograph recording equipment, a variety of software/hardware
              components, and a high-performance liquid chromatography unit.       Students
              pursuing each of the three majors offered by the Psychology Department  (A.B.
              Psychology, B.S. Psychology, and B.S. Behavioral Neuroscience) will be affected
              by this plan.   The scientific education of future scientists (especially
              women) and K- 12 educators, other college students in the region, and high
              school students will be advanced by the proposed laboratory improvements.      
              Our evaluation plan combines achievement testing and assessment of the
              scientific impact of the designed changes.   Our development plan represents an
              important advancement in the teaching of psychology and our approach could
              serve as a model for other institutions.  Thus we will actively share our
              findings through traditional means (journal articles, conference
              presentations), as well as through our web-site and video-conferencing
              facilities.
