Title       : Integrating Computer-Based Physiology Exercises Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9850907

Award Number: 9850907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Cooper RLCOOP1@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric F. Maurer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Doris Westerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The School of Biological Sciences at the University of Kentucky is currently
              renovating its undergraduate biology curriculum. New lab exercises are being
              designed for both majors and non-majors that center on the scientific method
              and science as a process. This project focuses on the development of a series
              of computer-based physiology lab modules using Macintosh-based data acquisition
              stations, each with probes, transducers and data analysis software.
              MacLab-based physiology exercises will become important components of the
              second semester introductory laboratory for life science majors, the required
              mid level Anima Physiology course and physiology-based summer research
              experiences. In addition, students preparing for careers in elementary and
              middle school education who are enrolled in our non-majors General Biology
              Laboratory will utilize the MacLab system in a basic human physiology exercise.
              These lab exercises will familiarize students with the use of computers in
              biological investigations, and will provide opportunities for real time data
              collection and analysis, hypothesis testing, report writing and participation
              in active group discussions.
