Title       : Use of XRF Spectrometry to Enhance an Integrated Geochemistry Component of the
               Undergraduate Geology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9850549

Award Number: 9850549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Niemitz niemitz@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene M. Yogodzinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Funding is requested for a Wave-length Dispersive X-ray Spectrometer (WDXRF)
              from which our students will obtain whole-rock chemical analyses for
              course-based and independent research projects. We propose to develop an
              integrated geochemical learning experience early in the geology major so that
              skills acquired in geochemical problem solving using analytical
              instrumentation-can be applied to upper level subdisciplines and independent
              research problems.  This project will focus on our required courses, Petrology
              and Chemistry of Earth Systems, which with Mineralogy and Bench Chemistry form
              the nucleus of the sophomore-year studies in the major. Petrology is in the
              early stages of being completely reformed into an inquiry-based format by our
              newest faculty member, Gene Yogodzinski. This format includes well conceived
              and controlled class research projects which aid in the understanding of
              geochemical principles fundamental to the study of rock and mineral
              associations. This approach, recently introduced in the Chemistry of Earth
              Systems course, has proven to be a viable means for students to apply chemical
              principles to geologic problems and for faculty to teach research
              methodologies. The acquisition of a WDXRF will allow our majors to better
              quantify igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary processes by "tracing the fate"
              of various major, minor, and trace elements through the integrated learning
              experience we propose.  In the capstone of our curriculum, a required
              independent research project, greater student demand for whole rock chemical
              data has been largely unmet. We will describe some of the projects that would
              have benefited from an in-house XRF spectrometer. We foresee even greater use
              for an XRF in student independent research projects in the future. Overall, we
              are striving for a balance between field study and instrumental analysis. An
              WDXRF is the missing link in the chain to provide students with accurate and
              precise whole rock chemical data in order that they may more fully understa nd
              the rock associations they observe so diligently in the field.
