Title       : A Case Study Approach to Teaching Thermal and Fluids Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9850651

Award Number: 9850651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Kaminski kamind@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amir H. Hirsa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               An instructional laboratory which complements an interactive studio course will
              be used to teach engineering students the fundamentals of thermodynamics, fluid
              mechanics, and heat transfer. Although these topics have traditionally been
              taught as separate courses in the mechanical engineering curriculum, in
              engineering practice they are often inextricably linked. In the present
              proposal, the study of heat transfer, fluid flow, and thermodynamics will be
              integrated through the use of case studies. The cases will be introduced in the
              studio course and further developed in the associated instructional lab for
              which funding is sought in this proposal Students will learn the basic theory
              which underlies each case in the studio course, experiment with the actual
              equipment in the lab, and develop a sound knowledge and understanding of
              thermal and fluid engineering as a result.   Four separate cases will be
              explored during the course of the semester. The first will be taken from
              automotive design and will deal with external flow, convective heat transfer,
              conduction heat transfer, and psychrometrics. The second will involve thermal
              processing of materials and will teach radiative heat transfer coupled with
              conduction and convection. In the third case study, thermodynamic cycles will
              be introduced through the use of an air conditioning/refrigeration cycle. The
              final case study explores reacting flow and power production in a gas turbine
              system. The experiments for the last two cases will be constructed with funds
              requested under this proposal.   Each case study builds in complexity and
              relies on principles introduced in earlier cases. Students are motivated to
              learn because they can quickly see the practical application o~ what is being
              taught and the relevance of the theoretical knowledge. A unique feature of this
              proposal is the use of the same cases for both the classroom portion and the
              laboratory portion of a student's education. By this integrated approach,
              students will develop both the fundamenta l grounding in theory that is
              essential in the engineering profession and the mature capability to deal with
              complex, realistic systems that they will encounter in engineering practice.
