Title       : Instrumentation for Measuring Photosynthesis in Undergraduate Teaching
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9850461

Award Number: 9850461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13878              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dalton david.dalton@reed.edu                   Ext. 7473  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Modern biology is increasingly dependent on sophisticated instrumentation and
              on the interface of this equipment with computers. Due to the expense of this
              equipment and the sophisticated training required to operate it, undergraduate
              students receive limited exposure to it. The Reed College Biology Department
              proposes to add new instrumentation for measurement of photosynthesis in
              undergraduate teaching laboratories. The equipment has been designed
              specifically as a teaching aid for undergraduates. It will be used by students
              in both lower and upper level courses that include Introductory Biology, Plant
              Physiology, Independent Study, and Senior Thesis. The equipment utilizes an
              infra red gas analyzer to measures CO2 content of a gas stream passing through
              a leaf cuvette. Humidity and light are also measured and all data is fed into
              an attached computer and displayed on a monitor. The computing equipment is
              already available. Exercises will be designed to demonstrate the fundamental
              properties of photosynthesis particularly with regards to the effects of
              environmental variables such as light and temperature. Students, many of whom
              will be majors from outside of the sciences, will gain familiarity with
              technology in which computers are used to gather and process data in scientific
              studies. Upper-level students will make extensive use of the equipment in
              independent research activities (especially senior thesis projects) that are
              the hallmark of Reed. Thus the equipment will enhance the ability of Reed to
              continue to produce students that are eager and competent to advance into
              graduate school and ultimately careers as professional biologists.
