Title       : Low Cost Self Paced Laboratory Workstations for Teaching Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9850603

Award Number: 9850603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruben Flores rflores@bc.inter.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo Mediavilla  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The main objective of the program is to achieve, at a minimum cost, the
              strengthening of the Electronics Engineering Technology curriculum by
              introducing a problem based learning approach to laboratory instruction and
              simultaneously provide the student body a much needed flexibility in their
              laboratory session schedules. To achieve this objective the program will
              develop low cost self paced laboratory workstations to teach electronics. Each
              workstation will consist of a PC, a data acquisition plug-in board, and a
              function generator plug-in board under the control of the HP VEE test
              development platform. Virtual instruments will be developed to emulate the
              typical test equipment in an undergraduate electronics laboratory. The
              workstations' user interface will provide HINT and HELP icons to guide the
              students during their laboratory sessions, but students will have to design
              their own test strategy and methodology. Non major students and students
              preparing for K-12 teaching will have the opportunity to acquire, at their own
              pace, in a user friendly and non threatening environment, experience performing
              actual testing of electronics circuits. The project targets Hispanic
              minorities, but its potential benefits have a much wider scope. Educational
              institutions across the nation may find multiple applications to the developed
              concept: as a viable alternative to distance learning courses which require
              laboratory sessions, as a low cost test platform for electronics or electrical
              engineering programs, as an instrument to attract more students to electronics
              or electrical engineering, as an alternative to reduce the operational costs of
              electronics laboratories, as an alternative to self paced laboratory sessions,
              and as an alternative to provide at a minimum cost electronics laboratory
              experience to future K-2 teachers.
