Title       : Enhancing Student Learning through Active Inquiry in Field Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9850977

Award Number: 9850977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15811              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ritter jritter@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wittenberg University
	      PO BOX 720
	      Springfield, OH  455010720    513/327-6231

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent reviews of science education and geoscience education in particular
              stress that pedagogy focus on processes of inquiry in science, that it enable
              the student to make the observations we, as scientists, make ask the questions
              we ask, and learn the way we learn. Traditional exercises in environmental
              studies and geology, general y conducted in a classroom setting, tend to
              dissociate data analysis from data collection, resulting in a lack of context
              between the data and the environment from which they are collected. The
              objective of this project is to create and adapt laboratory experiences in
              environmental studies and geology so that they promote active inquiry in a
              field setting by students as they begin ~o understand the physical and chemical
              attributes of hydrologic systems. Flow Probe Handheld Flowmeters and Hach
              DREL/2000 Water Quality Laboratories will support introductory laboratories for
              science and non-science majors and advanced laboratories and independent
              studies for majors in the area of physical and chemical hydrology. The
              laboratory experiences utilizing this equipment are intended to blur the
              distinction between lecture and laboratories, making the lecture a forum for
              active inquiry into environmental or geologic questions and the laboratory a
              practice ground for answering them. The experiences range from evaluating land
              use impacts on water quality in an introductory course to measuring hydraulic
              differences between bedrock and alluvial channel reaches in an advanced course.
              The expected outcome is a student community of critical thinkers and writers,
              science and non-science students alike, that understands geology and the
              environment through their understanding and utilization of the scientific
              method.
