Title       : An Inquiry-Based, Problem-Solving Approach to Introductory Geology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9850923

Award Number: 9850923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Good sgood@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              LeeAnn Srogi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lesley A. Welsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda D. Dyar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Lutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Busch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Gil Wiswall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia G. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This proposal requests equipment to establish an inquiry-based,
              problem-solving, constructivist introductory geology laboratory experience with
              a particular emphasis on pre-college teachers.  West Chester University is
              renovating a laboratory room that will be dedicated to introductory geology
              instruction, and this grant will provide the equipment required for students to
              personally participate in the range of activities that constitute Earth
              science. The lab curriculum is designed to engage students in three multi-week,
              continuing investigations that require them to collect observations and data,
              graphically and statistically analyze their data, formulate reasonable
              interpretations to specific scenarios, and present this range of information to
              classmates. These investigations address: 1) Earth Materials through a
              "tabloid" who-dun-it mystery where students will study Earth materials within
              the context of forensic geology; 2) Surficial Processes through the study of
              the "real value" of real estate (where students learn the potential hazards
              associated with purchasing a home), and 3) Earth Systems Science through
              development and testing of computer models (using Stella software) for the past
              history of the Earth in order to understand the "precision" associated with
              global change predictions generated by computer GCM's. Faculty instruct all
              labs and we envision each faculty member customizing his instructional approach
              using the variety of equipment requested. A critical part of this proposal is
              the participation by an expert on assessment from the School of Education of
              West Chester University, whose expertise will allow us to determine the
              relative effectiveness of our individualized instruction designs.  Pre-teaching
              students will also study the evaluation procedure as an integral part of their
              educational training.  The Introductory Geology course frequently fulfills the
              natural science general education requirement for pre-teachers and is required
              of pre-teachers in the science program.  A pproximately 100 future teachers a
              year will participate in this course. t is anticipated that the participation
              of these future teachers in an inquiry-based course will improve student
              understanding of science processes and model inquiry pedagogical strategies.
