Title       : Modernization of Plant Taxonomy Curriculum through Use and Development of Plant
               Identification Expert Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9850878

Award Number: 9850878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42148              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Meicenheimer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Vincent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. James Hickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Modern techniques of plant identification via computer based expert systems
              can enrich undergraduate students' comprehension of the species concept by
              exposing them to the total breadth of seasonal morphological variation within
              plant taxa irrespective of the season in which they conduct their studies and
              actively engage them in inquiry based study of variation of character states
              within and between plant taxa as they contribute to the expansion and
              development of these expert systems. Such richness is lacking from our current
              pedagogical practices which primarily utilize season specific paper based
              dichotomous keys for training students in field based plant identification.
              Dichotomous keys are not conducive to inquiry based study of plant taxa because
              of the relative difficulty associated with their expansion and modification.
              The structure of computer based expert systems on the other hand are very
              conducive to contributions and development by student engaged in inquiry based
              activities. Specific objectives of this proposal are to: 1. Modernize the plant
              taxonomy curriculum by replacing paper based dichotomous plant identification
              keys with CD-ROM based multi-access plant identification expert systems. 2.
              Enrich the educational experience of students by encouraging them to develop an
              understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry as it relates to taxonomic
              decisions as they contribute to the continual refinement and expansion of the
              plant expert system data bases. 3. Develop students' process skills in the
              practical nature of hypothesis formulation and testing, with particular
              emphasis on the statistical techniques used in taxonomy. 4. Develop group
              learning and group responsibility skills and techniques. 5. Improve
              instructional effectiveness by engaging undergraduates in the creation and
              development of expert systems which will require utilization of their
              newly/simultaneously acquired knowledge and skills of plant taxonomy into a
              format that is both self reinforcing and beneficial to f uture students and the
              public at large. 6. Test the effectiveness of this method of learning compared
              to current pedagogical practices. Preliminary results from the ongoing Miami
              University Dendrology Expert System pilot project indicate that these
              objectives can be met by the proposed modification of our plant taxonomy
              curriculum.
