Title       : Improvement of a Vertebrate Physiology Course Using Computer-Based Data
               Acquisition, Student Independent Investigation, and CD-ROM Animation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9850971

Award Number: 9850971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte A. Zalewsky czalewsky@carlow.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carlow College
	      3333 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133165    412/578-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to redesign the laboratory component of the
              undergraduate Vertebrate Physiology course, for Biology majors, in order to: I
              ) stimulate student critical thinking and problem solving, 2) help students
              improve their conceptual understanding of physiological processes, 3) focus
              understanding at the cellular level of physiology, and 4~ provide opportunities
              for student experimentation, data collection and analysis. The course as it is
              presently taught is traditional in terms of its laboratory approach in that
              "canned" laboratories are conducted and little new technology is used. These
              laboratories could be far more challenging and stimulating if students: I)
              conducted fewer such experiments and designed their own investigations, 2) had
              available physiograph equipment interfaced with computers to collect and
              analyze data, and 3) had access to animated. interactive, multimedia renderings
              of physiological processes. At present, the existing phisiograph equipment is
              computer incompatible only two computers are available for a laboratory o~ 16
              students, and only a single copy of A.D.A.M. interactive software is available
              for demonstration. The objectives of this project are to: 1) introduce
              computer-based labs using  Intellitool equipment, 2) develop and extend student
              labs into student- designed investigations which require 2-3 ~ weeks of student
              research in the areas of cardiovascular, respiratory and muscle physiology, and
              3) incorporate and "layer" animated, interactive, visual, CD-ROM software into 
              traditional labs. Funding is requested for the purchase of, physiograph
              equipment, A.D.A.M. interactive software, six computers and two printers. It is
              expected that the redesigned Vertebrate Physiology course will promote
              intellectual curiosity, deepen understanding of physiological processes, and
              encourage young women to apply technology with confidence in the study of
              science.
