Title       : Development of the Laboratory Component of a Materials Chemistry Course for
               Nonscience Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9850903

Award Number: 9850903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38305              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Kugel rkugel@smumn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/452-4430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project focuses on the development of new experiments for the World of
              Materials course for nonscience majors that is also mandatory for elementary
              education majors. The course explores the chemistry of familiar materials from
              everyday life--paper, fabrics, metals, plastics, glass, leather, etc.--and
              discusses the life-cycle of each material from its source in the animal
              vegetable, or mineral world, through the stages of its processing to finished
              products, to its demise when it becomes used up or worn out and its ultimate
              fate in disposal or recycling. The new experiments allow students to observe
              microscopic and atomic-scale images, to carry out some pertinent chemical
              transformations, and to measure some important physical properties of these
              materials. The students work in teams of three to interpret these observations,
              reactions, and measurements and to draw correlations among them. For example,
              in one experiment the atomic structures of the surfaces of gold and graphite
              observed using a scanning tunneling microscope is correlated with their vastly
              different densities. In another experiment soda-lime glass is made by heating a
              mixture of sand (SiO2), soda ash (Na2CO3), limestone (CaC03), and cullet
              (crushed glass) in a benchtop muffle furnace. Small amounts of different
              transition metal carbonates (CoCO3, NiCO3, Ag2CO3, etc.) are added for color
              and the effects of transition metal concentration and furnace atmosphere on
              that color will be assessed. In a third experiment synthetic fibers like nylon
              monofilament fishing line is tested for its tensile strength and the resulting
              stress-strain curves correlated with solvent pretreatment and average molecular
              weights. Experiments like these allow students to observe atomic structure,
              experience real world chemistry, and draw their own conclusions about
              structure-property relationships in materials helping them to understand and
              appreciate why different materials behave the way they do.
