Title       : SUNY Oswego Institution-Wide Reform of Science, Mathematics & Technology
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9850070

Award Number: 9850070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Y. Narayan narayan@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara B. Varhus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Deal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne P. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Hinrichs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah F. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary: SUNY Oswego Institution-Wide Reform of Science, Math, &
              Technology Instruction    This project to reform science, math, and technology
              (SME&T) instruction for all undergraduate students at SUNY Oswego has five
              objectives. First is the improvement of introductory SME&T courses for both
              general students and science majors. Faculty supported by the project are
              strengthening a wide range of existing SME&T courses and develop new
              issues-oriented, interdisciplinary courses. The criteria for excellence defined
              by national science and math education reform documents and by the new SUNY
              Oswego General Education Program is the benchmark for this process. The result
              is a suite of required courses which provide all students (majors and
              non-majors, women and minorities) with direct experience with inquiry in a
              collaborative setting and active learning of important SME&T concepts in a real
              world context.  Second, faculty development activities are providing sustained
              opportunities for faculty development in the areas of effective SME&T pedagogy
              (inquiry, active learning, conceptual understanding, real world context, and
              collaboration) and instructional technologies. This development is stimulated
              through two summer institutes, held in 1998 and 1999, and by follow-up
              activities throughout each subsequent academic year. Faculty have opportunities
              to learn and share effective pedagogical strategies, enhance their
              interdisciplinary knowledge base, and learn about and implement innovative
              instructional technologies. Third, as part of these professional development
              opportunities, new partnerships are being formed with regional businesses
              across departments to improve SME&T course offerings.  Fourth, in order to
              create an environment that encourages faculty to seek new connections among
              disciplines and engage in thoughtful pedagogies, the faculty reward system is
              being examined.  The goal of this element of reform is to redefine of the
              reward structure so that it supports a scholarship of pedagogy a nd
              interdisciplinary instruction, not only in SME&T, but across all disciplines.
              Fifth, the existing institutional structures are being streamlined and
              augmented  to provide a mechanism for sustaining growth in professional
              development, partnerships, and a supportive faculty reward system, not only in
              SME&T but across all disciplines.
