Title       : Transferable-Skills-Based University Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9850632

Award Number: 9850632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26226              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Humphrey dhump@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Harper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Vourvopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A very important function of the beginning laboratories of university physics is
              to teach current skills that the students can transfer to advanced laboratories
              in physics or their major area of study and apply later in their career. These
              skills can be obtained through carefully designed experiments, based on the
              fundamentals of physics, that incorporate current data acquisition techniques,
              data analysis methods, and the display of experimental results in an effective
              and presentable manner.     The microcomputer has completely revolutionized how
              this can be done as demonstrated through upgrades and modernization of our
              laboratories in Atomic Physics, Nuclear Physics, and Solid Surface/Solid State
              by employing, among other methods, a data acquisition and control system
              supported by National Instruments LabVIEW(tm). Based on the experience gained
              from these advanced laboratories, we believe the benefits should be given to
              all the students that take even the introductory university physics
              laboratories.    This project completes what has begun on a limited basis --
              the modernization of the three one-semester-hour beginning university-physics
              laboratories that emphasize transferable current skills by:    designing
              experiments that incorporate computer assisted data acquisition techniques,
              using a wide variety of transducers,    using LabVIEW as the programming
              acquisition language while progressively teaching students over the three
              semesters how to program in LabVIEW,    familiarizing the students with the
              concept of virtual instruments,    using spreadsheets for data reduction and
              analysis,    using plotting and function fitting software to display results in
              a graphical fashion.    The project uses eight state-of-the-art data
              acquisition stations for experiments.
