Title       : Engaging Non-Science Majors in Methods of Investigation and Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9850099

Award Number: 9850099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon H. Purser gordon-purser@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Henshaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

Engaging Non-Science Majors in Methods of Investigation and
              Exploration

Science, mathematics, and engineering faculty at The University
              of Tulsa are developing new student-centered, inquiry-based science courses for
              non-majors. The new courses will build on reforms instituted in the science and
              mathematics curriculum for pre-service teachers and on inquiry experiences
              developed for science and engineering majors. Courses will be of two types:
              Introduction to Scientific Inquiry and Connections. Introduction to Scientific
              Inquiry courses will develop science literacy by immersing students in a
              research experience focusing on a real world problem. These courses will be
              team-taught, interdisciplinary, and have natural ties to societal concerns.
              Problems will be selected from responses to an RFP issued to faculty. Some
              anticipated sections include bioremediation of oil spill sites on the Tall
              Grass Prairie, foraging behavior of bees, design of renewable energy sources,
              and degradation of water quality due to agricultural runoff. Courses in
              Connections will build on two strong current model courses, Plants and People
              and Earth's Physical Environment, and stress reasoning, the relationship
              between key concepts, and the interplay between scientific advancement and the
              needs of society. The Introduction to Scientific Inquiry and Connections
              courses will employ common instructional strategies, including an integrated
              classroom/laboratory/field format, appropriate use of mathematics, use of
              technology, and emphasis on oral and written communications. The courses will
              be developed through summer course development fellowships funded jointly by
              the award and the University. Release time for faculty during the initial
              semester of course presentation will facilitate high quality offerings from the
              outset of the new curriculum. The courses and their affect on the students and
              the institution will be studied by an internal evaluator. A Visiting Committee,
              composed of external experts, will offer additional guidance and facilitate
              dissemination of successful innovations.


