Title       : Environmental Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9850304

Award Number: 9850304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Fahey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid Strieby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Environmental Technology (ET) program establishes an A.A.S. degree in ET at
              Bronx Community College (BCC), the first of its kind in the City University of
              New York (CUNY) system, and a series of continuing education certificate
              courses in occupational health and safety. The program addresses a critical
              employment and public health need throughout the Bronx and other inner-city
              neighborhoods for trained environmental technicians. It is designed to provide
              new career pathways for minority students and other individuals and will
              establish greater awareness of the link between the environment and public
              health within inner-city neighborhoods.    To accomplish these primary goals,
              the following objectives will be addressed: (1) development of a minimum of 15
              partnerships with industrial, private and public employers; (2) implementation
              of 6 new specialized courses in ET; (3) development of summer training
              institutes and on-going workshops for ET high school and college faculty; (4)
              recruitment and enrollment of a first cohort of 24-30 ET degree students; (5)
              implementation of 13 to 15 field work-sites for job observations, job shadowing
              and internships; (6) graduation of 80% of all ET students in A.A.S. program;
              (7) effective job placement of 80% of ET graduates in ET or related fields; (8)
              enrollment of 200-300 men/women in continuing education certificate courses in
              ET; (9) full articulation agreements in place between BCC's ET program and
              Bronx High School's ET program and senior colleges throughout CUNY that have
              Environmental Science/Health programs.    The program addresses the Bronx
              governmental, business and industry needs for technical expertise in
              environmental instrumentation, regulation and compliance, as well as waste
              minimization/pollution prevention and control. BCC's established ties with
              business and industry are an integral component in the design of the program,
              which will produce uniquely qualified A.A.S. graduates who can work in the
              public and private sectors and help addres s growing inner-city community
              environmental regulations and concerns.  The A.A.S. degree curriculum is tied
              to secondary school Tech Prep and School-To-Work programs in the Bronx and
              related bachelor's degree programs in CUNY and other colleges; in that way the
              program links an environmental technology educational corridor from high school
              to associate and bachelor's degrees to graduate school. A major component of
              the program is the use of summer institutes for faculty training and
              opportunities for other faculty enhancement through internships with industrial
              partners as well as participation in conferences and workshops.
