Title       : Critical Thinking and Information Literacy Across the Curriculum (CTILAC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9850013

Award Number: 9850013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Talbott mtalbott@bcc.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. G. Surendranath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myra F. Van Vactor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bellevue Community College
	      3000 Landerholm Circle SE
	      Bellevue, WA  980076484    425/564-2301

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As we move toward an information based society, it is crucial that students and
              educators be equipped with the skills necessary to succeed in a world of
              increasing scientific discoveries and technological demands. The proliferation
              of information in electronic and print media demands the efficient application
              of research and communication tools and the ability to apply critical thinking
              in their use. To provide students with skills that will enable them to process
              information effectively, educators must ensure that all students are grounded
              in critical thinking and information literacy .

To meet these needs,
              Bellevue Community College proposes to build and institutionalize a program
              that infuses critical thinking and information literacy across the curricula
              using interdisciplinary topics based on scientific concepts and science-related
              issues as a vehicle for developing skills that will assist students throughout
              their educational and professional careers. Towards this goal, following are
              the proposed objectives of the project: (1) Refocus the Information Literacy
              Across the Curriculum project to use interdisciplinary scientific concepts and
              issues as vehicles for the integration of critical thinking and information
              literacy into the curriculum. (2) Equip faculty and students with critical
              thinking and information literacy skills that will empower them with the skills
              needed to fully function in the global information environment; (3) Develop an
              understanding of personal, institutional, and public policy issues as they
              relate to information literacy; (4) Develop an environment to foster
              collaborative efforts between faculty, students, information technologists, and
              librarians.

To accomplish these objectives, BCC has developed an
              institution-wide leadership panel to ensure wide-spread participation and
              dissemination. The Information Literacy Across the Curriculum (ILAC) project
              was funded by BCC to pilot the concept 0f incorporating information literacy
              into the curricula of various disciplines. The current proposal (CTILAC) is
              providing faculty with the tools to incorporate critical thinking and
              information literacy skills as they deal with scientific concepts and
              science-related issues in their courses. Faculty and students will be provided
              knowledge and skills to use technology effectively in their research
              activities. Methods of instruction include workshops, symposia, electronic
              courseware, tutorials, ongoing technical support, and peer training and
              assistance.

Collaborations with the University of Washington UWired program,
              the NorthWest Center for Emerging Technologies and the Regional Advanced
              Technology Education Consotium will ensure dissemination of the methodologies
              developed in the project as well as findings on student success and learning
              experiences.

Critical Thinking and Information Literacy Across the
              Curriculum is conceived as an ongoing, fully integrated project leading to
              infusion across the campus. Thorough evaluations and collaborations will result
              in a model program with materials to be shared on a local, regional and
              national level.


