Title       : Addition of a Multipurpose Luminescence Spectrometer to Enhance the
               Undergraduate Biochemistry and Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9850847

Award Number: 9850847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Roberts-Kirchhoff robkires@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian P. Buffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. R. Brook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shulamith Schlick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The acquisition of a versatile luminescence spectrometer that can measure
              fluorescence, phosphorescence, and chemiluminescence will enhance the
              laboratories in biochemistry, instrumental analysis and general, organic, and
              physical chemistry and positively impact the undergraduate research experience.
              The luminescence instrument will be used for identification, analysis, study of
              molecular dynamics and conformations of biomolecules in solution including
              interactions with ligands, and enzyme kinetics. The wide use of fluorescence,
              phosphorescence, and chemiluminescence in chemical, biological, and biochemical
              research makes it imperative that our undergraduates appreciate the sensitivity
              and versatility of these techniques. The luminescence spectrometer will be an
              integral part of the implementation of the mini-research project approach in
              the biochemistry laboratory that will allow students to develop problem solving
              skills with the proper supervision to ensure that they are exposed to a wide
              variety of research and experimental approaches. Implementation of the
              mini-project approach in the biochemistry laboratory, as well as the new
              experiments designed for this laboratory and the other laboratories across the
              curriculum, will be shared with colleagues within a professional forum. Through
              the integration of luminescence spectroscopy into many of the undergraduate
              laboratory courses, the students will obtain a solid understanding of
              luminescence spectroscopy and its many applications. This will impact the
              chemistry and biochemistry majors within our department, but also majors from
              other departments including chemical engineering and biology, who enroll in one
              or more of our laboratory courses. It will allow us to provide our students,
              many of whom are under-represented minorities and women, with a strong
              foundation in chemistry and biochemistry, which is necessary to pursue their
              goals of an advanced degree or professional employment.
