Title       : Limnological equipment for the Ballston Lake Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9850965

Award Number: 9850965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69498              (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Garver Garverj@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald T. Rodbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Gremillion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Environmental Studies (ES) program, through the Geology, Civil
              Engineering, Biology, and Chemistry Departments, at Union College is advocating
              a major new research and teaching directive entitled the Ballston Lake
              Initiative. The central focus of the initiative is Ballston Lake as an
              environmental system that has evolved through time. This broad-based initiative
              includes a variety of class field and research projects which are
              interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary. Our ES program is the vehicle needed
              to provide continuity to the initiative because the program draws a variety of
              expertise from many departments across the College and will foster
              interdepartmental collaboration and interdisciplinary teaching in a series of
              hands-on, field-oriented programs. The proximity of Ballston Lake to campus and
              the plethora of scientific opportunities that it affords make the lake the
              ideal link between projects and courses with an environmental focus. This
              initiative will generate interest from a variety of departments and, once
              started, will provide the field framework for the burgeoning Environmental
              Studies Program at Union College.    The Initiative requires four major pieces
              of field equipment which will serve as a basis for limnological studies and
              will provide field classes access to the lake. This equipment includes a
              pontoon boat as a "floating classroom" a seismic profiler for measurement of
              lacustrine sediment thickness, a side scan sonar for high-resolution mapping of
              the lake floor, and a high-precision global positioning system. The Ballston
              Lake Initiative will bring focus to field-based classes that promote
              investigative learning in environmental studies, geology, civil engineering,
              biology and chemistry. We anticipate that the Ballston Lake Initiative will
              stimulate a diverse range of student-initiated research projects on the Lake
              and its watershed. The equipment proposed herein will be integral to these
              research projects and to teacher training in the Master of Arts in Teaching (
              MAT) program. As with all equipment purchased on previous NSF-ILI grants, we
              will make the proposed equipment available to researchers at nearby
              institutions.
