Title       : Bio-Link: A National Advanced Technology Education Center for Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9850325

Award Number: 9850325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999995            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Johnson ejohnson@biolink.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City Coll of San Francisco
	      33 Gough Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941031214    415/239-3000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Center for Biotechnology Education is creating a structure to
              enhance and expand biotechnology technician programs throughout the nation.  
              The National Center is working with six regional centers, baccalaureate
              institutions, high schools, national laboratories, and industry to accomplish a
              set of ambitious goals.   Each region is spearheading a specific element such
              as identifying and testing instructional materials; implementing new programs;
              identifying methods for recruiting and retaining underrepresented minorities;
              creating student assessment tools; linking to high schools and baccalaureate
              institutions; strengthening basic math, science, and critical thinking skills;
              and increasing work-based learning opportunities for students.   By relying on
              the expertise of individuals around the nation, the Center is addressing a wide
              range of issues.    The National Center will hold an annual ten-day Summer
              Intensive for 30 Fellows across the nation.   Each Regional Center will hold
              annual regional workshops for 30 participants in their region.   These
              professional development activities will include hands-on laboratory training;
              discussion of legal, ethical, and social issues; industry tours; and
              pedagogical tools to be used for students.   Each region will also identify
              paid instructor internships.   This regional approach will allow the Center to
              reach a wide range of instructors from across the nation.    In addition the
              Center is creating an on-line network that will provide the opportunity for all
              interested people to communicate.   Input can be received to evaluate
              materials, strategies, and issues.   In a rapidly changing field such as
              biotechnology, the ability to communicate quickly speeds the integration of new
              knowledge and materials into the curriculum.   The Center also makes use of the
              most advanced technologies to enhance student learning, such as multi-media
              programs, virtual learning and virtual libraries, CD-ROM materials, and
              distance learning.   The lasting effect i s to bring stimulating, cutting-edge,
              and practical educational programs to the students who will make up the
              nation's future workforce.
