Title       : A Systems Approach to a Modern Computer Architecture Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9850534

Award Number: 9850534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Erickson erickson@stream.csis.gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay P. Ahuja  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gregory S. Wolffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer architecture has been typically taught from a CPU-centric,
              depth-over-breadth, context-free perspective. The efficacy of this approach for
              computer science and software- engineering majors seems questionable. We will
              develop a laboratory curriculum for computer architecture which places the
              ideas of computer architecture in a systems context, emphasizing applications
              where knowledge of architecture is essential for software and system
              development. The areas on which we will focus our new computer systems
              architecture course are architectural subsystems (CPU, memory, I/O),
              performance evaluation, parallel architectures, and high performance computing.
              We will use simulations and experiments as a means of teaching concepts, as
              well as important activities in themselves. We will develop fourteen laboratory
              exercises. A shared-memory multiprocessor will enable the study of modern
              architectural subsystems, support experimental performance evaluation including
              benchmarking, and teach an introduction to software development on a
              commercially common multiprocessor. Other labs will use performance monitoring
              and simulation software to study architectural subsystems, their interaction,
              and their impact on performance. Commercial software to support the network of
              workstations computing model will give students insights into parallel
              processing. A short and basic introduction to logic gates and circuits with
              accompanying breadboard laboratory will de-mystify the computing elements of
              modern computers. The evaluation plan for our project includes a longitudinal
              study to assess student change in attitude towards computer architecture, and a
              second study to measure the efficacy of our laboratory based curriculum on
              student's knowledge of fundamental computer architecture concepts.
