Title       : Development and Integration of Physiological and Ecological Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9850859

Award Number: 9850859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis C. Haney dennis.haney@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Teska  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rex E. Kerstetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Joseph Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective is for students to relate physiological attributes of organisms
              with constraints imposed by environmental conditions. Investigative
              laboratories are proposed to stress interdisciplinary approaches to learning.
              Equipment to be purchased will facilitate an understanding of homeostatic
              mechanisms, a fundamental biological principle. Instrumentation includes CO2
              and O2 analytic equipment, porometers, a digital imaging system, vapor pressure
              osmometers, temperature controlling devices, a physiological telemetry system,
              and data acquisition hardware and software. Students will be able to measure
              rates of photosynthesis and respiration, metabolism during torpor, osmotic and
              ionic regulation, leaf conductance, leaf surface areas. and other essential
              physiological and ecological indicators. Environmental chambers will allow
              students to create environmental conditions in the laboratory that mimic those
              in nature. The project focus is on two courses, Ecology and Animal & Plant
              Physiology.  Laboratory exercises will stress the interactive nature of these
              two disciplines. In each of three proposed laboratories, students in the two
              courses will address the same hypothesis. Ecologists will study how the
              environment shapes ecological adaptations of plants or animals, while the
              physiologists will measure the functional attributes of those organisms.
              Following collaboration, each student will evaluate the hypothesis. The intent
              is to demonstrate that biology is more than a set of distinct courses and to
              encourage the development of critical thinking skills by promoting
              collaborative problem solving. Instrumentation will support additional
              comparative organismal physiology exercises in Animal & Plant Physiology and in
              other courses including a course for nonmajors. As a result, there will be a
              significant increase in student investigations that consider multidisciplinary
              aspects of biological study.
