Title       : Multimedia for Science Literacy in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9850582

Award Number: 9850582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. McGee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Hyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science literacy is an increasingly important competency for the university
              non-science major. Rapid changes in medicine and biotechnology and their
              influence on society and industrial practices make it essential that students
              possess the ability to make informed decisions about science issues on a
              personal, community, and global level. This project is creating a course in
              which students develop an intrinsic, life-long interest in biology. Our
              objectives are 1) to increase student understanding of basic concepts in
              biology, and 2) to impart an appreciation for the nature of science and the
              scientific method. We are converting an existing audio-visual tutorial lab in
              Human Biology to a lab in which students access network-based, interactive
              multimedia that promotes active/collaborative learning of fundamental concepts.
              This course is offered as a series of modules that deliver concepts in the form
              of text, audio, animations, video clips, and other media. Included are
              activities that engage students in making observations, predicting and
              interpreting results, answering lower- and higher-order questions,
              reconstructing concepts, relating concepts to current research and events, and
              analyzing the process of learning itself. We are focusing on measuring
              knowledge, comprehension, and synthesis of key concepts in biology. We also are
              measuring student attitudes towards science before and after the course. This
              project is being developed in conjunction with the San Francisco Bay Area
              Collaborative for Excellence in Teaching Preparation (CETP) and San Jose State
              University's Science Education program. It will serve as a model for future
              science teachers in the San Francisco Bay Area, thereby promoting science
              literacy and life-long learning of science across generations.
