Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Undergraduate Biophysical Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9850942

Award Number: 9850942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93117              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Perona perona@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori A. Kohlstaedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Biochemistry occupies a unique position at the interface between the physical
              and biological sciences, generating a need for educational programs which focus
              on quantitative as well as descriptive aspects of the field. However, most
              curricula provide limited exposure to chemical and biophysical approaches. We
              are addressing this deficiency at UCSB via a new major in Biochemistry within
              the auspices of the Chemistry Department. Central to the curriculum are two new
              laboratories with emphasis on quantitative and analytical aspects of biological
              phenomena. This proposal seeks funding to equip these two laboratories.
              Instrumentation requested includes UV-visible atomic absorption and circular
              dichroism spectrometers.  The new laboratories will enhance undergraduate
              laboratory experiences via a research-oriented teaching perspective in which
              students are given experimental objectives but only general protocols. Guidance
              is provided as the students turn the objectives into detailed protocols.
              Students will be asked to integrate diverse approaches while focusing on the
              same enzyme for an extended period. This approach better resembles the working
              mode of practicing scientists than does the usual class experience of unrelated
              experiments.  We expect that these laboratories will permit students to develop
              highly marketable skills in protein chemistry, enzymology and biophysics. It is
              also hoped that students will more directly experience the excitement of
              scientific research as they learn to think creatively and quantitatively. Such
              an experience should be lasting and will help educate professionals in areas
              such as business, law and primary education, to better grasp the impact of the
              biotechnology revolution on society. The experiments will be disseminated
              through presentations and a published laboratory manual.
