Title       : Transforming a Mathematics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9850661

Award Number: 9850661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62224              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna H. Foster foster@ped.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patty P. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. David Sumerel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Piedmont Tech College
	      Emerald Road
	      Greenwood, SC  29646    803/223-8357

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Piedmont Technical College's challenge is to help entering students develop
              increasingly strong mathematics proficiency in order to meet the expectations
              of senior institutions and area employers.  "Tweaking" the mathematics program
              has not helped sufficiently.  The problems seem to lie with an emphasis on
              number-crunching rather than application and meaning, problems and data lacking
              interest and relevance, and a teacher-driven pedagogy.    This project is
              infusing parallel strands of activity across some 18 mathematics and 24 related
              science and technology courses, to place students, realistic applications, and
              the use of mathematics at the heart of learning. The Computer-Based Laboratory
              (CBL) system is being infused into 25 courses as a way both to bring math to
              life and to focus on analysis and use of data rather than on its calculation. 
              With this technology, student teams are designing and implementing their own
              experiments, adjusting variables, raising and testing hypotheses, and seeing
              mathematics as a tool for inquiry and understanding, not a topic for
              memorization and rote processing.    A dedicated mathematics computer lab
              allows for the introduction of Minitab statistical software.  This application
              is shifting the focus from monotonous calculations and number crunching towards
              experimentation, hypotheses testing, use of real-world data sets, team
              assignments, and mathematical displays not now possible in our program.     
              Cumulatively, these initiatives are being used by some 50 faculty in 300
              sections of 40 different courses, affecting over 2,000 students over the
              two-year grant period. Dissemination focuses on internal and area groups as
              well as state and national conferences and associations, with a particular
              focus on the participants in South Carolina's 16-college ATE Center for
              Excellence.
