Title       : DNA Fingerprinting Exercise for the Biology Freshman Laboratory Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9850783

Award Number: 9850783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19243              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Miller bymiller@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Stratton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. D'Surney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The University of Mississippi, Department of Biology Freshman Laboratory
              Program (FLP) includes separate laboratory sequences for first year biology
              mayors (over 500 students per year) and students not majoring in a science who
              must meet core curriculum requirements in science (approximately 1400 students
              per year). Approximately 70% of non-science graduates from the University
              fulfill their basic science requirement in the biology FLP. The FLP is faced
              with the dual challenge of preparing science majors for upper level work in
              biology while providing nonscience majors a basis of relevance and the
              appropriate intellectual tools for the interpretation of scientific information
              as it affects social issues and everyday life. Nowhere is this challenge more
              acute and the outcome of efforts to meet the challenge more important than with
              respect to student understanding of the molecular basis of genetic variation.
              DNA fingerprinting and other techniques of DNA analysis are routinely used in
              many subfields of biology. The importance of molecular genetics to human health
              and the application of DNA analysis in forensics is widely appreciated by most
              students. However, because of resource limitations, the coverage of DNA
              structure and function in the FLP is restricted to demonstrations and computer
              simulations. In this protect, we will implement DNA fingerprinting exercises
              into all freshman laboratories.  The exercise will involve the genetic analysis
              of three freshwater fish species (two congeners and one from a closely related
              genus) using a PCR-based technique. The instruments to be purchased for the
              exercises will be used by students under supervision of the PI's and Graduate
              Teaching Assistants trained by faculty. We expect the program to (1) enhance
              student's understanding of the structure and function of DNA (2) provide a
              working knowledge of the important tools of contemporary genetic analysis, and
              (3) provide an understanding of the limitations and potential uses of molecular
              genetic informatio n.
