Title       : Morehead Radio Telescope Multi-Channel Spectrometer System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9850647

Award Number: 9850647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33267              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin K. Malphrus b.malphr@morehead.st.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Kruth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehead State University
	      University Boulevard
	      Morehead, KY  40351    606/783-2221

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Faculty and students of the Department of Physical Sciences at Morehead State
              University in conjunction with Capitol College and Kruth Microwave Electronics
              (K-MEC) propose to design, construct, and operate a Multi-Channel Spectrometer
              System (MCSS) for the Morehead Radio Telescope (MRT).  The proposed MCSS is a
              robust, experimental platform that divides the MRT's existing 20 MHZ bandwidth
              into 2.4 million simultaneous narrow channels that allow the production of a
              radio frequency spectrum. The proposed instrument is suitable for a wide
              variety of experiments including galactic and extragalactic kinematic
              experiments and for SETI research.  The system design reduces cost by utilizing
              surplused demodulators obtained from the National Security Agency (NSA) in
              conjunction with special-purpose detectors and inexpensive PC sound cards for
              digital signal processing.  This "swords to ploughshares" approach utilizes
              existing resources and provides a low cost solution to high resolution radio
              frequency multi-channel spectral analysis. The MCSS will provide a research
              instrument for undergraduate astronomy and physics students and an active
              laboratory for physics, electronics, engineering, and computer science
              undergraduates and faculty.  The goals of the MCSS program are to enhance the
              curricula in physics, pre-engineering, electronics, and science education
              programs by serving to provide, 1) a research instrument for kinematic
              investigations in astrophysics; 2) an active laboratory in astronomy, physics,
              electrical engineering, and computer science; and 3) a research instrument and
              laboratory for science teacher education and inservice programs that utilize
              the appeal of SETI to teach basic science concepts.  The performance
              characteristics of the MCSS allow a varied and in-depth scientific program and
              are well suited to multi-frequency observations of a wide variety of
              astrophysically interesting phenomena. The MCSS provides hands-on experience in
              research and instrumentation technology utilizing a s cience that is in the
              midst of scientific revolution.
