Title       : Instrumentation and Improvement to the University of Minnesota Undergraduate
               Archaeobiology Laboratory Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9850947

Award Number: 9850947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41567              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy McCorriston   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha J. Tappen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will use laboratory equipment to develop an innovative program in
              undergraduate archaeobiology training. In the archaeological record, the best
              evidence for paleoenvironments, diet, ecology, and economy of past peoples is
              preserved in the form of charred plant remains, and animal bones. Undergraduate
              experience with these materials and the scientific analyses underlying their
              interpretation is generally confined to textbook and lectures.
              Archaeobiological remains, however, offer a rich and unexplored potential for
              demonstrating science through a teaching laboratory.     McCorriston and Tappen
              have complimentary skills in identifying and analyzing floral and faunal
              remains, and by working together and sharing equipment there is opportunity for
              integrative research and teaching. Both have a history of excellence in
              teaching undergraduates. Because both PIs are women scientists teaching in
              archaeological science, they are more likely to reach those undergraduates who
              normally avoid the sciences.     The University of Minnesota hosts an exciting
              interdisciplinary training program on environmental change (the NSF-funded
              Research and Training Group, "Paleorecords of Global Change"). This new
              Archaeobiology lab will be an additional resource for undergraduates. It will
              give students access to teaching microscopes, measurement stations, computers,
              and comparative specimens. It will allow undergraduates to focus on issues in
              interdisciplinary science as they learn from archaeological materials related
              to climate change and anthropogenic effects on the environment.     We propose
              to build on existing comparative collections and to teach scientific methods
              and critical thinking with sampling, microscopy, quantification, taphonomy,
              data management, model building, hypothesis testing, and other issues that are
              common in research of both floral and faunal remains.
