Title       : Exploring New Frontiers in Spatial Information Management: A Rocky Mountain High
               in Applied Geoscience Education (I.M.A.G.E.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9850588

Award Number: 9850588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70528              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica E. Ramirez ramirem2@aol.com                        Ext. 6310  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kelsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aims Community College
	      BOX 69
	      Greeley, CO  806320069    303/330-8008

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Aims Community College in Greeley, Colorado, has developed an
              interdisciplinary Geographic Information Systems (GIS) emphasis program which
              is part of an Associate of Arts (A.A.) degree. This program will be shared by
              diverse academic disciplines, departments and divisions.  The purpose of this
              proposal referred to as Information Management in Applied Geoscience Education
              (I.M.A.G.E.) is to introduce students to spatial information management in
              traditional geoscience curricula and to serve as a model for other institutions
              of higher education. The I.M.A.G.E. program will provide funding for the
              establishment of a GIS lab and associated GPS and field instrumentation.
              LM.A.G.E. students will learn how to solve problems using spatial principles
              and techniques (computer cartography, GIS applications using ArcView software,
              GPS systems) so they may compete in today's and tomorrow's global society.
              Students will develop and integrate customized GIS data sets in conjunction
              with commercially available data sets into multi-layered presentations to
              understand the attributes of locations on the earth's surface. Research
              indicates the explosive growth of GIS applications in the Rocky Mountain Front
              Range corridor. Businesses and government agencies are looking at two- and
              four- year academic institutions to fill this gap between supply of and demand
              for GIS professionals. Currently, institutions of  higher education in Colorado
              are not training sufficient numbers of GIS professionals. Subsequently, GIS
              users must go out of state to hire trained GIS employees. Aims' commitment to
              the I.M.A.G.E. program is demonstrated as follows: adequate release time of
              geoscience and computer faculty for curriculum development and course
              preparation, the hiring of a part-time technical support person in addition to
              the institutional computer services provided by Aims, facility renovations and
              remodeling plus an equipment match equal to NSF's contribution. Aims Community
              College requests funding from the DUE for Instrum entation and Laboratory
              Improvement (ILI) to implement the LM.A.G.E. program for the acquisition of
              computer hardware and software for a GIS lab and associated GPS
              instrumentation, as well as additional field equipment and laptop computers
              that will insure sophisticated and professional training for the next
              generation of applied geoscientists.
