Title       : Instrumentation For a Vertically-Integrated Multidisciplinary Engineering
               Laboratory Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9850556

Award Number: 9850556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. King rking@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan P. Gosink  (Principal Investigator former)
              Terence E. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The mission statement of the Engineering Division at the Colorado School of
              Mines prescribes the following specific goals: to provide our students with a
              solid foundation in engineering principles and the skills to adapt to rapidly
              changing industries and advanced technologies; and, to enhance the life-long
              learning ability of our students. This proposal seeks funding to implement a
              Multidisciplinary Engineering Laboratory (MEL) sequence to achieve these goals.
              We will create a vertically-integrated, laboratory-centered educational
              pedagogy and link these laboratories to a suite of core engineering science
              classes, horizontally integrating labs with courses. Students will apply
              inquiry based methods to explore and discover critical engineering concepts and
              theory.  The proposed laboratory sequence differs in philosophy, pedagogy, and
              content from traditional labs. In MEL, students are given a set of equipment, a
              set of reference materials, and a set of questions. Posing the questions
              properly is critical; the questions must lead the students into higher levels
              of thinking. The students explore various procedures and equipment set-ups -
              which they design - to answer the questions. Fundamental engineering
              principles, such as conservation and equilibrium, are stressed. In a vertically
              integrated laboratory sequence, we can increase knowledge sequentially in
              levels of thinking, experimental design, experimental methods, instrumentation,
              data analysis, teamwork, communications and modeling. With support from the
              ILI, we will be able to modernize the equipment to suit the modernization of
              the teaching/learning approach of these labs.
