Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope to be used in an Undergraduate
               Materials Science Program for Teaching and Students Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9850777

Award Number: 9850777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia D. Sparks patricia-sparks@hmnc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Eckert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shenda M. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The physics and chemistry departments at Harvey Mudd College are enhancing
              their capability for interdisciplinary instruction and student projects with a
              scanning probe microscope (SPM). The equipment allows students to perform
              atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements in a non-contact mode and magnetic
              force microscopy measurements (MFM). It is used for teaching laboratories and
              for student research.     There are two aspects of this project that involve
              teaching laboratories. First, a new interdisciplinary course is being
              developed, a Materials Characterization Laboratory. This course is expected to
              attract 10 physics or chemistry majors a year. It represents a continuation of
              the departments' joint ventures and a significant integrative experience for
              the students. Students make samples and then characterize them using a number
              of different techniques. The unique information provided by SPM is essential to
              an analysis of the magnetic and structural properties of the samples.    
              Second, there is an AFM experiment in the sophomore physical chemistry
              laboratory. This course involves 20-30 chemistry students per year and
              introduces them to sophisticated data acquisition and analysis. Having the
              ability to use SPM early both makes it easier for them to understand concepts
              clearly represented by SPM data as well as trains them in the capabilities of
              this experimental technique.     The remaining component of this project
              addresses the use of SPM in the student research in the two departments. The
              non-contact mode of the AFM allows the students to make forefront measurements
              on the polymer systems under study in Prof. Baker's laboratory. Students
              working with Profs. Sparks and Eckert can use the MFM both to characterize and
              guide the design of samples involving the giant magnetoresistance of
              silicon/cobalt structures and to investigate the micromagnetics of iron films.
              Research involves approximately 10 students per year.
