Title       : CONFERENCE: Sphingolipids as Signalling Modulators in the Nervous System, July
               13-17, 1997, New York, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9724171

Award Number: 9724171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Yu rkyu@gems.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724171  Yu    This Conference entitled, "Sphingolipids as Signaling  Modulators
              in the Nervous System" will take place from July  13 - 17, 1997, at the New
              York University Las School, New  York City.  Historically, sphingolipids have
              been of  interest to neuroscientists and neurologists because of  their
              involvement in lipid storage diseases and other  disorders affecting the
              nervous system.  More recent  investigations have focused on questions of basic
              biological  functions, such as the physiological roles of these  molecules in
              neuronal differentiation, regeneration, and  trophic assisted cell survival. 
              Sphingolipid involvement in  such processes has been shown to include a number
              of signal  transduction mechanisms as well as protein modulatory  effects. 
              Sphingomyelinase, for example, when activated by  cytokines such as tumor
              necrosis factor, converts  sphingomyelin to ceramide which then functions as an
              active  second messenger triggering such processes as proliferation  and
              apoptotic cell death.  Sphingosine, sphingosine  phosphate and ceramide
              phosphate are also recognized as  intracellular messengers exerting a variety
              of effects on  cell proliferation and differentiation.  Gangliosides as a 
              class of sphingolipids are well recognized neurotrophic  factors which function
              as neuroprotective agents in a  variety of in vitro and in vivo systems. 
              Numerous studies  have indicated their role as modulatory agents to a variety 
              of membrane enzymes, receptors, ion channels and adhesion  factors.  They are
              now being actively studied as potential  pharmaceutical agents for treatment of
              specific neurological  disorders including Parkinson's disease, spinal cord
              injury  and stroke.  Presentations from basic scientists on the 
              biochemical/cell biological aspects of gangliosides and  other sphingolipids
              will focus on possible mechanisms to  account for the trophic, neuroprotective
              properties of these  substances.  The immunogenic potential of gangliosides and
               sulfated glycosphingolipids in promoti ng neurological  dysfunction will be
              explored, a key question being whether  or not this invalidates use of these
              substances as  therapeutic agents.  As in  past sphingolipid meetings, we 
              anticipate stimulating interchanges between research  scientists and clinicians
              concerning basic mechanisms and  the biomedical potentials of sphingolipids.
