Title       : The Infrastructure of Mitochondrial Matrix Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9724922

Award Number: 9724922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kosdaku Uyeda kuyeda6400@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Srere  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724922  Srere  The investigator's laboratory has presented evidence in the past
              that the enzymes of the Krebs tricarboxylic acid cycle exist in vivo as a
              metabolon, i.e., a complex of sequential metabolic enzymes.  Their most recent
              experimental approach is fusing malate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase. 
              They have found that the best fusion protein for replacing the enzymes in a
              double mutant of yeast that lacks those two enzymes is one  in which the
              C-terminus of mitochondrial citrate synthase is linked to the N-terminus of
              mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase.  This protein was also produced and
              isolated using recombinant technology.  The kinetics of the isolated fusion
              protein were studied and a channeling of oxalacetate was observed.  They will
              extend these studies to include aconitase, the next enzyme in the metabolic
              sequence.  The project has two specific aims.  The first is to continue the
              kinetic studies on the fusion proteins of citrate synthase, aconitase, and
              malate dehydrogenase.  The second concerns two forms of citrate synthase, the
              peroxisomal and mitochondrial, which have similar enzyme activities but
              different binding properties.  As a preliminary step in comparing the ability
              of the peroxisomal form to substitute for the mitochondrial form in the
              mitochondria, they will investigate the reason it has not yet been possible to
              express peroxisomal citrate synthase activity in mitochondria.  The
              methodologies to be used are those they have published previously on the
              citrate synthase-malate dehydrogenase fusion protein adapted to the inclusion
              of aconitase.    The investigator's previous work provides evidence that in
              certain metabolic pathways, the component enzymes form a sequential complex
              which enhances their effciency.  This phenomenon will be further explored in
              the current project.  This enhancement of activity has many implications for
              basic biology and for the development of efficient biotechnological products.
