Title       : Editing of Homocysteine by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9724929

Award Number: 9724929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hieronim Jakubowski jakubows@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hieronim Jakubowski  MCB 9724929  Editing of Homocysteine by Amino-tRNA
              Synthetases   1. Technical  The non-protein amino acid homocysteine (Hcy), an
              obligatory precursor of methionine in all cells, poses an accuracy problem for
              the protein biosynthetic apparatus. Hcy is misactivated by methionyl- (MetRS),
              isoleucyl- (IleRS), and leucyl-tRNA synthetases (LeuRS) at a frequency
              exceeding the frequency of translational errors. Misincorporation of Hcy into
              tRNA and cellular protein is prevented by an editing mechanism of these
              synthetases which yields a cyclic thioester, Hcy thiolactone. In spite of
              considerable progress on the elucidation of structures of AARSs, knowledge of
              the structural basis of editing is limited.  This study is undertaken to
              determine the molecular basis of an error-correcting mechanism, using E. coli
              class I MetRS as a model, testing a hypothesis that the Zn-binding domain of
              MetRS constitutes a thiol-binding editing subsite involved in the editing of
              Hcy. Mutant selection as well as PCR and site-directed mutagenesis methods are
              used to obtain editing-defective MetRS enzymes. These approaches, combined with
              sensitive biochemical assays, are designed to allow the study of
              structure-function relationships both in vitro and in vivo, as well as mapping
              of the editing subsite and determining its interplay with the synthetic subsite
              of MetRS. The data will be interpreted within the framework of the
              three-dimensional structure of MetRS using molecular modeling. This study
              contributes to the elucidation of the extraordinary accuracy in the flow of
              genetic information.    2. Non-technical  Living organisms have evolved editing
              or proofreading mechanisms that assure accurate synthesis of their nucleic
              acids and proteins according to the genetic information contained in DNA. One
              such mechanism eliminates incorrect amino acids and assures that correct amino
              acids are incorporated at specific positions of protein chains which is
              important for proper functioning of these molecules. A parad igm of error
              correcting mechanisms in protein synthesis is editing of the nonprotein amino
              acid homocysteine which is being studied at the molecular and cellular levels. 
              This study addresses the molecular details of homocysteine editing, which is
              fundamental to the extraordinary accuracy in the flow of genetic information.
