Title       : Segment- and Target-Related Embryogenesis of Identified Motor Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9724064

Award Number: 9724064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291777             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Jellies john.jellies@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN:  9724064   PI:  JELLIES  Dr. Jellies will employ a system of stereotyped
              motor neurons, interneurons and muscles to investigate the roles of cell-cell
              interactions and retrograde as well as retrospective influences in the
              generation of a functional neural circuit.  The model system he will use is the
              one that produces the heartbeat rhythm in the leech.  In all animals, neural
              circuits are generated during development and modified throughout life by
              dynamic processes driven by molecular and cellular mechanisms such as
              differential adhesion, selective fasciculation, cytoskeletal modifications and
              trophic support.  In many cases the underlying mechanisms used by single cells
              to generate particular phenotypes appear to be intrinsic to the individual
              cell.  Yet, because a neural circuit used in even a simple behavior requires
              the coordinated differentiation of many cells to generate particular patterns
              of connections, it is necessary to understand how these single cells are
              coordinated.  For example, a behavioral defect or variation may reflect a
              change in the timing or spatial placement of a signaling event between two or
              more neurons rather than any particular deficiency or genetic change intrinsic
              to a neuron.  The studies by Dr. Jellies will examine the hypothesis that
              interactions between developing neurons and potential targets are one of the
              major sets of factors that coordinate circuit formation, and furthermore, that
              particular interactions are required for instructing the subsequent formation
              of one pattern of connections rather than an alternative pattern.  These
              studies will also begin to characterize the signals that are generated in one
              set of cells to influence the subsequent differentiation of another.  Results
              from the project are expected to yield significant insights into the way that
              cues derived from one set of developing cells exert a long-lasting influence
              over the functionally important development of others, and perhaps make it
              possible to predict the development of comp lex neural circuits.
