Title       : Molecular Dissection of the Leishmania Paraflagellar Rod
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9724105

Award Number: 9724105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. LeBowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724105  LeBowitz    The paraflagellar rod (PFR) is essential for the normal
              motility of Leishmania promastigotes, yet the   molecular structure, assembly
              and function of this unique cytoskeletal structure are not well understood.  
              The PFR extends the length of the axoneme after it emerges from the flagellar
              pocket and is built up from   discrete filaments organized in lattice-like
              arrays.  The major protein components of the PFR do not reveal   significant
              homology to other cytoskeletal proteins.  This lack of homology together with
              the elaborate and   unusual structure of the PFR suggests a novel type of
              cytoskeletal filament and organization. Based on the   characterization of L.
              mexicana lines lacking the major PFR proteins, PFR-1 and PFR-2, a simple model 
               for the organization of the PFR is proposed that has a number of testable
              features.  First, PFR-1 protein is   an essential constituent of the proximal
              domain of the PFR and PFR-2 is absent from the proximal   domain.  Second,
              PFR-1 protein can assemble into filaments in the absence of PFR-2 either
              forming a   homopolymer or polymerizing with as yet unidentified partners.
              Third, PFR-2 protein is a primary   constituent of the distal domain of the
              PFR.  Fourth, assembly of the distal domain of the PFR requires   prior
              assembly of the proximal domain of the PFR whose assembly in turn is
              coordinated with assembly of   the axoneme.  This ordering of PFR assembly
              explains the observed inability of PFR-2 protein to assemble   into a stable
              structure in the absence of PFR-1, and it explains the presence of a properly
              positioned   structure that contains PFR-1 in the absence of PFR-2. 
              Furthermore, it accounts for the puzzling   observation that in dividing cells
              examined by immunofluorescence with anti-PFR antibodies, the   daughter
              flagellum often stains more weakly than the parental flagellum.  This would be
              expected if the   PFR was assembled stepwise from the proximal to the distal
              zone. Genetic and cytological experiments   are proposed t o test and extend
              this model of the organization of the PFR in Leishmania mexicana.  These  
              specific objectives will be accomplished: 1.  Ultrastructural characterization
              of PFR-1 and PFR-1/PFR-2   null mutants. The objective of this set of
              experiments is to determine whether or not substructures of the   PFR are
              retained in the mutant lines that lack PFR-1 2.  Determination of the location
              within the PFR of   the PFR-1 and PFR-2 proteins.  The objective of this set of
              experiments is to separately localize PFR-1 and   PFR-2 proteins by immunogold
              labeling of thin sections and whole mount cytoskeletons. 3.  Test of the  
              order of assembly of the domains of the PFR.  The objective of these
              experiments is to determine whether   the nascent daughter flagella of dividing
              L. mexicana assemble the proximal domain of the PFR prior to   the distal
              domain.    Among unicellular organisms there is an immense diversity of
              differences in physiology and structure that   reflects the vast
              experimentation in form and function that has occurred during evolution. The
              means by   which unicellular organisms move using flagella and cilia as basis
              has been elaborated and altered as   among diverse unicellular organisms. In
              this award Dr. LeBowitz will study the function and form of the   paraflagellar
              rod of Leishmania. Understanding how the paraflagellar rod is assembled will
              yield   important information on the diversity of motility mechanisms of
              unicellular organisms. Members of   Leishmania species include pathogens that
              are causitive agents of human disease. Potential applications of   this
              information includes finding compounds that impede the formation of
              paraflagellar rod preventing   motility and spread of the organisms.     ***
