Title       : A General Neural Simulation System for Computational Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9724137

Award Number: 9724137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799108             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Bower jbower@bbb.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project is the comprehension redesign of the neural  simulation toll
              referred to as GENESIS (GEneral NEural  SImulation System).  GENESIS was
              developed initially as part  of the P.I.'s ongoing efforts to build realistic
              models of  nervous systems.  GENESIS has been made available for use to 
              laboratories outside Caltech for research and education, and  has become an
              important tool for the computational  neuroscience community.    The overall
              design objective for the GENESIS project is to  provide neurobiologists with a
              powerful tool for simulating  neruobiological systems, while at the same time
              promoting  the interactions between different modeling efforts.  We  will
              concentrate on two areas: first we will continue to  provide ongoing user
              support.  This includes on-line  services, continued development of
              documentation, bug fixes,  and promotion of collaborations between GENESIS
              users and  between GENESIS developers.  The second major focus of our 
              activities will be the redesign of GENESIS itself.  The  basic software design
              of the project has not changed  substantially since its inception in 1986.  It
              is now time  to completely redesign GENESIS to provide far more efficient 
              portability across platforms free extensibility and exchange  of code,
              flexibility lump missing parameters and  compartments, and provide granularity
              along multiple axes.  Achieving these goals should result in a move useful,
              more  easily federated system which is far less expensive to  extend and
              maintain.  The redesign is beginning by first  taking a parallel systems view
              point, rather than starting  with a sequential platform and later parting to
              parallel.  This work is supported by the Computational Neuroscience  program,
              and the neuroscience's cluster (all in Bio).  This  effort will focus on both
              support for parallel architectures  as well as new graphics languages.
