Title       : Regulation of Motor Neurons by Postsynaptic Targets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9724155

Award Number: 9724155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene Chiu achiu@smtplink.coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9724155    PI:  CHIU  A mature nervous system functions in large part
              because correct synaptic connections are made and maintained between the
              appropriate groups of neurons.  Although we do not fully understand how
              appropriate connections are established and maintained, it is clear that
              neuronal networks require bi-directional communication between nerve cells and
              their synaptic partners.  Dr. Chiu has preliminary evidence that the downstream
              or post-synaptic target can "talk back" and regulate the characteristics of the
              innervating neuron.  Her laboratory has produced a marker that recognizes a
              molecule found only in mature motor neurons (the specialized nerve cells that
              directly control the contraction of skeletal muscles).  This molecule is
              interesting for several reasons.  First, it is very selective and detected only
              in this single population of cells, suggesting that the molecule must play an
              important role in the function of this class of neuron.  Second, it appears
              very late in development, at a time when motor neurons establish their adult
              pattern of connections with muscle cells.  Third, its presence requires an
              active response from the target muscle.  Finally, the molecule is lost when
              communication between nerve and muscle is disrupted.  Together, these results
              demonstrate that when motor neurons form and maintain active synaptic contact
              with muscles, they acquire a unique molecule not found in any other cell type. 
              These preliminary results suggest that when muscles are activated, they return
              a signal to the presynaptic (upstream) neuron; this retrograde signal then
              confers a biochemical property found only in motor neurons.  In this manner,
              the post-synaptic target can regulate the biochemical nature of its innervating
              neurons.  Dr. Chiu will now investigate how communication between motor neuron
              and muscle regulates the levels of this molecule, and she will identify and
              characterize this novel, motor neuron-specific molecule to understand its
              possible functions in signalling a nd maintaining the normal wiring of the
              nervous system.
