Title       : Dissertation Research: Intensive Agriculture and Political Economy in the
               Yaguache Chiefdom of the Ecuadorian Lower Guayas Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9724998

Award Number: 9724998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Florencio Delgado will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork in
              the Lower Guayas Basin region of Equador and combine analysis of aerial
              photography with surface survey, augur testing and small scale archaeological
              research. This lowland region is seasonally flooded and this fact makes
              subsistence agriculture difficult. The Spanish chronicles indicate that the
              inhabitants at the time of contact were organized into chiefdoms and
              archaeological reconnaissance has revealed the presence of a large scale system
              of `raised fields.` These prehistoric constructions consist of elongated raised
              earthen platforms and research in other regions of Middle and South America
              indicate that they were planted and served as fields which projected above the
              water level.   Based on co-occurrance in many parts of the world,
              archaeologists know that the rise of stratified chiefly societies and the
              appearance of irrigation systems and other `large scale` agricultural projects
              are linked. However they do now understand the cause and effect mechanisms
              involved. In attempting to understand the appearance of such features, some
              believe that a `top down` model applies: that it was the emergence of chiefs
              and the authority they wielded which allowed the organization of the numbers of
              people supposedly necessary for such construction projects. Other researchers
              support a `bottom up` interpretation and believe that many features such as
              raised fields are relatively easy to construct, that this can be done at a
              family level of organization and that the surplus produced by such fields
              allowed chiefs in fact to emerge.  Mr. Belgado's research will examine this
              question. Through an examination of raised field size, spatial organization and
              association with `elite` mound vs. commoner residences it should be possible to
              set this agricultural system into a political and social context and examine
              the relationships among them. This research is important because it addresses a
              central anthropological question. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
