Title       : Mathematical Models of the Cell Division Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9724085

Award Number: 9724085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304350             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT                                  The major
              events of the cell division cycle, DNA synthesis  and mitosis, are triggered by
              'cyclin-dependent kinases'  (CDK's): a family of enzymes whose activity and
              specificity  depend on their binding to various cyclins.  CDK activity is  also
              regulated by phosphorylation and by binding to  inhibitory proteins.  These
              regulatory proteins interact  with each other in a complex web of biochemical
              reactions  and feedback signals, to generate an orderly progression of  the
              cell cycle.  So far, characterization of this regulatory  system has been
              reductionistic: breaking the network into  its constituent pieces and
              determining which pieces  interact.  Rigorous mathematical methods are being
              developed  to assemble the pieces into a coherent model of the intact 
              regulatory system, so that predictions can be compared  qualitatively with
              experimental observations about the  physiology and genetics of the organisms.
              Using standard  methods of dynamical systems theory, the investigators are 
              constructing comprehensive, accurate, and predictive.  Mathematical models of
              the cell cycle in yeast cells and  frog embryos.    The human genome project
              promises to deliver a rich stream  of information about the genes and proteins
              that govern all  our physiological affairs. Complementing extensive research 
              on the 'informational' aspects of genome analysis (storage  and retrieval,
              sequence comparison, structural predictions)  this project addresses a new
              level of 'dynamical' questions:  how do molecules interact with one another in
              time and space  to produce the organized, functional behavior of living  cells?
              Appropriate mathematical and computational tools to  answer this question are
              being developed in the context of a  specific physiological problem: cell
              growth and division.  To understand how cell proliferation is regulated would
              not  be only a satisfying achievement of basic science but also a  breakthrough
              for clinical medicine.  When the  signals that  initiate or suppress cell
              division are understood, the means  to restrain the proliferation of cancer
              cells or to induce  the regeneration of nerve cells will become more apparent. 
                  This work is being funded by the Computational Biology  (BIO), Signal
              Transduction (BIO), and Mathematical Biology  (MPS) Programs.
