Title       : US-East Mediterranean Cooperative Research: GPS Data Processing and Analysis
               Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9724114

Award Number: 9724114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Reilinger reilinge@erl.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of participation by five scientists
              from Egypt, Turkey, Greece, Armenia and Russia in two workshops to be held at
              the Massachusetts Institute of Technology In Cambridge, MA in the summer of
              1997.  The workshops are organized by Dr. Robert Reilinger and Dr. Robert King,
              of the Earth, Atmosphere, and Planetary Sciences Department at M.I.T.   The
              purpose of the first workshop is to carry out geological data reduction and
              analysis.  The data was obtained in a study by the P.I., funded by NSF/EAR,
              using Global Position System (GPS) measurements.  The second workshop will
              follow, to conduct analysis and interpretation of the results obtained in the
              first workshop.  The study seeks to understand the nature of the collision of
              the African and Arabian plates with the Eurasia plate, by monitoring
              deformation in the eastern Mediterranean region.  The workshops will involve
              scientists from the countries in the region as well as others from the US,
              Germany, Switzerland, and the UK.  Scope:  This project will support
              participation by key scientists from the eastern Mediterranean region, who are
              actively involved in multi-national research effort using GPS measurements of
              ground movement, in important workshops intended to understand the results from
              field data collected in that region.  Their participation should lead to
              improvement in the interpretation of the results obtained and in the
              conclusions to be reached.  The attendance by the scientists from Russia,
              Armenia, Greece, Turkey, and Egypt should help them with their future
              in-country research in this field, and would enhance the potential for further
              collaboration.  Their participation will therefore have mutual benefits to all
              involved in these studies and for future efforts.  The project fits well within
              the objectives of the Division of International Programs.  This award includes
              funding from the Division of International Programs, and from the Division of
              Earth Sciences.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
