Title       : Analysis of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2000   
File        : a9724078

Award Number: 9724078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Chamberlin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amanda Simcox  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      Simcox  9724078        The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor is a
              member of the erbB class of tyrosine  kinase receptors which are highly
              conserved in evolution and signal through the Ras/Raf/MAPK  pathway. Both in
              vertebrates and in flies the EGF receptor has multiple ligands. The goal of
              this  project is to use the relatively simple fly system, which is both
              genetically and biochemically  tractable, to investigate the biological
              significance of having multiple ligands for a single receptor.  Two activating
              ligans, Vein and Spitz, will be the focus of the study.        The hypothesis
              is: Vein (Vn) and Spitz (Spi) are biochemically distinct ligands which 
              activate the Drosophila EGF receptor (DER) with different potency and are
              required for specific  developmental events. Preliminary data suggest Vn is a
              mitogenic signal whereas Spi is required  for tissue patterning.  There are 3
              specific aims:              AIM 1) To analyze the relative roles of vn and spi
              in the embryo. The role of spi in embryonic  development has been well studied
              whereas little is known about the role of vn. Genetic analysis  will be used to
              determine the role of vn in embryos by examining both loss of function and gain
              of  function phenotypes. Other genes involved in VADER signaling will be
              identified and the ability  of spi and vn to substitute for each other will be
              tested. These results will establish whether vn and  spi have distinct roles in
              embryonic development.         AIM 2) To define the structure-function
              relationships of Vn. Biochemical and genetic analysis will   be used to test
              the function of Vn proteins which have domains, previously recognized by
              sequence   homology, deleted or altered and specific residues mutated. In
              particular, it will be established   whether the EGF domain is the key
              determinant which distinguishes the properties of Vn and Spi.       AIM 3) To
              test the specific hypotheses: (a) Vn/DER signaling results in cell
              proliferation, and (b)   Spi/DER signaling results in cell dif ferentiation, in
              a tissue-culture system. DER expressing   Drosophila S2 cells will be exposed
              to control medium and medium conditioned by Vn or Spi. The   proliferation of
              the cells will be determined. The growth stimulatory, neutral or inhibitory
              effect of   Vn and Spi will be determined. Genetic tests will be done to
              determine if spi can compensate for   proliferation defects in vn mutants.
              These experiments will address whether Vn and Spi mediate   distinct cellular
              responses.        Significance: ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors and their
              ligands are highly conserved and play  important developmental roles in
              vertebrates, flies, and worms. Because of their role in growth  control and
              differentiation this family of receptors and ligands is also implicated in
              human cancers.  This study will use the powerful molecular genetics of
              Drosophila to address the issue of whether  different cell responses;
              proliferation and differentiation, are mediated by specific ligands. The 
              results will contribute to the understanding of both normal and abnormal growth
              control and  differentiation.
