Title       : Higher-Order Mechanisms in Olfactory Communication: Individual Recognition and
               Scent-Overmarking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9724007

Award Number: 9724007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Johnston rej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724007  Johnston  This proposal concerns mechanisms of olfactory perception 
              and  communication, particularly with regard to competition  between
              individuals  by scent marking.  Most mammals communicate their individual 
              identity  and other information by scent marking, and many species  that scent
              mark  also scent over-mark (deposit their scent in the same  location that
              other  individuals have deposited scent).  It has recently been  discovered
              that, in  at least two species of rodents, individuals can determine  which of
              two  individuals' scents is on top in an over-mark, regardless of  whether the
              two  scents are completely or only partially overlapping.  Animals can thus 
              determine which animal has marked most recently.  The data  suggest:  (1) that
              the animals have a perceptual/cognitive strategy to  determine which scent was
              deposited most recently; and (2)  that they have  some previously unsuspected
              sensory mechanisms to accomplish  this.  In this research, behavioral
              experiments will be carried out  to investigate the  functions of these
              extraordinary abilities, particularly  with regard to the  related hypotheses
              that (a) individuals engage in scent  marking  competitions in order to
              maintain their scent as the most  recent scent in  an area and (b) that other
              individuals evaluate scent over-  marks as one  means of assessing the quality
              of potential mates.  Specifically, females  may prefer males that are
              persistent at over-marking because  this is a  measure of male vigor and
              quality.  These experiments will  involve both  typical laboratory tests using
              habituation-discrimination  methods and other  experiments using semi-natural
              laboratory enclosures to  approximate the  complexity of natural situations. In
              the specific context of  the sense of smell  and its role in animal behavior,
              this research will clarify  the significance of  a newly discovered ability to
              analyze spatial arrays of  individual scents and  determine which scent is on
              top (that is, to perceive  "depth" or recen cy in  arrays of individual odors).
               This perceptual ability  probably occurs in  many species and is potentially
              important in a wide range of  situations.  Our research aims to determine why
              such abilities have  evolved, and to  investigate the specific hypothesis that
              they are important  in evaluation  of the health, vigor, and quality of other
              individuals and  thereby  influence mate choice and competitive interactions.
              This  project integrates  mechanistic and functional approaches to olfactory 
              communication.  In a more general context, this research demonstrates some  of
              the  higher-order mechanisms involved in social perception and  characterizes
              in  a unique way the kinds of sophisticated processes animals  may use to 
              evaluate one another.  Such higher-order knowledge of other  individuals are 
              widespread throughout the animal kingdom,  which in turn  suggests that this 
              kind of evaluation of others has been important in the  evolution of complex 
              social behavior necessary for complex social organization.  Understanding  this
              kind of higher-order social cognition is necessary if  we are to truly 
              understand both the evolution of social communication and  the neural 
              mechanisms underlying social recognition, social memory, and  social  behavior
              in animals and in humans.
