Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Ultra-Wide-Band Short-Pulse Electromagnetic
               Interrogation of Targets and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9724193

Award Number: 9724193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Rothwell rothwell@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kun-Mu Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis P. Nyquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Electromagnetics Research Group (EMRG) at Michigan State University (MSU)
              performs both fundamental and applied research in the interaction of
              electromagnetic fields with both electronic and biological systems.  Areas of
              current and past research activity include electromagnetic radiating and
              receiving processes and systems, the interaction of waves with radar targets
              and target identification, the guiding of EM waves and the interaction of
              guided waves with integrated circuits, microwave characterization of materials,
              the interaction of antennas with plasmas, the interaction of electromagnetic
              fields with non-ionic species, the interaction of microwaves with biological
              bodies, the interaction of power-line fields with human cell structure and the
              assessment of cancer risk, and the development of microwave life detection
              systems.  The EMRG has existed for more than thirty years and currently
              includes faculty members Dr. Kun-Mu Chen, Dr. Dennis Nyquist, and Dr. Edward
              Rothwell.  This group has a record of significant research contributions, and
              is nationally and internationally recognized for its EM expertise.  The group
              has graduated some 60 doctoral students, many of whom have gone on to attain
              high positions in government, industry, and international business.  In
              addition, the group has produced some 200 refereed journal papers, 300
              conference papers, several book chapters, and has held 53 research grants and
              contracts valued in excess of $5.5 million.  Government sponsors have included
              the NSF, DARPA, DOE, Naval Medical Research Conunand, Naval Air System Command,
              Naval Ocean Surveillance Center, Office of Naval Technology, Office of Naval
              Research, and other agencies of the Departments of the Navy, Army, and Air
              Force.  Corporate support has been obtained through Lockheed, General Electric,
              Boeing, Thermo Trex, Martin Marietta, TRW, and the Electric Power Research
              Institute.  Members of the EMRG have demonstrated high levels of achievement in
              research and scholarship.  This is evidenced by the awards and positions held
              by the members, as well as their successful completion of numerous research
              projects.  Dr. Kun-Mu Chen holds the Richard M. Hong Chair of Electrical
              Engineering, the first endowed chair in the department.  He is a Fellow of the
              IEEE, a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and
              has been awarded the MSU Distinguished Faculty Award, the Withrow Distinguished
              Scholar Award, and the Taiwanese American Foundation's Outstanding Achievement
              Award.  Dr. Dennis Nyquist is also a Fellow of the IEEE, a member of Commission
              B of the International Radio Science Union, Sigma Xi, Tau Beta Pi, and Phi
              Kappa Phi.  He has acted as associate editor of the IEEE Transactions on
              Antennas and Propagation and the Journal of Electromagnetic Waves and
              Applications, and has won the MSU Distinguished Faculty Award, the MSU
              Teacher-Scholar award and the Withrow Distinguished Scholar Award.  Dr. Edward
              Rothwell is a Senior Member of the IEEE, a member of Commission B of the
              International Radio Science Union, Sigma Xi, Phi Kappa Phi, and has twice
              received the Withrow Teaching Excellence Award.  1.2  Major Laboratory
              Facilities  The Michigan State University Electromagnetics Research Laboratory
              (EMRL) occupies approximately 4000 square feet of laboratory space in two rooms
              of the Engineering Research Complex.  Room C-24 (3000 square feet) contains a
              free-field scattering range, a ground-plane scattering range, and a
              low-frequency magnetic field exposure system.  It also houses three smaller
              laboratories, two of which are currently dedicated to the electromagnetic
              characterization of materials.  Room C-12 (900 square feet) contains an
              arch-reflectivity scattering range.  The magnetic field exposure system is
              currently being employed for the assessment of the potential health hazards of
              power-line frequency magnetic fields.  It consists of an incubator, two
              exposure chambers, and a stock chamber.  Biological samples are placed into the
              chambers for controlled exposure to various levels of AC magnetic field.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
