Title       : Ultrastructural Organization of Developing Acetylcholine Receptor Aggregates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9724035

Award Number: 9724035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jes Stollberg jesse@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Kunkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9724035  PI:  STOLLBERG  This research is directed at a better understanding
              of the molecular events underlying "synaptogenesis" (the formation of synapses
              during fetal development), which is of fundamental importance because synapses
              are the conduits through which nerve cells communicate with each other and with
              other cell types such as muscle fibers.  At nerve-muscle synapses the
              communication depends on the release of acetylcholine from the nerve terminal. 
              This molecule diffuses across a small space between the cells and binds to
              specialized muscle-cell molecules called "acetylcholine receptors."  The
              binding of acetylcholine to its receptors triggers muscle contraction.  Because
              nerve-muscle synapses must be fast and reliable, the receptors are concentrated
              in that part of the muscle cell membrane that is adjacent to the nerve
              terminal.  This concentration takes place during fetal development, and many
              research efforts have been directed at discovering the molecular mechanisms
              that cause receptors to aggregate at this precise location.  This project will
              examine aggregates of acetylcholine receptors and two related synaptic
              components at the ultrastructural level.  The experiments involve labeling the
              molecules under study with small gold particles which can be detected using
              scanning electron microscopy.  A sophisticated numerical analysis of label
              locations is then used to deduce the structure of labeled aggregates to within
              <1 nanometer.  This represents a greater than hundred-fold improvement in
              resolution over previous experiments with developing receptor aggregates.  The
              successful completion of this work will greatly enhance our understanding of
              the molecular mechanisms underlying receptor aggregation, and will thus
              contribute to our understanding of the basic mechanisms by which synapses are
              formed.
