Title       : A Biochemical Genetic Analysis of Inositol Metabolism in Subcellular Organelles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9724117

Award Number: 9724117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Johnson majohnso@bama.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724117  Johnson  Inositol, a six-carbon cyclitol, is essential for growth,
              differentiation, and communication of eukaryotic cells.  Inositol phosphates
              convey signals for a wide variety of hormones, growth factors and
              neurotransmitters.  Insitol's metabolism, therefore, is an important concern in
              many agricultural and clinical disciplines.  Although extensive physiological
              and biochemical data document the importance of inositol to higher plants, less
              is known of the molecular genetic mechanisms regulating its metabolism.  The
              goal of this research is to understand the genetic mechanisms controlling
              inositol metabolism during plant growth and development. The investigator's
              developmental studies of inositol biosynthesis have shown, that isoforms of the
              pivotal biosynthetic enzyme, myo-inositol-1- phosphate synthase (Ml-1-P
              synthase), exist and that one form is localized to chloroplast thylakoids in
              Phaseolus vulgaris and Arabidopsis thaliana.  Given this finding, it is
              imperative that the current two pathway model for phosphatidylinositol (PI)
              biosynthesis in plans be examined.  According to this model, PI(precursor for
              phosphinositdes) is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and then
              transported into other subcellular organelles such as the chloroplasts.  The
              investigator's recent finding (the synthesis of inositol in chloroplasts),
              however, raises the possibility that PI and the phosphinositides are also being
              synthesized in these organelles.  It is conceivable that inositol and/or the
              phosphoinositide signal tranduction pathway operates as part of the
              communication system between chloroplasts and the nucelus ( the hypothesized
              chloroplast-to-nucleus signal transduction pathway in plants).  The
              investigator will use enzyme assays, western analyses, Immunocytochemical
              analyses, in situ hybridizations, phospholipid studies, and molecular analyses
              to (1) correlate sites of inositol biosynthesis with sites of PI biosynthesis
              and (2) isolate mutants defective in inositol metabolism.  This  project is
              expected to yield direct evidence concerning inositol's function in chloroplast
              and other subcellular organelles shown to synthesize inositol.  The findings
              will be directly applicable to the overall picture (still lacking) of the
              important plant phosphoinositide signal transduction pathway.    This project
              is concerned with synthesis of inositol in plants.  While much is known about
              inositol phosphate signaling in animals, the corresponding issues in plants
              have not been well studied.  The overall long-term goal of the work is to
              understand inositol's role in the biology of subcellular organelles.  The
              investigator has shown in previous studies that the key biosynthetic enzyme,
              myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase, has temporally and spatially controlled
              isoforms; this unexpected finding is novel.  This project will involve a
              detailed study of the sites of inositol and phosphionositol synthesis.  A
              combination of immunocytochemical analyses, in situ hybridization studies, and
              enzyme activity measurements will be performed using Phaseolus vulgaris and
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  This work will help in developing an understanding of
              cell signaling in plants, as well as of regulation of an important metabolic
              pathway.
