Title       : Fifth E. coli and Small Genomes Meeting, held October 12-15,1997 in Snowbird,
               Utah.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9724782

Award Number: 9724782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: George Weinstock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      Weinstock  9724782  The Fifth E. coli and Small Genomes Conference is to
              be held October 12-15, 1997 at the conference center in Snowbird, Utah.  The E.
              coli genome project was one of the first initiated and at its completion this
              year is the largest genome sequenced to date, nearly 2.5 times the size of
              typical genomes under study such as H. influenzae, the first prokaryotic genome
              to be completed. The extensive physiologic, biochemical, and genetic analysis
              of E. coli over the last four decades make this the best studied of prokaryotic
              organisms and one of the model systems to which all others are compared. The
              larger size of the genome in itself promises that there will be a wider range
              of functions to be analyzed, and this guarantees that E. coli will continue to
              provide precedent and paradigm for both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. 
              There is great excitement over the prospect of comparing the sequences and
              contents of as many as 40 prokaryotic genomes over the next few years, and E.
              coli is expected to occupy a prominent place in this analysis. Considerable
              integration of different aspects of microbiology will undoubtedly take place,
              including new perspectives on evolution and the requirements for life. To
              achieve these goals, particularly of integration and synergy, scientists from
              diverse disciplines must interact. Thus this conference will include active
              genome researchers, such as sequencing experts and informatics specialists
              working in database design, sequence analysis, or simulation; geneticists
              developing new methods to take advantage of genomic information, e.g. for
              functional analysis; and cell biologists and biochemists who have specialized
              in areas now ripe for genomics such as metabolism, chromosome structure, or
              gene regulation. While there have been a number of recent genome conferences,
              continuing completion and release of new genome sequences and developing
              momentum for analysis of this huge amount of information means the community
              has continued need of such  conferences. This meeting has become established as
              the only regular annual bacterial genomics conference during the last 5 years
              and has assured status and quality.
