Title       : FSML Planning Activities: Research, Education and Facilities Planning for the
               Prescott College Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9724701

Award Number: 9724701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8818               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Boyer eboyer@prescott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prescott College
	      220 Grove Avenue
	      Prescott, AZ  863012912    602/778-2090

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Prescott College has been conducting field courses for  undergraduates in the
              Gulf of California, and  particularly in the area around Bahia Kino, Sonora, 
              Mexico, and the Midriff Island region of the Gulf of  California, for nearly
              thirty years.  Although it is a  small liberal arts school, its mission
              emphasizes field  studies and experiential approaches to science and 
              environmental studies.  The college recently purchased a  small field station
              on the coast of the Gulf of  California near the town of Bahia Kino, Sonara,
              Mexico  and has been offering field courses and facilitating  research at the
              station since the fall of 1992.  With the  growth of the college, the creation
              of a Master of Arts  program and increases in enrollment and use of the field 
              station, the college has expanded its commitment  to the Prescott College Kino
              Bay Center for Cultural and  ecological Studies by appointing a director,hiring
              a  manage, increasing operating budgets and committing to a  broader mission
              for the station,particularly in the area  of support for scientific research,
              independent studies  and graduate students. Although the station is a small 
              offers unparalleled  access to a unique and fragile  bioregion, which is coming
              under increasing human  pressures.  It is only field station on a 400-mile 
              stretch of Sonoran Desert coast from Puerto Penasco in  the north to Guaymas in
              the south.  This project will  develop an intelligent, coherent, long-range
              plan that  will improve the undergraduate curriculum, create  opportunities for
              graduate research at the station,  define research priorities and identify the
              facilities  and equipment needs to properly support research in  marine and
              desert ecology, island biogeography,cultural  anthropology and human impact on
              fisheries.  The intent  is to create a field station that supports and  blends 
              qualify field research with undergraduate field courses  and graduate studies.
