Title       : Biochemistry and Genetics of Propionate Catabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9724924

Award Number: 9724924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge C. Escalante-Semerena jcescala@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724924  Jorge C. Escalante-Semerena   The long-term goal of this project work
              is to improve our understanding of procaryotic cell physiology, and to learn
              more about how the metabolic web of procaryotes is integrated. For the past
              several years the physiology, biochemistry and genetics of vitamin Bl2
              biosynthesis and the vitamin B12-dependent catabolism of ethanolamine (EA) and
              1,2-propanediol (1,2-PDL) have been studied in the enteropathogenic bacterium
              Salmonella typhimurium. Observations made during the course of this work,
              uncovered features of the catabolism of these poor carbon sources that have
              important, global implications for cellular physiology. The studies have
              discovered that glutathione (GSH) and DNA  polymerase I (Po1I) are required for
              the utilization of propionate, EA, and 1,2-PDL. This work established for the
              first time a link between GSH, Po1I and cell growth. The unexpected involvement
              of GSH and Po1I, brought into focus the serious problems generated when the
              cell catabolizes carbon/energy sources such as propionate, EA, or 1,2-PDL. The
              conclusion reached by this work was that catabolism of these carbon sources
              requires cellular systems to protect both proteins and nucleic acids from
              reactive metabolic intermediates. However, to identify damaging intermediates
              of a pathway, it is essential to understand its biochemistry.   This project
              will define the propionate catabolic pathway in S. typhimurium. This work is
              needed due to the gap of knowledge of how this bacterium (and other enterics)
              catabolize propionate. Recent work suggests that S. typhimurium catabolizes
              propionate via a pathway found in yeast, not via the acryloyl-CoA or the
              vitamin B12-dependent methylmalonyl-CoA mutase pathways typically found in
              procaryotes. This project will begin the biochemical analysis of the functions
              encoded by the recently described propionate (prp) catabolism operon, and by
              the cobB gene which is not part of the prp operon, but whose product is
              required for propionate breakdown in this  bacterium. This project will provide
              a solid foundation for future studies on the role of metabolic intermediates in
              the endogenous mutagenic process, and on the strategies the cell uses to
              protect proteins and DNA from damage, a critical issue to cell viability and
              evolution.
