Title       : Mechanistic Aspects of Nitric Oxide Production by Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9724060

Award Number: 9724060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia Giulivi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724060  Giulivi  Nitric oxide (NO) is a radical synthesized from the guanidino
              nitrogen of L-arginine and O2 by dioxygenases called nitric oxide synthases
              (NOS).  Recently, immunocytochemical evidence for a protein antigenically
              related to NOS was localized in mitochondria from different tissues.  No
              reports, however, are available on mtNOS activity, the precise role of this
              enzyme, or on the mechanistic aspects of NO  metabolism in mitochondria from
              different tissues.  It has been shown that NO (either generated chemically or
              pure NO gas) binds reversibly to cytochrome oxidase, inhibiting mitochondrial
              O2 consumption at nM concentrations.  However, an endogenous production of NO,
              i.e., a continuous flux of NO close to target molecules within the organelle,
              may lead to different steady-state concentrations than those obtained by the
              addition of a bolus of pure NO gas and consequently may elicit distinctive
              biological effects.  Thus, the presence of a NOS in mitochondria and the
              production of NO by mitochondria might have important implications for energy
              production in a cellular setting.    The goal of this project is increasing the
              understanding of the production of NO by mitochondria, along with elucidating
              the regulation of the process, the physicochemical characteristics of mtNOS,
              and the targets of NO in mitochondria.  The production of NO by mitochondria
              gains significance from the modulatory effect this molecule may have on energy
              metabolism, O2 consumption, and O2 free radical production.  The ubiquitous
              distribution of mitochondria, the diffusibility of NO through cellular
              membranes, and the roles of NO as a cellular transmitter, messenger, and
              regulator suggest that mitochondrial NO may be involved in overall
              physiological regulation.
