Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial DNA Inheritance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9724143

Award Number: 9724143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jodi Nunnari jmnunnari@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724143  Nunnari     Accurate transmission of subcellular organelles during 
              eukaryotic cell division is an essential and regulated  process. In the case of
              the semi-autonomous respiratory  organelle, the mitochondrion, this process is
              more  complicated because, in order for progeny cells to be  respiratory
              competent, both the organelle and its genome  must be accurately transmitted. 
              Although it is widely  accepted that during cell division the partitioning of 
              mitochondria is an active process dependent on the  cytoskeleton, one
              fundamental question  that remains  unanswered is what additional mechanisms
              are required for  the partitioning and distribution of mitochondrial DNA 
              (mtDNA) both within the organelle and to daughter cells.  The long term goal of
              the proposed work is to determine the  cellular and molecular mechanisms
              responsible for mtDNA  inheritance.  These questions will be addressed using
              the  simple eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast).  From a wealth
              of genetic data obtained using this organism,  it is clear that mtDNA
              inheritance is a non-random process.  The ability to visualize both the
              organelle and mtDNA in  vivo, and the opportunity to combine both genetic and 
              biochemical approaches to understanding function, make S.  cerevisiae an
              excellent model system for examining the  cellular and molecular mechanisms
              involved in mitochondrial  inheritance.    It has recently been shown that when
              S.  cerevisiae haploid cells fuse, mitochondrial fusion also  occurs and a
              single, continuous dynamic mitochondrial  reticulum is created in the zygote. 
              While mitochondrial  matrix proteins are able to freely diffuse within this 
              reticulum, the diffusion of inner membrane-associated mtDNA  is severely
              restricted.  Although the movement of mtDNA  within the organelle is
              restricted, mtDNA does enter  emerging buds with the mitochondria.  Elucidating
              the  molecular mechanisms underlying mtDNA limited diffusion is  critical to
              understanding the exact mechanisms for mtDNA  inheri tance.  The specific aims
              of this proposal are  directed at further characterizing this mechanism and at 
              identifying and determining the mechanisms of action of the  proteins in S.
              cerevisiae that mediate mtDNA inheritance.  Specifically, mtDNA movement within
              cells will be  characterized by time lapsed imaging of a fluorescently  tagged
              mtDNA-binding protein.  The molecular components  responsible for the limited
              diffusion and segregation of  mtDNA will be identified using both genetic and
              biochemical  approaches.  Conditional mutants that are unable to stably 
              maintain the mitochondrial genome during mitosis will be  isolated.  The
              mtDNA-protein complexes will be purified and  characterized biochemically. 
              Associated proteins will be  identified using tandem mass spectrometry.  The
              role of  these proteins in mtDNA segregation will be determined using  genetic,
              biochemical, and microscopic approaches.        When cells divide, the various
              essential components (genes,  cytoplasm, organelles) of the cell must be
              apportioned among  the two daughter cells.  In the case of the mitochondrion, 
              the organelle possesses its own genome (in the form of  multiple copies of
              mitochondrial DNA), and this must also be  apportioned.  Prior work has shown
              that the mtDNA  distributes non-randomly, suggesting that mechanisms exist  to
              somehow tether the DNA so that the copies do not intermix  spatially within the
              organelle.  This project will shed  light on just how this occurs.  ***
