Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: From National Identity to
               State-Building: The Political Economy of South African Taxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9724055

Award Number: 9724055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Price rprice@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,1066,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9724055  Price    This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate 
              student, Mr. Evan Lieberman, working under the direction of  Dr. Robert M.
              Price, Professor of Political Science at the  University of California,
              Berkeley, to do field research in  South Africa.  This project will study the
              development of  South Africa's taxation system and how it has been  influenced
              by the political issues of national identity and  state-building.  South
              Africa's tax regime is unique among  developing countries with similar
              histories, which typically  raise no more than five percent of their Gross
              Domestic  Product (GDP) as revenue.  Developed as a two-part taxation  system
              when the country was racially divided, the system was  raising fifteen percent
              of the GDP as government revenue  from taxes on income and profits by the
              1980's.  It is  hypothesized that the politicization of a national identity 
              makes a significant, measurable impact on the establishment  and performance of
              a state's tax institutions, while also  influencing a group's propensity to
              make sacrifices in the  form of taxation.  By considering taxation as a
              historical  component of state-building, Mr. Lieberman will explore the 
              theoretical links between critical periods in South Africa's  history and the
              resultant impact on its economic  institutions.  Additionally, Mr. Lieberman
              expects that to  find that the post-apartheid era is leading to a new 
              definition of national identity, which could dramatically  alter South Africa's
              taxation institutions and the ways in  which revenue is collected.  The
              research plan will consist  of in-depth interviews, a survey, and an analysis
              of  archival records.  Staff members at the Institute for  Democracy in South
              Africa will collaborate with Mr.  Lieberman on this project.  He will also
              collaborate with  members of the Department of Political Science at the 
              University of Cape Town, where he will be a Visiting Fellow.    This study will
              make an important contribution to the  understanding abo ut the structure of
              taxation in a  developing country.  This grant also provides support to  enable
              a promising student to establish a strong,  independent research career.    ***
