Title       : Workshop on Cellular Computation and Decision Making, October 5-8, 1997, Santa
               Fe, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9724164

Award Number: 9724164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Shapiro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erica Jen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shapiro  9724164  The workshop will bring together the concepts and approaches
              of two fields--molecular biology and theoretical computer science--for the
              study of molecular computing/decision-making networks in cells. The focus will
              be on molecular networks in a small number of well-analyzed microbial systems.
              All of these networks are analogues of computing networks formed by multiple
              interacting agents, and we now have powerful experimental tools to investigate
              the properties of the molecules which constitute their nodes.  What is needed
              now are formal methods for describing and analyzing the behavior of the
              ensembles. The idea is to use the real networks that are found in microbes to
              derive formal models/representations with predictive powers. The predictions,
              in turn, can be tested by returning to the microbes. Truly creative modeling
              will require new concepts in theoretical computer science. The genesis and
              testing based on actual microbial systems will ensure that the theoretical
              results are firmly tied to real phenomena.  The goal of the workshop therefore
              is to begin converting our molecular knowledge into computer theoretic
              understanding of how these networks function. For example, we need to determine
              how to represent the analog processing capabilities of proteins that interact
              with multiple ligands, and we need to find the best vocabulary for translating
              experimentally-determined molecular properties, such as binding and catalytic
              constants, into components of computational algorithms. To do so will require
              intense collective discussions of a small number of real cases involving
              representatives of many perspectives, both biological and computational.   The
              results of the workshop should have applications to biotechnology, for example
              in the area of metabolic engineering.
