Title       : Regulation of the Neuronal Promoter of Calcium-Activated Potassium Channel Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9724088

Award Number: 9724088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel S. Atkinson nigela@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    9724088  ATKINSON   Different types of neurons must have different
              patterns of electical activity for the nervous system to function properly. 
              For example, neurons that initiate movement often "fire" with high-frequency
              burst of action potentials, whereas neurons that control slow, rythmic
              behaviors may fire only slowly, but with very precise timing.  A neuron's
              ability to generate specific activity patterns is determined by the types and
              numbers of ion channels it expresses.   Dr. Atkinson and his students will
              investigate the transcriptional regulation of an ion channel gene in the
              fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster.  The gene, called "slowpoke," produces a
              calcium-activated potassium channel, which is crucially involved in setting
              activity patterns in a variety of neurons types.  The expression of any gene is
              controlled by specific areas of the gene called the transciptional control
              region.  In the case of slowpoke, there are four different promoter sequences
              within the transciptional control region that are responsible for differential
              expression in different tissues.  Some of the promoters alter the amount of the
              gene product, whereas others alter the amino acid sequence, and thus the
              structure, of the encoded channel.  Such changes can dramatically alter a
              neuron's range of firing patterns.   Dr. Atkinson's laboratory has cloned the
              entire transcriptional control region of slowpoke.  They now plan to
              systematically introduce deletions into the region to precisely locate the
              transcriptional control elements responsible for expression in different
              neuronal subtypes.  The function of these control elements will then be
              verified by re-introducing them as single oligonucleotide sequences, which
              should restore the expression pattern, if the elements have been properly
              identified.  In the final part of the project, they will use several techniques
              to identify genes that produce the transcription factors that bind each of the
              transcription control element.  The results of this work will  help us
              understand how neurons acquire the sometimes subtle differences in ion channel
              number and type they need to play different functional roles.
