Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Sub-band Decomposition Based Lossless Image
               Compression Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9724100

Award Number: 9724100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasir Memon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5940,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Nasir
              Memon of the Department of Computer Science at Northern Illinois University in
              Dekalb, Dr. Khalid Sayood, Department of Electrical Engineering at the
              University of Nebraska in Lincoln, Dr. Bulent Sankur, Department of Electrical
              and Electronics Engineering at Bogazici (Bosporus) University in Istanbul,
              Turkey and Dr. Emin Anarim of HAVELSAN ELECTRONICS Corp. in Ankara, Turkey. 
              The objective of this research is to develop lossless image compression
              techniques that are based on subband decompositions.  Such techniques offer
              features that cannot be matched by currently popular predictive techniques for
              lossless image compression.  However, the best known lossless image compression
              techniques based on subband decomposition do not match the compression
              performance provided by state-of-the-art predictive techniques.  The proposed
              research aims at removing this performance difference and possibly achieving
              performance that surpasses the best known predictive techniques.  Scope:  This
              research project will be useful in promoting the scientific and technological
              knowledge of computer graphics in general, and especially of image compression.
               The techniques developed may have applications in teleradiology and in the
              world-wide-web.  The collaboration involves four scientists who have had some
              academic interaction in the past.  Each of the four has outstanding academic
              credentials and a solid research record and publications.  Their expertise
              complement each other in the tasks of this project.  The US team has primary
              expertise in lossless image compression, while the Turkish team has expertise
              in subband coding.  The participation of high-technology private research
              organization such as HAVELSAN is especially useful because of its practical
              experience.  This proposal meets INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign
              collaboration in areas that benefit both sides, and, since Dr. Memon received
              his Ph.D. in 1992, in enhancing junior scientists' international experience. 
              This award includes partial funding by the Division of Networking and
              Communications Research.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
