Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Effects of UV-B Radiation on Photosynthesis in
               Bean and Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9724829

Award Number: 9724829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice S. B. Ku   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald E. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724829  Ku    This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative  research
              project on plant responses to UV-B radiation,  between Drs. Maurice Ku and
              Gerald B. Edwards, Washington  State University , and Drs. Manuel Pinto and
              Claudio  Pastenes, University of Chile.  The major objectives of the  proposed
              study are to identify specific  alterations in  photochemical,  biochemical and
              physiological processes of  photosynthesis induced by supplementary UV-B
              radiation in  bean (C3 species) and maize (C4 species), and to evaluate  the
              relationship between these alterations and the  loss/change in photosynthetic
              rate.  The purpose is to  determine if modifications in photochemical
              efficiency and  photosynthetic enzymes correlate with changes in 
              photosynthetic capacity by UV-B treatment.  The hypothesis  is that the
              decrease in photosynthetic capacity in bean  caused by UV-B radiation would be
              related to changes in key  photosynthetic enzymes and/or changes in
              photochemical  efficiency.   For this study, representative bean cultivars 
              with contrasting tolerance to UV-B will be used.    Over the past three
              decades, there has been a significant  increase in research involving the
              effects of UV-B radiation  on plant systems.  Based on those studies, it is
              estimated  that about one half of all plants species, (especially  herbaceous
              species) are negatively affected by that  increased radiation. However, because
              some species are known  to be well adapted to high UV-B radiation environments,
              a  comparison of changes in enzyme activity versus protein  content during UV-B
              treatment will allow the researchers to  assess if the changes in protein
              amount or activation state  is responsible for the loss/change of
              photosynthetic  capacity.    Interactions between plants and their environment
              are  complex, but important to our understanding of plant  productivity. 
              Reduction of stratospheric ozone, which  primarily absorbs UV-B radiation, has
              raised concerns about  the potential implications of rising UV-B radia tion at
              the  Earth's surface.  ***
