Title       : High Quantum Efficiency Confocal Microscope Detector for Viewing Live Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9724515

Award Number: 9724515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284608             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Pawley jbpawley@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth S. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Hardin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Bement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Auerbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Three-dimensional imaging with a confocal microscope is probably  the most
              advanced imaging method that can be applied to living  cells. As equipment
              becomes ever more sophisticated, the  application of confocal microscopy of
              living cells has become  increasingly common and productive.    Unfortunately,
              such studies usually require the introduction of  fluorescent dyes into the
              cell and when these are illuminated with  the laser beam of the confocal
              microscope, the dye molecules are  often degraded in a manner that injures the
              living cell. Though  much has been written about this problem when viewing
              living  cells, the solution comes down to making the best possible use of  the
              fluorescent light photons emitted by the dye. Photon  efficiency has two
              aspects: ensuring that as many photons as  possible reach the detector in a
              short period of time and making  sure that those that do so are actually
              detected.    Recently a silicon photodetector has been designed (available in 
              several different formulations) which operates at high efficiency  in
              collecting and detecting photons. Dr. Pawley proposes to modify  these
              detectors for use in a confocal microscope and test their  performance under
              realistic conditions to determine the optimum  design and method of adaptation.
              The final adaptation should be a  signal advance in the technique of
              three-dimensional visualization  of cells.
