Title       : Structure-Function Studies on Deoxycytidylate Deaminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9724071

Award Number: 9724071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gladys F. Maley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724071   Maley  Technical  The investigators have cloned, expressed, and
              purified the deoxycytidylate (dCMP) deaminase induced by T4-phage, as well as
              human dCMP deaminase, in large enough quantities for x-ray crystallography and
              various other studies.  Since the enzyme is a metalloprotein with 2 moles of Zn
              per subunit of T4-phage enzyme and 1 mole of Zn per subunit of human enzyme,
              studies are planned to define the role of Zn for each enzyme and in particular
              the second Zn in the T4-phage enzyme. Mutational studies are planned to confirm
              the location of the second zinc and its role will be examined by Zn replacement
              and deletion. The effect of these mutations on transcription by their role in
              maintaining the hexameric structure of the enzyme, and their interaction with
              T4-phage TS will be examined.  Most dCMP deaminase holoenzymes are hexamers,
              but the yeast enzyme appears to differ.  Different constructs of this enzyme,
              one that is full length and others that are truncated will be studied. 
              Questions to be answered are the nature of the enzyme's subunit composition,
              its regulation by dCTP and dTTP and whether the enzyme is located in the yeast
              membrane fraction.  In order to establish the role of the deaminase in
              eukaryotic cells, attempts to delete the intact active dCMP deaminase gene from
              mice by homologous recombination are being pursued The researchers will
              investigate whether dCMP deaminase interacts with its mRNA and thereby
              autoregulates its own synthesis in an in vitro translation system.  Preliminary
              studies indicate this to be the case.  X-ray crystallography studies on both
              the T4-phage and human deaminases will be pursued. As with many proteins the
              crystal structures could yield answers related to substrate binding, allosteric
              ligand binding, and Zn binding, in addition to the nature of subunit
              interaction in an attempt to explain how this enzyme is regulated by dCTP and
              dTTP.    Non Technical  The concentrations of DNA precursors, nucleotides, are
              maintained very carefully in t he cell by the levels of the enzymes that
              comprise the nucleotide biosynthetic pathways and by the presence of various
              factors that can affect the activities of those enzymes.  There is ample data
              available to demonstrate that when the cell's nucleotide pool is perturbed, an
              increase in DNA mutation occurs.  The investigator's studies on the enzyme,
              deoxycytidylate deaminase, are key to a juncture in the nucleotide pathway
              leading to DNA.  Any mutations in that enzyme or restrictions of its activity
              can lead to a disturbances in cell growth and function.
