Title       : Acquisition of a New Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive
               Spectrometry System at the American Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9724454

Award Number: 9724454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374430             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Barnett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmond A. Mathez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman I. Platnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  We request funds to replace our aging scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
              facility with new instrumentation that has the capabilities to meet the 
              evolving research and educational requirements at the American Museum of 
              Natural History (AMNH). The high magnification, great detail, depth of  field,
              and analytical capabilities inherent to scanning electron  microscopy are
              crucial to the investigation of systematics, mineralogy,  and other research
              foci at the AMNH.    The current SEM/EDS system, a Zeiss DSM 950 and Link
              AN10000, is in  continuous use by a varied population of researchers.  It was
              an  innovative digital design at the time, but is now worn, outdated, and  not
              upgradeable. This system does not meet research and educational  requirements
              including: 1) imaging uncoated biological specimens, 2)  high magnification
              imaging in both secondary and backscattered electron  modes, 3) production and
              storage of high resolution digital image files,  4) separation of light
              elements, 5) ease of operation for a diverse user  population, 6)
              industry-standard computing platforms that can be  upgraded and have third
              party application support, 7) network and  Internet operation for collaboration
              and education, and 8) publication  quality printing. A new isolation system
              will suppress of vibrations at  magnifications above 20,000x.    Secondary
              electron imaging of uncoated biological specimens,  particularly taxonomic
              types, is important in a museum setting because  these specimens are unique and
              cannot be coated. Backscattered imaging  at high magnification and high
              accelerating voltage operation are  critical for mineralogical research. These
              diverse requirements can now  be met by field emission FE) instruments. The
              ability to greatly  increase magnification (FE scopes are rated to 600,00'0~
              will extend the  frontiers of scientific research at the AMNH. FE instruments
              have  chamber sizes adequate for large specimens and are easy to operate. 
              Current SEM and EDS systems are now migrating to standa rd computing  platforms
              that are easy to use, produce high-resolution digital images,  and operate with
              other instruments over networks and the Internet.    The new facility will
              provide state-of-the-art instrumentation that will  meet both new and
              longstanding research and educational requirements for  a very large user
              population associated with some of the most important  natural history
              collections in the world (in excess of 37 million  specimens). The AMNH has
              committed, and will continue to commit, staff  and resources to the operation
              of the SEM facility. The SEM will be  available to all affiliated personnel who
              undertake research, research  training, or education.    3
