Title       : The Four-Jointed Gene and PD Specification in the Limbs of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9724930

Award Number: 9724930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Flora N. Katz FKatz@bio.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The body plan emerges from information laid down in three axes during
              development:  the anterior-posterior, dorsal-ventral, and proximal-distal (PD)
              axes.  The PD axis specifies values at increasing distances from the central
              body, and all the limbs require such information.  The fruit fly, Drosophila
              melanogaster, has proven to be a valuable model system to explore axis
              formation, and work in the investigator's laboratory has focused on the PD axis
              specifically.  Mutations in the Drosophila four-jointed (fj) gene result in
              loss of discrete positional values in the middle of the PD axis of the legs and
              wings.  The fj gene encodes a novel, conserved transmembrane protein that can
              be cleaved in vivo to form a secreted polypeptide, a potential signaling
              ligand. Four genes have been shown to interact genetically with fj:  the dachs
              (d) approximated (app), abelson (abl), and enabled (ena) genes.  This proposal
              is concerned with the further analysis of fj and its interacting partners, with
              the long-term objective of understanding both how Fj functions and how this
              relates to the genetic control of limb morphogenesis and the specification of a
              PD axis.  Four issues will be addressed.  (1) The relative importance of the
              membrane and secreted forms of Fj will be explored using site-directed
              mutagenesis to create altered forms of the protein in transgenic flies.  (2)
              Alternative hypotheses of how Fj functions will be tested by the controlled
              loss or ectopic expression of Fj in small patches of tissue in the imaginal
              discs.  (3) Domain-specific antibodies will be used to study the subcellular
              distribution of the FJ protein, its potential association with cellular
              junctions, and its relationship to interacting genes.  (4) d mutants have
              phenotypes almost indistinguishable from those of fj, and genetic studies
              suggest it is the best candidate for a Fj receptor.  Consequently, d will be
              cloned making use of chromosomal mapping and gamma deficiencies already in
              hand.
