Title       : Conference and Workshop on the Participation of Caribbean Countries in the
               Inter-American Institute for Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9724718

Award Number: 9724718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54371              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Gilbes gilbes@cacique.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge I. Velez-Arocho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724718  Gilbes  The proposed conference and workshop will be held in 
              Mayag=FCez, Puerto Rico during the second week of July,  1997.  The main
              purpose of the conference is to bring  together scientists from the Caribbean
              with government  officials interested in global change and to discuss the 
              possibilities for involving their countries in the Inter-  American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI).  In  addition, the meeting will provide an
              efficient mechanism  for the exchange of information about global change
              research  projects currently being supported by countries in the  Caribbean.
              Conference proceedings,  including summaries of the papers presented,
              discussions,  and final conclusions will be distributed to the  participants
              and other interested parties, and will be  available in English and Spanish.
              This workshop is being co-  sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
              on behalf  of the IAI.  The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate  cooperative
              research on global change issues among the  scientific institutions of the
              Americas.  The NSF is the  U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S. 
              responsibilities within the IAI.  %%%  The proposed conference and workshop
              will be held in  Mayag=FCez, Puerto Rico  during the second week of July, 1997.
               The main purpose of  the conference is to bring together scientists from the 
              Caribbean with government officials interested in global  change and to discuss
              the possibilities for involving their  countries in the Inter-American
              Institute for Global Change  Research (IAI).  In addition, the meeting will
              provide an  efficient mechanism for the exchange of information about  global
              change research projects currently being supported by  countries in the
              Caribbean. Conference proceedings,  including summaries of the papers
              presented, discussions,  and final conclusions will be distributed to the 
              participants and other interested parties, and will be  available in English
              and Spanish. This workshop is being co-  sponsored by the  National Science
              Foundation (NSF) on behalf  of the IAI.  The IAI is a U.S. initiative to
              stimulate  cooperative research on global change issues among the  scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National  Science Foundation is the U.S.
              Government agency designated  by the White House to carry out U.S.
              responsibilities within  the IAI.  ***
