Title       : Satellite Ground Station Acquisition for Regional and Global Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9724564

Award Number: 9724564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Perkey don.perkey@nsstc.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin R. Knupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard McNider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1525,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of operational weather satellite information at high spatial and
              temporal scales can be an expensive and time consuming process.  While there
              are many sources of satellite data available over the Internet, most of these
              data have been converted into a format that is easily transferred and displayed
              as a picture and are, therefore, not suitable for detailed, quantitative
              scientific investigation.    With support from the Major Research
              Instrumentation Program (MRI), the Principal Investigators will purchase
              satellite receiving ground stations and associated processing equipment that
              will allow them to acquire data from both the Geostationary Operational
              Environmental Satellite (GOES) and the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
              (AVHRR).  The Principal Investigators will employ this satellite data to study
              diverse research topics covering both mesoscale weather and climate
              investigations.  Examples of specific topics include:    -  performing
              observational case studies as a means to classify and document cloud-top
              characteristics of mesoscale convective systems, including tornadic squall
              lines;    -  understanding the relationship between cloud-top temperature and
              lightning characteristics of clouds, and potential microphysical interactions
              (and effects on lightning) among adjacent storms;  -  incorporating GOES
              satellite IR and visible data into mesoscale prediction models to produce more
              accurate surface temperature and moisture fluxes and, hence, improve model
              skill;   -  improving regional-scale air pollution models by assimilating
              satellite information into photochemical modeling systems, mapping sea ice and
              clouds over polar regions;   -  understanding the vegetation characteristics of
              various ecosystems;  -  detecting and understanding the impact of jet contrails
              on regional climate.    Additionally, this satellite information will be used
              as an integral part of courses in which graduate students are not only trained
              how to utilize this information, but are also challenged t o develop new and
              improved approaches to meteorological problems.
