Title       : Analysis of Ascidian Axis Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9724094

Award Number: 9724094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Smith w_smith@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Smith  9724094    The development of a complex organism, such as a vertebrate,
              from a fertilized egg is a multi-step process involving the coordinated actions
              of thousands of genes.  In elaboration of the adult form from the egg,
              mechanisms involving both the segregation of cell fate determinants to specific
              regions of the developing embryo, and inductive interactions, in which cells
              communicate to determine the developmental fates of neighboring cells, are
              found.  In this project Dr. Smith will seek to isolate genes that act early in
              chordate development and which are involved in determining the fates of
              specific tissues.  As a model chordate in these studies, he will use the
              ascidian Ciona intestinalis.  Ciona, which is one of the most primitive of the
              chordates, has many advantages for study of early chordate development.  While
              ascidians retain the basic body plan common to chordates, they have a fixed
              lineage in early development, they have very few cells at the larvae stage
              ((2,300), and they have a genome that is only about 5% the size of a
              vertebrate.  To identify genes which are important for early development in
              Ciona, an expression cloning strategy will be used.  Plasmid cDNA libraries
              will be made from Ciona gastrula stage embryos.  In vitro transcripts from the
              libraries will be microinjected as pools into 4-cell stage Xenopus embryos. 
              Pools with activity will be identified as those that bring about developmental
              changes to the Xenopus embryos.  Single cDNAs with activity will be isolated by
              sub-dividing the libraries into progressively smaller pools.  The identity of
              genes isolated by this method will be determined by nucleotide sequencing,  and
              the expression patterns will be determined by in situ hybridization to staged
              Ciona embryos.
