Title       : US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement: Knowledge and Authority of Western and
               Indigenous Knowledge in Maternal and Child Health in Rural Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9724132

Award Number: 9724132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor W. Purcell purcell@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Akin Kearly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,5991,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724132  Purcell & Kearly    This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate  student, Ms. Elizabeth Kearly, working under the guidance of  Dr.
              Trevor Purcell, Professor of Anthropology at the  University of South Florida,
              to do field research in Kenya.  During the past two decades many of  Kenya's
              traditional  birth attendants (TBAs) have periodically attended  biomedical
              workshops where they have been trained in western  biomedical practices
              concerning maternal and child health  care.  As a result many TBAs have
              incorporated this  knowledge into their own indigenous health care methods, 
              resulting in an integrated approach which lets them select  the most
              appropriate biomedical or indigenous treatment for  each patient's situation. 
              Due to Kenya's long history of  colonization, even the untrained TBAs have some
              exposure to  western biomedical knowledge, but many of them still  continue to
              only use the traditional practices.  Ms. Kearly  hypothesizes that the
              untrained TBAs do not integrate the  two knowledge systems because they lack
              adequate access to  western medical facilities and supplies, and they view
              their  indigenous methods as having more authority, or relative  influence, as
              a result of the various cultural,  socioeconomic, and political factors
              embedded in their  traditional health care beliefs.  Based on information she 
              will collect on how trained and untrained TBAs in the rural  Migori District
              acquire and use both forms of knowledge, Ms.  Kearly expects to identify the
              various levels of authority  they ascribe to each form of health care knowledge
              and how  that authority then influences their selection of the best  method to
              be used in various health situations.  The  discovery of such selection
              patterns will prove useful in  predicting how people integrate and use
              knowledge systems  under different conditions.  In-depth interviews, 
              participant observations, and archival research at the  Indigenous Knowledge
              Center and the Kenya National Archives,  will be used durin g this study. 
              Staff members at the Maseno  University will collaborate with Ms. Kearly on
              this project.    This study will make an important contribution to existing 
              knowledge on the societal dynamics involved in the  integration of western and
              traditional forms of knowledge  concerning obstetrical practices in a rural
              area in a  developing country.  The grant will also provide support to  enable
              a promising study to establish a strong, independent  research career.    ***
