Title       : Physics Survey Overview
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2001        
File        : a9724780

Award Number: 9724780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Shapero dshapero@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1022,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9724780  Shapero  The National Research Council (NRC) will carry out a new 
              survey of physics entitled "Physics in a New Era".  The  survey is being
              carried out in phases.  The first phase (now  complete) has produced
              assessments of (1) atomic, molecular,  and optical physics and (2) plasma
              physics as well as a  number of short reports on selected topics, including 
              cosmology and cosmic ray physics.  These assessments have  involved the
              corresponding divisions of the American  Physical Society and have had a
              significant impact on their  fields.  The second phase (now in progress) will
              produce  assessments of (1) elementary-particle physics, (2)  condensed-matter
              and materials physics, and (3) nuclear  physics.  In the third phase, special
              reports on areas such  as biological physics, computational physics, and
              education  in physics are being developed; in addition, and Overview is 
              planned.  The Overview will discuss the unity of physics,  its relationships
              with other fields, and its contributions  to meeting national needs.  This
              volume will take a fresh  look at the ways in which society reaps benefits from
              its  investment in physics.  The Overview will also explore such  issues as
              demographics, career paths, and education.  The  contents will include an
              executive summary written for the  non physicist, a summary of the studies of
              the various  branches of physics carried out in Phases I and II, a  discussion
              of the overall U.S. physics program, an essay on  "Physics in a New Era", and a
              number of other topics.  The objective of the Overview, in the broadest terms,
              is to  facilitate a recalibration of the goals of the field as a  whole.  The
              motivation for this undertaking is the rapidly  changing societal context for
              science.  Our society is in  the process of reexamining its goals as it enters
              a new  environment of reduced expectations for growth on the one  hand and
              enhanced opportunities for increases in  productivity and functionality on the
              other.  The physics  survey in general and  the overview in particular provide 
              means for the physics community to participate in this  process.  This Overview
              volume will be supported partially by this  grant.  ***
