Title       : Molecular Genetics of Cell Fate Specification in the Arabidopsis Root Epidermis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9724149

Award Number: 9724149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324607             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Schiefelbein schiefel@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Schiefelbein  9724149    Multicellular organisms possess diverse cell types that
              are organized in appropriate patterns to generate functional tissues and
              organs. One of the great mysteries in the field of developmental biology is the
              nature of the mechanism that defines the fates and patterns of the various cell
              types. Plants are useful organisms with which to study this developmental
              problem because many of their tissues are composed of a simple array of cell
              types and their cell lineages can be traced easily.  In the present project,
              root epidermis formation in the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana is used as
              a model for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying cell fate and
              patterning during development. The formation of cell types in the Arabidopsis
              root epidermis is a remarkably simple and elegant example of cell
              position-dependent fate specification, and this experimental system is amenable
              to molecular, genetic, and cellular analyses. One of the major advantages is
              that the root epidermis is composed of only two cell types, root-hair cells and
              hairless cells, and their fates are determined by the positional relationship
              of the epidermal cells to their underlying cortical cell neighbors.  In recent
              studies, three genes (named TTG, WER, and GL2) have been identified that are
              required for proper cell type specification at an early stage in root epidermis
              development. The research in the present project period is designed to: (1)
              define the regulation of the GL2 gene during root epidermis development, (2)
              analyze the relationship of the WER gene to the TTG and GL2 genes and determine
              its role in root epidermis cell fate, and (3) study the developmental features
              of the root epidermis by using a GL2 promoter fusion construct as a cell-type
              specific marker gene. The results of these studies are expected to provide a
              greater understanding of the specific genes controlling epidermis cell fate in
              Arabidopsis as well as novel insights into the general mechanisms employed by
              multicellular  organisms to control cell-type diversity and patterning.
