Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9724894

Award Number: 9724894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert S. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Indian Sci&Eng Soc
	      P.O. Box 9828
	      Albuquerque, NM  871199828    505/765-1052

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)  has    mentored and
              offered support to students since 1979  through    its first student chapter. 
              As the proposal indicates, the    number of student chapters has grown to 147. 
              The proposal    indicates that AISES has empowered students with  leadership   
              skills, and information to better prepare students in  science    and
              engineering fields.  In addition, AISES has provided    scholarships to enable
              students to continue their  education    and attend AISES conferences by
              offering opportunities for    students to connect with each other and with
              faculty who  are    role models at conferences.  By offering information 
              through    the Internet students are easily able to connect with each    other
              and with the organization.  AISES also conducts    precollege activities such
              as science fairs and    pre-college math and science camps.  Through these 
              activities,    AISES has created an environment that nurtures and  encourages  
               pre-college and college students to pursue the sciences.    According to the
              proposal, there is a 65 percent college    retention rate for AISES members. 
              Materials such as the    unique Winds of Change and American Indian College
              Guide  have    empowered students' education, contacts, and career.  The   
              strengths of the nominee include:              Prepares students for careers in
              science both  intellectually         and culturally.       Provides
              scholarships and leadership training.       Participants give back to the
              community.       Pre-college program including science camps.           
              Growing network of professional scientists and  engineers         serve as role
              models for the American Indian youth.       Publication of "Winds of Change" is
              a major outreach  mechanism; another way to engage students and role models.   
                      Internship program with the Department of  Transportation.       Web
              page idea is good.       Replications in Canada and New Zealand are underway.  
                 In summary, AISES has dem onstrated that it is a unique    organization with
              connections to open doors in many  schools    and colleges.  For all that is
              stated in the nomination,    including its impressive graduation numbers in the
               sciences,    it can be said that AISES has an outstanding record in   
              mentoring Native American youth in the sciences.
