Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
               Karachi, Pakistan, Feb. 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9724167

Award Number: 9724167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Gealt gealt@duvm.ocs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5943,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
              `US-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology`,
              to be held in February 1998, in Karachi, Pakistan.  The US team leader is Dr.
              Michael Gealt, Department of Biosciences and Biotechnology at Drexel University
              in Philadelphia, and the Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Nuzhat Ahmed, of the
              Center of Molecular Genetics at the University of Karachi, Pakistan.  The
              research areas to be emphasized in the workshop include: on-site
              biodegradation; in situ (intrinsic) biodegradation; genetic manipulation for
              development of new microorganisms; risk assessment; and environmental analysis.
               The meeting includes a symposium attended by scientists from the US and
              Pakistan, and from Europe and Japan.  It will be followed by a bilateral
              US-Pakistan session to identify areas of potential joint research based on the
              information gathered in the symposium.  The proceedings, including the
              presentations and also the US-Pakistan recommendations, will be published by
              the University of Karachi.  Scope: This project is intended to first bring
              American and Pakistani scientists in a meeting with others working in the
              important areas of genetic engineering and biotechnology from Europe and Japan
              to exchange information and results of recent research work.  It is also
              intended to focus attention to the scientific questions that can be better
              addressed through US-Pakistan scientific cooperation.  There is potential for
              considerable benefits from collaboration between an advanced country such as
              the US with a developing country such as Pakistan in this field.  There is a
              unique flora of plants, animals, and microorganisms in Pakistan that enriches
              the biological resources to be used.  There is also relatively inexpensive,
              skilled, scientific manpower in Pakistan, which can carry part of the lengthy
              and laborious research work that is common in the field of biotechnology and
              genetic engineering.  The benefits of successful collaboration, to many
              developing countries, can be great.  The proposal meets INT criteria for
              supporting activities likely to enhance collaboration between US and foreign
              scientists in areas of mutual interest.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
