Title       : Acquisition of a High Efficiency Segmented Germanium Detector Array for Nuclear
               Structure Experiments with Exotic Beams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2000   
File        : a9724299

Award Number: 9724299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Glasmacher glasmacher@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Mantica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregers Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Morrissey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Thoennessen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1232,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Specialized equipment for use in the study of the  structure radioactive
              nuclei will be constructed at the  Michigan State University National
              Superconducting Cyclotron  Laboratory, presently the major US facility used in
              the  study of radioactive nuclei.  The equipment will consist of  an array of
              germanium detectors for detecting decay gamma  rays from unstable nuclei
              produced via a technique known as  particle beam fragmentation.  Beams produced
              in this fashion  have a high velocity in the laboratory and the gamma rays 
              emitted in different directions are thus Doppler shifted in  a varied degree to
              the extent that the overall energy  resolution is broadened dramatically.  This
              array will  permit such Doppler broadening to be deconvoluted, allowing 
              important high resolution studies of these unstable nuclei.  The study of the
              structure of these nuclei will provide  important input to our understanding of
              nuclei and reactions  of importance in nucleosynthesis and other stellar 
              processes, and will constrain and test theoretical work in  nuclear structure. 
              The study of nuclei far from stability  and nuclear astrophysics are topics of
              high priority within  US nuclear science, as established by the joint NSF/DOE 
              Nuclear Science Advisory Committee in its 1996 Long Range  Plan.  Education of
              students and postdocs is strong  component of the experimental program in which
              this  equipment will be used.  Funding is provided through the  Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities as part of an  initiative which will enable
              expansion of capabilities  regarding instrumentation support.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
