Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Shoot Apical Meristem Development in Arabidopsis
               Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9724163

Award Number: 9724163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Kathy Barton mkbarton@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Barton  9724163        The shoot apical meristem (SAM) plays a central role in
              angiosperm shoot development giving rise to nearly all of the above-ground
              structures of the plant. The SAM simultaneously serves two purposes: it acts
              both as a site of pattern formation and as a source of pluripotent stem cells
              or initial cells. Thus, the SAM produces the basic subunits of the shoot,
              leaves and stem, in repeated and predictable patterns, using new cells derived
              from the center of the SAM. The long term goal of this project is to understand
              the molecular basis for how a SAM makes a plant.    By isolating mutants that
              either entirely lack a SAM or are defective in some aspect of SAM development,
              it is possible to identify genes that are uniquely important in SAM function.
              One of these is the SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) gene, a homeodomain-containing gene
              that is required for SAM formation and function in the model plant Arabidopsis.
              The STM appears to act in the periphery of the SAM to form the separations
              between organs, and in doing so, may play an important role in the shaping of
              the plant body. We will test this notion by specifically expressing the STM
              gene product in the periphery of the SAM and asking whether this can rescue the
              defect in cotyledon separation in stm mutants. This experiment will also allow
              us to gauge the degree to which STM acts cell autonomously within the SAM.   
              Other mutants defective in SAM development will be studied as well. A
              Peripheral Zone specific reporter construct will be used to determine if
              several mutants suggested to have defects in the Central Zone misexpress this
              construct. The PINHEAD gene, a gene required for the correct functioning of
              positional information in the SAM, will be cloned to find out how positional
              information works in the SAM - a process about which almost nothing is known.  
               Finally, the Adnormal mutant has suggested the existence of a positive
              interaction between the adaxial side of the leaf and SAM formation. We will
              test this hypothesis by i solating mutants that do not make an adaxial leaf
              domain and asking whether they can form axillary and primary SAMs. We will also
              investigate the ability of an "overly" adaxialized mutant to suppress the
              phenotypes of mutants defective in SAM formation.
