Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Preparation & Applications of Ultra- Fine Particulates, Nov.
               15-16, 1997, Cairo, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9724070

Award Number: 9724070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan E. El-Shall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
              `US-Egypt Workshop: Preparation and Applications of Ultra-Fine particulates,
              Cairo, Egypt, November 15-16, 1997`.  The US leader is Dr. Hassan El-Shall of
              the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of
              Florida, Gainesville.  The Egyptian co-organizer of the workshop is Dr. Adel K.
              Ismail, of the Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDA)
              in Helwan, Egypt.  The purpose of the workshop is to bring the US and Egyptian
              scientists and engineers in a forum to explore the recent scientific
              developments and technical advances in the area of fine particles, and to
              identify specific research areas where their collaboration would be useful for
              both sides.  The workshop will be followed by an `Engineering Foundation
              Conference on Development of Nonrenewable Resources` on November 17-21, in
              Luxor, Egypt.  The workshop topics will be: advanced techniques for fine
              particle preparation; grinding of ultra-fine particles; characterization;
              separation of fine particle systems; surface modifications for specific
              applications; and research needs.  The EFC on Development of Nonrenewable
              Resources will focus on industrial minerals, non sulfide minerals, sulfide
              minerals, energy minerals, and environmental aspects.  The proceedings will be
              published prior to the meeting.  Recommendations on areas of scientific
              cooperation will be made available after the meeting.  Scope: This project
              deals with an area that is gaining in importance as most countries are
              attempting to develop their mineral and energy resources, because as the high
              grade resources are depleted there is increasing emphasis on efficient
              utilization of low grade resources preparation and new applications of fine
              particles.  The planned workshop allows a forum for scientists and engineers
              from both countries to discuss the challenges facing the preparation of fine
              particles and its applications in different industries as well as its
              environmental impact, and possible technical solutions to overcome these
              challenges.   Dr. El-Shall is the deputy director of the NSF-supported
              Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the U. of
              Florida.  He will be assisted by a number of eminent scientists at that ERC and
              at other well known research institutes including Columbia University and the
              University of Utah.  The CMRDA is the largest such center in the Arab countries
              and provides a substantial capability for the workshop, the following
              conference, and for the cooperative research that is expected to result.  The
              proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities likely to enhance
              technical and scientific collaboration between US and foreign researchers in
              areas of mutual interest.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
