Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: Motion-Based Recognition, Karachi, Pakistan, Jan. 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9724058

Award Number: 9724058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mubarak Shah shah@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5943,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
              `US-Pakistan Workshop on Motion-Based recognition`, to be held in January 1998,
              in Karachi, Pakistan.  The US team leader is Dr. Mubarak Shah, Department of
              Computer Science at the University of Central Florida in Orlando.   The
              Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Javaid Laghari, of the Shaheed Zulfikar Ali
              Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology in Karachi, Pakistan.  The areas to
              be emphasized in the workshop include: cyclic motion detection, activity
              recognition, event recognition, lip-reading, gesture recognition, and facial
              expression recognition.  The proceedings, including the technical presentations
              and the recommendations, will be published.  The workshop is to be held just
              before the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) planned in
              January 1998, in Bombay, India.  The proximity of the two sites should help
              increase the participation in the Karachi workshop by US scientists.  Scope: 
              This project is to bring US and Pakistani scientists to discuss recent
              developments in a relatively new and important area of computer graphics,
              namely the area of motion-based recognition.  The applications of this
              technology are wide, such as in manufacturing (industrial automation and
              robotics), in surveillance and monitoring, in traffic control, in object
              tracking, in measurement of cloud and wind motions, and in biomedical imaging. 
              It is planned to focus attention during the workshop on the scientific
              questions that can be addressed through US-Pakistan collaboration.  There is a
              relatively inexpensive, skilled, scientific manpower in Pakistan, which can
              effectively carry part of the research work in the field of computer imaging
              and software development.  This project should help establish the
              infrastructure necessary for developments in industry in Pakistan, and for
              Western companies wishing to invest in manufacturing in this growing market.  
              The invited US participants are eminent researchers from universities, industry
              and government laboratories, and they include one woman who is an expert on
              artificial intelligence and signal processing, and at least two junior
              scientists.  The proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities likely
              to enhance collaboration between US and foreign scientists in areas of mutual
              interest, and for encouraging the participation of women scientists and junior
              scientists in international activities .                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
