Title       : Development of Instrumentation for Digital Imaging Fluorescence Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  2000  
File        : a9724611

Award Number: 9724611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Carrington Walter.Carrington@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-2119

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Carrington, Walter  9724611    Project Summary:         A plan is presented to
              develop hardware, algorithms and  software to enhance and extend the
              capabilities of the  digital imaging microscope (DIM),  an approach to 3-D 
              fluorescence microscopy which combines wide field microscopy  with high speed
              CCD cameras, fast focus change,  deconvolution algorithms and visualization and
              analysis  software.  The plan has been developed in response to the 
              limitations imposed on biological experiments by even the  most advanced
              current systems.  Enhancements to an existing  ultra-fast 3-D microscope will
              be implemented, including  increasing the number of high speed images that may
              be  obtained before slow readout is necessary.  New  computational methods for
              3-D image  restoration(deconvolution) will be developed and tested that  use
              L^p smoothing with non-negativity to achieve a lateral  resolution of 75nm and
              axial resolution of 250nm.  New  software will be written to automate the
              calculation of a  sub-sampled point spread function used in this super- 
              resolution image restoration approach.  We will develop a  new parallel
              implemention of these algorithms on a single 4-  processor Silicon Graphics,
              Inc. (SGI) Origin 200 computer  using SGI's software development tools. 
              Visualization tools  that increase 3-D rendering speeds by 100x using hardware 
              texture mapping on low end SGI 02 workstations will be  developed.  Finally,
              new methods for analyzing the  statistical significance of spatial and temporal
              patterns in  images will be developed.  A number of biological projects  will
              be carried out on this new instrument addressing key  problems which are not
              soluble by currently existing  instruments.  For example, the pathway through
              the cell that  glut4 glucose transporters take when they are sent to the 
              plasma membrane in response to insulin will be directly  visualized and the
              dynamics of assembly of centrosomal  proteins and consequences of assembly and
              disassembly during  the cell cycle for centros ome function will be determined.
               Biologists and engineers will be trained in optical methods  and digital
              imaging microscopy through involvement in  biological projects and instrument
              development respectively.  The work we propose will enhance the sensitivity, 
              resolution, numerical accuracy and visualization and  analysis capabilities of
              the digital imaging fluorescence  microscope.  It will thus extend the range of
              questions that  biologists can answer with it.
