Title       : Developmental Mechanisms of Body Plan Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1999  
File        : a9724003

Award Number: 9724003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf A. Raff rraff@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Raff  9724003    Although there are several million species of animals, they
              fall into groups representing 35 basic body plans (phyla). The phyla appeared
              in the Cambrian radiation, and have existed for over a half billion years. The
              study of the evolution of development has revealed two important and unexpected
              observations. The first is that radically different developmental modes can
              evolve rapidly among closely related taxa. The second is that master regulatory
              genes are highly conserved, even among morphologically widely disparate phyla.
              These results suggest that developmental reorganization has occurred largely by
              co-option of existing genes and pathways, and that we can exploit the
              expression of conserved regulatory genes to determine how body plan
              transformations took place. This study investigates the evolution of the
              pentameral body plan of echinoderms with the bilaterally symmetric body plan of
              their sister group, the chordates. This proposal focuses on the transformations
              that have converted a bilaterally symmetric body plan into a pentameral one,
              and on finding shared processes that govern axial determination in disparate
              phyla. The proposed work will seek to establish a potential echinoderm homolog
              to the notochord in the induction of axial structures. The hypothesis that such
              a homolog exists can be confirmed by defining patterns of expression of
              echinoderm homologs of vertebrate axial determination genes.  The project will
              exploit a sea urchin species that develops directly into a juvenile adult in
              only four days. Genes involved in specification of vertebrate
              anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axis induction pathways will be isolated
              from that sea urchin. The project will characterize spatial expression patterns
              of the genes to infer echinoderm homologs to vertebrate axial features. The
              function of axial determination genes will be tested by over/ectopic expression
              experiments. Finally, the project will determine the role of induction
              processes in axial determination in echin oderms by experimental embryology and
              use of gene markers. This testing of inductive processes will further test the
              potential homologies of developmental processes in two morphologically distinct
              but related phyla.  The results of this project will provide an insight into
              the evolutionary modifications of developmental processes, and into the role of
              developmental processes in constraining the course of morphological evolution.
