Title       : Dynamics of Tropical Waves and Instabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1999   
File        : a9724987

Award Number: 9724987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry A. Emanuel emanuel@texmex.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9724987  Emanuel     The tropical atmosphere exhibits a large variety of
              wave phenomena, ranging from "synoptic-scale " waves of several thousand
              kilometers in dimension to the planetary-scale Madden-Julian Oscillation. 
              Complex numerical simulations of the tropical atmosphere also exhibit a
              spectrum of waves, but their characteristics differ appreciably from one model
              to another.  There is considerable controversy about the dynamics of these
              waves, particularly concerning their interaction with moist convection.  Some
              argue that such an interaction can be unstable an result in wave amplification
              while others argue that convection damps the waves.  As these waves play a
              considerable role in tropical weather and climate, including the genesis of
              tropical cyclones, there is much to be gained by improving general
              understanding of the basic dynamics of the waves.  This project seeks to
              improve that understanding by carrying out a number of  experiments with
              simplified models under a variety of conditions.  By excluding many of the
              complexities of the real world, such as land-sea contrasts, strongly varying
              background wind and temperature, and even the Earth's rotation, an appreciation
              of the most basic underlying dynamics can be attained.   Experiments will be
              performed with a hierarchy of models ranging form sing-column models to fully
              three-dimensional quasi-geostrophic models.  All will share a common design in
              that the basic state is one of statistical equilibrium in which convection,
              radiation, and large-scale circulation are in balance and the physical
              processes of convection and radiation are represented as accurately as
              possible.   This research effort ultimately will contribute to improved models
              and prediction of the tropical atmosphere.
