Title       : The OASIS Project: Oklahoma Atmospheric and Surface/Layer Instrumentation System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9724594

Award Number: 9724594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1551491            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Crawford kcrawford@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred V. Brock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerald A. Brotzge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Beasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott J. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin K. Droegemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1525,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI), the Principal
              Investigators   upgrade and improve an existing weather observational network
              known as the Oklahoma Mesonetwork.   The Mesonet is an internationally
              recognized network of remote environmental-monitoring stations.  It consists of
              114 sites that have operated continuously since March of 1994.  With sensors
              that extend from 10 m above ground to 75 cm below ground, the Mesonet has
              archived more than 99.95% of all observations possible since commissioning
              (over 45 million observations).  The Oklahoma Legislature provides primary
              funding for the maintenance and operation of the network.    The work
              accomplished under this MRI is termed the Oklahoma Atmospheric & Surface-layer
              Instrumentation System (OAISIS) Project.  The OASIS Project advances the
              frontier of mesoscale and storm-scale meteorological research by:  (1)
              development of a system of surface-flux stations using the 114 operating sites
              in the Oklahoma Mesonetwork;  (2) development of a new generation of low
              powered, low cost and low maintenance field mills, deployed over the 42 sites
              of a Micronetwork of stations embedded within the boundaries of the Mesonetwork
              and located within the Little Washita watershed (southwest of Oklahoma City).  
               The new, unique data sets resulting from these upgrades will address a number
              of key questions not previously answered with today's lack of observations. 
              For example, quantitative assessment of the surface energy budget for the
              entire state will provide better initialization for the Advanced Regional
              Prediction System, developed by the Center for Analysis and Prediction of
              Storms at the University of Oklahoma, one of the NSF Science and Technology
              Centers.  This will allow, among other advantages, tests of the relative
              importance of surface energy fluxes under various conditions.      
              Electric-field data from the newly developed field mills will enable
              investigations of variations in electrical activity from storm-to-storm, and
              relati ons of electrical activity to other meteorological observables in
              storms, such as radar reflectivity.    Data acquired from the basic and
              upgraded Meso- and Micronetworks will be archived and made available to the
              research community.
