Title       : MRI: Development of a Paperless Machine Design Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1998  
File        : a9724528

Award Number: 9724528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stewart P. Prince   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1189,1464,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of a paperless machine
              design research laboratory.  The purpose of the laboratory is to introduce
              students to state-of-the-art machine design and manufacturing processes, and
              provide a venue for research in these areas.  The laboratory shall consist of a
              computer workstation with solid modeling and analysis software, a rapid
              prototyping device, a computer controlled milling machine, and a computer
              controlled lathe.  Students will take design concepts and model them using
              solid modeling software.  Solid modeling allows one to sculpt a design from a
              solid volume rather than draw a two-dimensional representation of a part. 
              Designs are also created parametrically using the parent/child relationship;
              these designs can be combined together to create assemblies which include many
              components.  Stress, kinematic, thermal, and other types of analysis can be
              performed by post processing the model information, and the resulting design
              can be quickly produced using rapid prototyping processes, such as
              stereo-lithography.  The prototype gives the student insight into his/her
              design, and actual fabrication of the machine part leads to a fundamental
              understanding of the overall machine design process, yet few blueprints are
              ever produced.  Illustrations and analysis can be directly ported into
              presentation software for review.  By the use of retro-active updating, a
              design change can be updated backward through the design chain.  In many cases,
              the use of such state-of-the-art equipment can identify design flaws early in
              the process thus reducing the need for refinement and iteration.       The
              development of this laboratory will enhance the student's understanding of
              current machine design and manufacturing processes.  Faculty members and
              students from many departments will use the laboratory for research and
              experimentation.  Students will perform research on advanced transient control
              strategies for tool path generation, error reduction in stereo-lithography
              interpolation, and optimization of the interface between machine design and
              manufacturing.  Knowledge gained will lead to future research in many other
              areas.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
