Title       : Acquisition of Major Multiuser Research Instrumentation for the Study of Plant,
               Fungal and Insect Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9724557

Award Number: 9724557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1265027            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rod A. Wing   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph A. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The primary objective of this proposal is to acquire major instrumentation
              for research and training in the analyses of complex plant, fungal and insect
              genomes. The instrumentation includes: 5 automated DNA sequencers, a robot for
              preparing DNA sequencing templates, 9 computer workstations for processing
              sequence and physical mapping data, a robotics system for the development of
              semi-automated procedures for high through-put screening of thousands of DNA
              samples for library screening and plant breeding applications, 12 ultra-low
              freezers for maintenance of large insert B AC libraries, a bank of 6
              hybridization incubators and a versatile imaging system for rapid screening and
              analysis of BAC libraries.    The requested instrumentation will be integrated
              with existing robotics equipment, and ongoing research, service and teaching
              programs to establish a state-of-the-art Genome Center at Clemson University
              (CU). The functions of this new CU Genome Center are: 1 ) construction and
              maintenance of high quality BAC libraries; 2) production and distribution of
              high-density hybridization filters and DNA pools for library screening and
              distribution of BAC libraries and clones; 3) positional cloning of
              agriculturally important genes; 4) physical mapping of whole chromosomes and
              targeted genomic regions with BAC clones; 5) genome sequencing of important BAC
              contigs and genomes; 6) application development; and 7) undergraduate, graduate
              and postdoctoral training.    There are three primary activities that would be
              greatly enhanced by funding this proposal. First, MRI funding would ensure that
              the CU Genome Center will be capable of serving as a public resource for the
              construction, maintenance and distribution of large insert BAC libraries of
              important plant, fungal and insect genomes. Such a centralized resource would
              provide the research community convenient access to a major tool that is used
              for positional cloning, physical mapping and genome sequencing. Secondly, MRI
              funding would allow us to perf orm pilot projects aimed at physical mapping and
              sequencing of specific genomic regions of genomes that are being targeted for
              intensive investigation. Successful completion of these projects will put the
              CU Genome Center in a position to compete effectively for substantial federal
              support to sequence major portions of genomes such as Arabidopsis, Rice and
              Neurospora crassa. Lastly, MRI funding will substantially support and enhance
              undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral training in genomics. With access to
              state-of-the-art instrumentation, the CU-Genome Center will attract students
              and scholars of high caliber propelling several life sciences programs to
              national ranking, such as the interdisciplinary program in Genetics.    The CU
              Genome Center, as envisioned above, will be an internationally recognized
              facility that in turn will produce world class science serving the agricultural
              genome community at large.
