Title       : Genetic Investigation of Lammer Protein Kinase Structure and Function in
               Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9724006

Award Number: 9724006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Chase   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Rabinow  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Medical Ctr
	      987835 Nebraska Medical Center
	      Omaha, NE  681987835    402/559-7456

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    9724006 RABINOW   Dr. Rabinow's laboratory is characterizing a
              Drosophila gene known as Doa, which encodes a member of the LAMMER kinases, a
              recently discovered eukaryotic family of protein kinases.  Protein kinases
              transfer phosphate groups to other proteins as a means of regulating their
              activity, and regulate many essential cellular processes.  Homologues to Doa
              throughout the animal kingdom have very similar amino-acid sequences in the
              part of the protein that has enzymatic activity, suggesting that they have
              equally similar function in cellular processes.   Recessive Doa mutations in
              flies are almost lethal; however, rare adults do survive, but show defects in
              eye development.  Other defects in Doa mutants include failure of a normal
              embryonic central nervous system (CNS) to develop and segmentation defects. 
              The DOA kinase is widely expressed and is found at particularly high levels in
              the embryonic CNS, where rapid cell division and differentiation occurs.  The
              DOA kinase comes in two major forms that differ in size.  The larger of these
              (105 kD) is found only in the cell cytoplasm, whereas the smaller version (55
              kD) is also found in the cell nucleus.  The structure of the 105 kD cytoplasmic
              form is completely unknown.   In the current research project, Dr. Rabinow's
              laboratory will carry out further structural and functional characterization of
              DOA kinase to define the role of this kinase family in the initiation and
              maintenance of cellular differentiation.  The first task will be to determine
              the structure of the 105 kD protein.  In addition, antibodies against the two
              protein isoforms will be generated to examine their expression.  Drosophila
              expressing specifically altered forms of the kinase will be constructed to
              determine whether the two protein isoforms perform different functions, as well
              as to provide more complete genetic characterization of Doa mutant defects. 
              These data will be used to identify one or more of the cellular processes that
              are altered in mutants. R esults from this project will substantially advance
              the long-term goal of elucidating the specific cellular functions of the LAMMER
              protein kinase family and the developmental signaling pathway(s) in which they
              function.
