Title       : Molecular Characterization of GRASP and its Mechanism of Action on
               Oligodendrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9724033

Award Number: 9724033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243624             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara Szuchet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Oligodendrocytes are the central nervous system cells that  make and maintain
              myelin (an insulating membrane that  surrounds nerves and facilitates fast
              nerve impulses).  Myelin is indispensable for the proper function of nerves 
              and muscles.  It has previously been shown that  oligodendrocytes, isolated
              from myelinated brain tissue and  kept in vitro (i.e., in the laboratory),
              regenerate and have  the potential to resynthesize myelin membranes.  It has
              also  been shown that during the process of regeneration,  oligodendrocytes
              reenact the sequence of events that lead to  myelination during development. 
              Hence these cells  constitute a good model to investigate the mechanism of 
              myelin formation.  In vitro, a critical requirement for this  entire process is
              the interaction of oligodendrocytes with  an adequate substratum (a surface to
              which the cells can  adhere).  A horse serum, heparin-binding glycoprotein (a 
              protein with attached sugars) termed GRASP  Glycine (a type  of amino acid)
              Rich Adhesion Serum Protein  has now been  identified, purified, and partially
              characterized that, in  vitro, fosters the adhesion of oligodendrocytes.  This 
              adhesion acts as a driving force that propels  oligodendrocytes on their path
              toward differentiation (i.e.,  myelin formation).  The long-term research
              endeavors are to  define the signaling events and single out the molecular 
              players that initiate and propagate the in vitro  regeneration/differentiation
              of oligodendrocytes.  It is  hypothesized that GRASP binds to a glycoprotein
              (receptor)  on the surface of oligodendrocytes; this binding turns on  the
              machinery that activates the cells to make myelin.  Specifically, this research
              is an attempt to confirm/refute  this hypothesis.  To this end, it is proposed
              to:  a)  identify and isolate GRASP's putative receptor; b) determine  the
              structure (i.e., the sequence of amino acids) of this  receptor; obtain the
              structure of GRASP and define its mode  of interaction with oligodendrocytes.
              The proposed  resear ch  should advance our understanding of the mechanisms
              that are  operative in the in vitro model.  Ultimately, it is hoped to  extend
              these concepts to the in situ system by identifying  GRASP's counterpart on
              nerve cells.  This research should  further our knowledge of the biology of
              OLGs and the  mechanism of myelin formation.
