Title       : Development of an Electromagnetics Analysis System for NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9724627

Award Number: 9724627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217484             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Vaughan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                An Electromagnetics Analysis System for NMR  A.  Project Summary Our overall
              goal is to predict and minimize the  radio  frequency  (RF)  electromagnetic
              (EM) losses  affecting  the  success  and  safety of human NMR at very high
              magnetic field strengths. To pursue  this  goal  we  require  the  means  to
              numerically  model  the  RF  coil-tissue  interface, and then to analyze the
              realization of the coil-tissue model on  the  bench, prior to actual human
              application. The means for the  modeling  and   measurement  of  EM  losses 
              will  be  provided  by   the   proposed  "Electromagnetics Analysis System for
              NMR". The rationale for  this  study  lies  in the need to know and control RF
              dependent transmit power,  tissue  heating,  field penetration, and
              signal-to-noise for high field (1.5-7.0T)  human and animal studies.  The need:
              A unique "Electromagnetics (EM) Analysis System" is requested to  support
              on-going high field NMR research and research training activities,  directly 
              and collaboratively at three institutions with leading  programs  in  high 
              resolution  metabolic, anatomic,  and  functional  imaging.  The  institutions:
               Massachusetts General Hospital /Harvard U., the  University  of  Minnesota, 
              and  the  University of Alabama at  Birmingham  (UAB)  are  currently
              conducting basic life science research on humans and animals  in  vivo  at the
              highest magnetic field strengths available. Increased signal-  to-noise  (SNR)
              and its dependent spatial resolution, temporal  resolution  and  contrast, are
              chief reasons for performing NMR investigations at high  field   strengths.  
              Also   important,   the   spectral   resolution   and  susceptibility  contrast
               also  improve  with  field  strength.  The  MGH,  Minnesota,  and UAB sites
              among others have demonstrated these high  field  advantages  with  their  3 
              and 4T whole body systems.  The  data  quality  achieved at 3 and 4T has
              compelled the MGH, Minnesota, and other groups to  consider the feasibility of
              human studies at 6 T, 7T, an d higher.  The  project: The proposed EM Analyzer
              will be used to help achieve  three  specific  aims: 1) predict of EM losses
              through RF coil-anatomy  modeling,  2)  verify and account for EM losses by
              measurement, and 3) minimize these  EM losses by appropriate RF coil design and
              application. In first aim, the  EM losses in finite element models of the coil
              adjacent to anatomy will be  numerically calculated. The consequences of these
              EM losses, to the coil's  RF  (Bl) field homogeneity, to safety, and to the SNR
              will be predicted by  using the computing power and software of the proposed
              instrument to solve  the  time-dependent electromagnetic and thermodynamic
              equations for  these  models. The second aim will be achieved by verifying the
              model predictions  by  bench  measurement  methods  using  the  high  power 
              pulsed  analyzer  functions  of the instrument. The modeled coils will be built
              and  tested,  with and without phantom, animal, and human loads. For the third
              aim,  the  theoretical  predictions and empirical verifications  will  be 
              tested  in  targeted applications. Initially, high field RF coils will be
              dedicated to  each  of  four  applications in the human head  targeting  deep 
              localized  structure,  whole brain, superficial local, or superficial global 
              cortex.  By  minimizing RF losses for each application we seek to show improved
              NMR  data  at  safe RF power levels in NMR applications at 1.5, 3, 4,  and  7T.
               Although  the EM Analysis System will be applied to the development  of  a 
              wide  variety  of  high field NMR experiments, the three groups  proposing 
              this  instrument share a common interest to first develop the  high  field 
              human  head  application. The aims of this project will be closely  allied 
              with, and checked against the commercial high field products supported  by 
              Advanced NMR Systems, Inc.  The instrument: The EM Analyzer will be used to
              help prove the feasibility  of  6 to7T experiments, and to achieve the inherent
              potential of 3T and 4T  studies.  This   will  be  accomplished by predicting 
              and  developing  the  physical  and technical components of selected high field
              NMR experiments.  The  EM  Analysis System will be a workstation driven, high 
              power  pulsed  network  analyzer.  The  system will include  a  dynamic 
              gradient  signal  analyzer  as well. The workstation will host EM, thermal,
              mechanical,  and  NMR  simulation software for modeling the physical components
              of  the  NMR  experiment.  The  EM  Analyzer does not exist as a stand-alone 
              commercial  product,  but  will  be assembled from mostly off-the-shelf 
              hardware  and  software  components. Analogous to and deriving from  the 
              Automatic  Test  Equipment (ATE) used in military radar development and
              diagnostics, the EM  Analyzer  proposed  will  be  quite unique to  the  NMR 
              application.  The  Analyzer  will  be uniquely powerful as well, combining 3D,
              time-dependent  EM  simulation  software,  with  automated test  equipment  for
               analyzing  realizations  of these EM coil designs on the bench, under
              realistic  high  power  pulsed or switched conditions. This instrument will
              allow 3D finite  element  models  of  anatomic regions encompassed by  EM  coil
               structures  including  RF,  gradient and magnet coils, to be modeled.  Time 
              dependent  numerical  solutions of EM phenomena including SNR, B1 penetration, 
              power  absorption,  heating, magnetic susceptibility, etc.  will  be 
              calculated.  After  using  these  simulations to develop optimized  coil 
              designs,  the  proposed  instrument  will be used to dynamically analyze  the 
              physically  constructed  coil circuits for realistic RF pulse excitation and 
              gradient  wave  form  protocols. Thusly the success and safety of high  field 
              human  experiments will be predicted by simulation, and verified on the bench. 
              The  shared  use: The proposed instrument will be a much enhanced,  second 
              generation  of  the  workstation  and  small-signal  CW  network  analyzer 
              previously used by the PI while at UAB. The PI will assemble and  mainta in 
              the EM Analyzer at the MGH-Harvard Advanced Detector Laboratory, a part of  the
              MGH-NMR Center. In addition to and as part of their own research, Drs.  Vaughan
               and  Ackerman will support and supervise local  Harvard  and  MIT  graduate 
              student projects requiring use of the EM Analysis  System.  This  system  will 
              be shared through continued collaboration with Dr.  Harrison  and  his 
              students  at the UAB, and with Drs. Ugurbil, Garwood  and  their  students  at 
              the University of Minnesota. In turn, the methods  and  coil  technology
              developed through shared use of the proposed instrument will be  verified by
              application at 4T and at 7T at the collaborating sites.
