Title       : Development of Neuroimage Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9724256

Award Number: 9724256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176157             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Balota dbalota@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award permits the Psychology Department at Washington University to
              purchase instrumentation to store and analyze functional magnetic resonance
              imaging and positron emission typography data. Currently cognitive scientists
              in the department conduct cognitive research using fMRI and PET machines
              located at the Washington University Medical School campus and they must
              analyze the resultant data there. This makes convenient and continuous access
              difficult both for senior researchers and students. The instrumentation
              provided will allow transmission of this information to the Psychology
              Department where it can be analyzed. The system includes: a server computer
              which will receive the large data structures and store the images for
              distribution to other work stations; an SGI Work Station that takes advantage
              of programs that have been developed to provide 2-dimensional surface
              reconstructrions of the human cortex; three work-stations; an eithernet hub; a
              color printing device; a half-time technician who will be responsible for the
              initial development and maintenance of the system.  Two projects currently
              under way will make immediate use of the system. Both address the neural
              underpinnings of cognitive components of behavior. The first - PET Activation
              Studies of Words - addresses those areas of the brain which are actively
              engaged in processing distinct aspects of words and the neural underpinnings of
              the attentional control systems that coordinate such processes. The second
              project - Imaging Studies of Learning and Memory - addresses those brain areas
              which are involved in the distinct aspects of encoding and retrieval of
              information from episodic, semantic and procedural memory systems.  This
              equipment will also be used for training graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows in the area of cognitive neuroscience.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
