Title       : Cellular Mechanisms of Adult Plasticity in Barrel Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9724102

Award Number: 9724102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. McCasland mccaslaj@vax.cs.hscsyr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      750 E. Adams Street
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/464-5476

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724102  McCASLAND  Humans and other animals can acquire new information from
              their surroundings throughout life, but can also precisely recall familiar and
              long-held memories.  This capacity for simultaneously retaining and importing
              information must be achieved by networks of neurons, especially in the cerebral
              cortex.  Much of cortex consists of defined areas devoted to one or more of the
              senses such as touch, and each of these areas represents a topographic map of a
              sensory surface such as the skin.  Dr. McCasland's research uses new anatomical
              and computer-imaging techniques to study a well-known model of such topographic
              maps -- the portion of rodent somatosensory cortex representing the invariant
              array of large whiskers on the face.  Using this model, his group has shown
              that a much larger area of adult cortex than normal is driven by a few spared
              whiskers when all other whiskers are repeatedly trimmed.  Such large-scale
              changes imply robust shifts in the activation of individual neurons and
              therefore of the operation of local cortical circuitry.  Because the same
              circuits are critical for the rodent's exquisitely precise discrimination of
              tactile cues, these results provide a powerful model of how brain circuits can
              both perform precisely and remain adaptive.   This project studies potential
              mechanisms underlying the demonstrated large-scale neuronal plasticity. 
              Studies will focus on the interactions between excitatory and inhibitory
              neurons within local circuits, and on the role of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
              receptors in such interactions. NMDA receptors are found on both excitatory and
              inhibitory neurons and have been implicated in several forms of neuronal
              plasticity.  Subtle changes in the strength of inhibition within local cortical
              circuits have dramatic effects on the selection of sensory inputs.  Thus,
              neural inhibition may represent an important control point for cortical
              plasticity.  Yet little is known of the behavior of inhibitory neurons during
              adaptation, or of the relati onship between neural inhibition and the
              activation of NMDA receptors.  Dr. McCasland's methods are uniquely suited to
              systematic, cell-by-cell measures of activation in identified excitatory and
              inhibitory neurons.  The project will test whether neural inhibition declines
              in early stages of adult plasticity, then increases as new activation patterns
              emerge.  Blockade of NMDA receptors will show whether these receptors are
              necessary for either the measured changes in excitation and inhibition and/or
              for the neural plasticity itself.  The results will provide a unique assessment
              of the relative roles of excitation, inhibition, and NMDA receptors in adult
              cortical plasticity.
