Title       : Acquisition of a Simulation and Visualization Facility for Fluid Dynamics
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9724559

Award Number: 9724559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Shelley shelley@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bastiaan J. Braams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This MRI award will support the purchase of equipment for research, research
              training, and education in computational fluid dynamics and visualization, at
              the Courant Institute.  The aim is to create a state-of-the-art simulation and
              visualization center within our new Applied Mathematics Laboratory (AML), which
              is dedicated to education and research training in fluid dynamical simulation
              and visualization.  The equipment will be shared by research groups engaged in
              various areas of fluid dynamics research at the Institute, and integrated with
              the present and future computational and visualization facilities owned by
              these research groups.  The planned instrumentation includes computers, a mass
              storage system, projection facilities, network enhancements, third-party
              software licenses, and miscellaneous smaller items. . The research and research
              training to be conducted in the facility is dedicated to understanding
              complicated fluid flows - 2- and 3-dimensional - arising in biophysics,
              geophysics, and energy research as well as basic fluid dynamics, and to
              education in fluid dynamical computation and visualization.  A major
              beneficiary of the requested instrumentation is the new Applied Mathematics
              Laboratory now under construction on the ground floor of Warren Weaver Hall. 
              The AML is comprised of two components, the Wetlab and the ViSLab.  The Wetlab
              is a demonstration and research laboratory of fluid mechanics.  The ViSLab
              (Visualization and Simulation Laboratory) is the associated computational
              facility.  The AML facility is designed to integrate research with research
              training and education, and to synthesize computation, visualization, and
              experimental research with research training and instruction.  Research
              activities that will use the proposed instrumentation include the simulation of
              insect flight, computational studies of the dynamics of complex fluids, the
              fluid dynamics of the heart, three-dimensional niagnetohydrodynamic modelling
              for fusion science and solar physics, geophysical  flows, and study of
              aerodynamic flow in complicated geometry.  Through the present proposal it will
              provide our students with access to large-scale simulation platforms and to
              modern visualization and animation hardware and software.  This research effort
              will be funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Science, the MPS Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the MRI Program.
