Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Elucidation of the Rate Processes involved in the
               Selective Dissolution of Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9724698

Award Number: 9724698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard W. Pickering pick@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Howard
              Pickering, of the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at Pennsylvania
              State University in University Park, and Dr. Badr G. Ateya, of the Chemistry
              Department at Cairo University in Egypt.  The objective of this research is to
              explore the prevailing mechanisms and to identify and characterize the various
              rate processes involved in de-alloying, i.e. the selective removal of one
              component of an alloy under external actions, usually that of the environment. 
              The de-alloying usually leads to deterioration in the properties of the
              remaining alloy.  The understanding of the mechanisms is essential to the
              development of successful methods and techniques to mitigate and control this
              problem.  Dr. Pickering is currently conducting analytical and experimental
              research in this area, with funding from DMR, to study the various possible
              mechanisms and their degree of prevalence in various alloys, in the copper,
              zinc, and amalgam families.  The participation of the Egyptian scientist adds a
              particularly proven expertise in the area of physical and mathematical modeling
              of the various kinetic and transport processes involved.  Scope:  This research
              project will be useful in improving the scientific knowledge on the mechanisms
              and processes of de-alloying which are extremely important in modern industrial
              designs, with heavy emphasis on light weight alloys that have superior
              properties.  The project involves US and Egyptian scientists with complementary
              expertise in material sciences, chemistry and physics, as well as 
              complementary laboratory facilities at the two participating universities.  The
              project will also involve a US graduate student who will have access to an
              international experience, by working in Dr. Ateya's laboratory, which should
              help in his/her career.  The project meets INT objective of increasing
              U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides, and of enhancing
              junior scientists' international experience.  This award includes partial
              funding by the Division of Materials Research.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
