Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9724897

Award Number: 9724897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Kuhla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cooperating Hampton Roads Organizations for Minorities in   Engineering (CHROME)
              network of community organizations,  founded  in 1983, impacts students in
              elementary, middle and high school.   This proposal does a fine job of
              outlining how CHROME meets each  criteria while specifically highlighting
              CHROME activities and  successes.  As a result of it clubs throughout the K-12
              school  system, this program is able to "follow through" with youngsters  and
              offer a variety of support and activities.   As a result,  CHROME claims
              "virtually all students who remain" in the program  graduate high school. 
              CHROME claims 95 percent of its club members  go to college and 80 percent
              major in SMET or related fields proven  by  conducting a follow-up survey with
              alumni and maintaining a   database.  CHROME's ability to track students
              demonstrates how the  program has made a difference in students graduating,
              going to  college and choosing majors in SMET fields.  While this program 
              mostly benefits African American students, there are a number of  other
              minorities who participate in the program including Hispanic,  Asian/Filipino,
              and Native American students.  The strengths of the  nominee include:        . 
              Sixty community organizations working together providing            outstanding
              programs for youth and students.    .  Constant communication to keep
              individuals informed by             providing information online.    . 
              Provides training for teachers and counselors to be             effective
              leaders of local clubs through a variety of summer        training programs.   
              .  Excellent outreach structure.    .  Provides internships through its
              business members, holds            educational forums, funds scholarships, and
              tracks       participants.        In summary, CHROME is a comprehensive
              community networking   effort that goes beyond establishing mentoring
              relationships   between senior and junior individuals.  The program's
              activities  sustain encouragement for SMET disciplines from elementary schoo l 
              through high school.  It trains teachers and counselors to  encourage students
              to pursue careers in technical fields,  establishes and sustains partnerships
              among business corporations,  higher education institutions, and government
              agencies plus  supports community educational improvements in science, 
              mathematics, and engineering areas.  It even brings parents into  the picture
              by offering them workshops with themes such as "How to  Rear an Engineer" or
              "Preparing for College."
