Title       : Closing Loops: A Workshop on Scale Issues in Implementing Industrial Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9724931

Award Number: 9724931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton J. Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Socolow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724931  Andrews  The PI's propose a one day workshop for a small number of
              senior  engineers, social and natural scientists, and practitioners to  discuss
              scale issues in implementing industrial ecology.  The  event has three
              important goals: (1) build better linkages  between the research, business, and
              policy communities; (2)  encourage implementation of lessons learned to date;
              and (3)  scope future research needs in one comer of this young, cross- 
              cutting field.    More than just a powerful metaphor, industrial ecology offers
              a  systematic way of looking at the environmental impacts of modern  industrial
              activity.  It emphasizes the dense web of  interconnections between actors in
              modern economies, and it  highlights the prominent role of industry determining
              the overall  environmental burden.  The normative vision includes a 
              transformation from a simple, linear, oncethrough industrial  ecosystem to a
              more efficient arrangement which re-uses most  materials and requires few
              exogenous inputs to keep the system  going.  Implicit in this vision is active
              participation of  industry, and public policies designed to complement rather
              than  substitute for market forces.    Scale issues become important when (1)
              sorting out the relative  merits of proposals for example, an eco-industrial
              park versus a  waste exchange strategy; (2) the boundaries of economic and 
              political systems are not coincident; and (3) analyzing the  system's
              dynamics-how an industrial ecosystem evolves.    This project includes four
              tasks: prepare a background paper and  agenda, select workshop participants,
              convene the workshop, and  write up the results.  The investigators see the
              workshop as the  scoping phase of a longer term research project on scale
              issues  in implementing industrial ecology.  It is timely to hold this 
              workshop for two reasons: key lessons from previous research are  now ready to
              be implemented, and future research in this  burgeoning field needs to be
              prioritized.  ***
