Title       : U.S.-Brazil: Influence of Support and Additives on Pd-BasedCatalysts for
               Emission Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9724169

Award Number: 9724169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16653              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Campbell campbell@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Castner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 0000,5911,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724169  Campbell  This U.S.-Brazil award will support a research collaboration 
              between Dr Charles T. Campbell and Dr. David G. Castner of  the University of
              Washington to work with Professor Martin  Schmal at the Federal University in
              Rio de Janeiro, Brazil  on the influence of support and additives on Pd-based 
              catalysts for emission control.        The goal of this project is to clarify
              catalytic processes  which are relevant to environmental protection.  They will
               investigate the relationships between the activity of a  series of
              palladium-based catalysts and their surface  structure.  They will prepare
              catalysts and test them with  classic techniques, such as activity
              measurements, surface  areas, temperature programmed reduction, and porosity. 
              Their surface structure and composition will be  characterized using facilities
              at the University of  Washington, which are not available in Brazil.  Schmal's 
              group has extensive experience in the characterization of  supported catalysts
              with reactor studies, selective  chemisorption, temperature programmed
              reduction and  temperature programmed oxidation and adsorbate structure.  The
              U.S. group brings expertise in the area of surface  analysis and the surface
              science of catalysis.  Findings  from this research will be useful in
              developing commercial  supported catalysts with optimum structures and maximum 
              emission control activity.  The full kinetic and mechanistic  information will
              identify critical barriers and operating  conditions that limit emission
              control activity, and  possibly provide a basis for developing strategies to 
              overcome barriers and limitations.  The results will also  provide information
              about properties that would be desirable  to have for a promotion of emission
              control catalysts.  *  *  *
