Title       : Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9724053

Award Number: 9724053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Pruett-Jones aspj@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724053  Pruett-Jones  This research involves ecological and behavioral studies
              of  a group  of passerine birds in Australia, the fairy-wrens. These  species
              are endemic  to the Australian mainland and exhibit a variety of  interesting
              patterns of  behavior, the study of which will help us understand  evolutionary
              processes  and social behavior in non-human species.  Fairy-wrens are 
              interesting because  individuals live in large social groups and the offspring 
              from one  generation remain in the territory and assist the parents in  raising
              young  in successive breeding attempts.  Also, despite the close  social ties 
              between individuals in the same group, individual males and  females  generally
              mate with birds in other social groups.  This  extreme complexity  and
              difference between social interactions and reproductive  patterns in 
              fairy-wrens offers a unique opportunity to study the  evolution of animal 
              societies. In our study of reproductive patterns, and of the  sex ratio of 
              offspring, we are using the technique of DNA profiling  (i.e.,  fingerprinting)
              and microsatellite analysis.  Separate from  the specific  species under study,
              this research will also contribute to  the field of  molecular biology and the
              refinement of techniques that have  applicability  in human research.  This
              study will be conducted in mallee  scrub habitat in  South Australia, one of
              the most threatened habitat types in  Australia, and  it will further our
              understanding the ecology of this  important ecosystem.  This study will
              contribute to the conservation of mallee  habitats and  provide information
              critical to the management of mallee  bird species.
