Title       : Structure-Function Studies of the Heme Pocket of an Oxygen Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9724048

Award Number: 9724048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie A. Gilles-Gonzalez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724048  Gilles-Gonzalez  The rhizobial oxygen sensing protein FixL contains a
              catalytic domain and a heme binding domain. Apo-FixL or FixL having high-spin
              heme iron autophosphorylates at a conserved histidine with the (-phosphoryl
              group from ATP.  By contrast, FixL having low-spin heme iron, is enzymatically
              inactive.  The proteins to be exploited in the proposed studies include the
              full-length FixL from Bradyrhizobium japonicum (BjFixL), a Rhizobium meliloti
              FixL lacking an ATP binding region  RmFixLT(ter439) , the isolated heme domain
              of the R. meliloti FixL (RmFixLH), and the same domain coupled to kinase
              (RmFixLT). To probe the nature of the FixL heme pocket and the coupling of the
              kinase to the heme, a number of factors will be examined that are expected to
              influence binding of heme ligands.  Those factors include: the chemical nature
              of the heme ligands, the presence of ATP or a phosphoryl group, and the
              presence of a kinase domain.  The kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for
              binding of F-, CN-, N3-, imidazole, and NO to   FeIIIBjFixL will provide
              information about the influence of ligand shape, size, polarity and charge on
              binding to the heme iron.  Measurements of oxygen binding to FixL complexed
              with non-hydrolyzable ATP analogs or to FixL lacking a site of ATP binding will
              extend knowledge of the "back effect" of the kinase.  Determination of the
              activation energies and the enthalpies for binding of ligands of varying
              crystal-field strengths to RmFixLH and RmFixLT will help to examine the
              influence of the kinase.  Resonance Raman spectroscopy experiments verifying
              the heme coordination and examining the impact of the kinase on the spin
              equilibria will complement the measurements of ligand binding.  Structural
              differences in the heme pockets of the cyanomet derivatives of the FixLs will
              be probed by NMR spectroscopy on isotopically labeled proteins or proteins
              reconstituted with isotopically labeled heme.  More detailed structural
              information will be obtained from X-ray crystallogra phic studies of high-and
              low-spin derivatives of FixL heme domains of varying lengths and the
              full-length BjFixL.    The overall goal of this work is to understand the
              biophysics of signal transduction.  It has particular relevance to signal
              transduction by heme-based sensors such as guanylyl cyclase and by the
              histidine kinases of the two-component class.  An understanding of FixL's
              regulatory mechanism will provide a key part of a complete biochemical
              description of the regulation of nitrogen fixation.  Possible applications of
              this research include the design of novel sensors of heme ligands for
              biotechnology and the development of improved rhizobial strains for
              agriculture.  ***
