Title       : US-Madagascar Dissertation Enhancement: Cultivating Democracy on Fragile Lands:
               Environmental Institutions and Non-Elite Perceptions of Democracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9724118

Award Number: 9724118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Goran Hyden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 5928,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724118  Hyden    This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate 
              student, Richard R. Marcus, working under the guidance of  Dr. Goran Hyden,
              Professor of Political Science at the  University of Florida, to do field
              research in Madagascar.  During the democratic transition in Madagascar, the 
              government instituted a country-wide conservation program.  Many international
              and local nongovernmental organizations,  including USAID and the World Bank,
              worked with the Malagasy  government in the formulation of the program.  It is 
              hypothesized that support for democracy in Madagascar is  contingent upon
              positive economic outcomes at the local  level.  Since donor-supported
              conservation programs have  such a far-reaching influence on local economies,
              local  people will only support democracy in Madagascar if  conservation
              programs lead to an amelioration in the quality  of life.  Further, it is
              assumed that the most successful  environmental institutions are those that
              incorporated the  concerns and attitudes of the local people, as expressed 
              through their fokonolona (local administrative units) and  community
              organizations, into the project.  Mr. Marcus will  visit villages in surrounds
              of Masoala National Park and the  Ankarana Protected Area.  In each of these
              areas, villages  influenced by Integrated Conservation and Development  Project
              (ICDP) policies and villages beyond the influence of  ICDP policies will be
              selected in an effort to study the  activities of donor-funded environmental
              institutions and  local organizations.  The strength of the relationship 
              between environmental activity and democracy will be  determined by studying
              the differences between the  activities and policies of the fokonolona involved
              in the  ICDP and a social/economic/demographic index, as well as the 
              democratic perceptions of the local Magalasy people.  A four-  step
              methodology, consisting of participatory appraisals,  interviews with local
              leaders, a survey, and a series of  follow-up interviews, will  be used during
              this study.  Staff  members at the Universite D'Antananarivo will collaborate 
              with Mr. Marcus on this project.    This study will make an important
              contribution to the  understanding of the relationship between international 
              environmental activity and local democratic attitudes in  Madagascar
              specifically, and political transition in Africa  generally. The grant will
              also provide support to enable a  promising student to establish a strong,
              independent  research career.    Funding jointly provided by the Division of
              International  Programs and the Division of Social, Behavioral and Economic 
              Research.    ***
