Title       : Evolution and Genetics of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9724037

Award Number: 9724037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori Stevens lori.stevens@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724037  Stevens  Behaviors affect life, death and reproductive characters of 
              individuals and populations and it is important to  understand their 
              expression and evolution. Understanding the expression of a  behavior  requires
              understanding the genetic basis of the behavior,  the physiological  basis of
              the behavior, the relationship between the behavior  and fitness as  well as
              effect of natural selection on the behavior. This  research will use an  insect
              model system to understand the role of genetics,  physiology and  selection in
              the expression of a behavior - cannibalism  behavior in the  confused flour
              beetle Tribolium confusum. Because behaviors  are likely to  be determined by
              or highly correlated with other traits -  including basic  physiological
              processes such as metabolic rate or  respiration rate - the  genetic basis of
              and selection on respiration rate and  surface behavior  (i.e., the tendency of
              beetles to be on the flour surface  rather than  tunneling in the flour media)
              will also be examined.  Using  high and low  cannibalism strains, experiments
              will determine if there is  single optimum  expression of a behavior in a given
              environment, by creating  populations  with differing allele frequencies of
              cannibalism genes and  tracking the  change in allele frequencies over time. 
              Statistical  analysis will be used  to determine the relative importance of
              selection vs random  processes in  behavior evolution. The proposed research
              will also examine  the  controversial, virtually untested portion of Wright's 
              shifting balance  theory, namely the plausibility of a population moving from 
              one adaptive  behavior stratagy to another by migration among populations.  The
              genetic  analysis will be done using recent developments in molecular  genetics
               including quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis.  A  molecular genetic map 
              of the genome of T. confusum will be constructed and used to  identify  regions
              of the genome associated with the behavioral and  physiological  traits. This
              rese arch is an important contribution to both  behavior  genetics and
              evolutionary biology because it tests common  assumptions made  about the
              adaptive significance of behaviors, as well as  their genetic  basis and
              evolution.
