Title       : International Consultative and Planning Meeting of Physical Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9724179

Award Number: 9724179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irving A. Lerch lerch@aps.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physical Soc
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403844    301/209-3204

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will provide partial support of a planning  meeting of international
              physical societies to be held in  Washington, DC, on October 8-10, 1997,
              organized by the  American Physical Society.  The planning meeting will 
              include representatives from the largest national membership  societies
              (Deutsche Physikallische Gessellschaft, the UK's  Institute of Physics, the
              Japanese Physical Society and the  Japanese Society of Applied Physics, the
              Chinese Physical  Society) and the five international regional societies (the 
              European Physical Society, the Federation of Latin-American  Physical
              Societies, the association of Asia-Pacific Physical  Societies, the Euro-Asian
              Physical Society, the Society of  African Physicists and Mathematicians). 
              Observers to the  meeting will include the President of the International 
              Union of Pure and Applied Physics and the President of the  Canadian
              Association of Physicists.  The purpose of this meeting is to explore important
              common  issues affecting the international physics enterprise and to  engage in
              joint planning to address these issues.  The  topics which have been identified
              as most important by all  participants are: 1) the formulation and
              implementation of  national and international science policy, 2) the impact of 
              electronic publishing on the dissemination of research  results, 3) status and
              needs for physics education and  public education, 4) physics and capacity
              building in  developing nations and 5) the possible organization of an 
              international council or congress of physical societies as a  means to sustain
              international collaboration.  The meeting will be organized around plenary
              presentations  designed to outline the problems and alternative solutions, 
              followed by break-out groups assigned specific tasks.  A  concluding plenary
              will bring together the elements of the  various discussions to include a
              compilation of outcomes and  assignments.  The meeting is expected to produce a
              consensus paper on each  of the principal topics of discussion and a general
              plan for  further concerted action.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
