Title       : Role of One Double-Strand DNA Break in Yeast Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9724086

Award Number: 9724086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Haber haber@hydra.rose.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Haber  9723086  Meiotic recombination is fundamental in the generation of
              diversity in people and in most other eucaryotes. Crossing-over between
              homologous chromosomes also plays a key role in proper chromosome segregation.
              The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has provided a powerful model system to
              analyze these events by a combination of genetic, molecular biological and
              cytological techniques. Much progress has been made in understanding how
              meiotic recombination occurs and how recombination is related to the formation
              and function of the synaptonemal complex (SC). One central unanswered question
              is: how does meiotic recombination differ from mitotic recombination and to
              what extent this difference can be assigned to: a) the way double-strand breaks
              are created, b) the influence of the synaptonemal complex on gene conversion
              and crossing-over, or c) the expression of meiotic-specific recombination
              genes?  By the meiotic expression of the site-specific HO endonuclease, under
              the control of the meiotic-specific SPOI3 promoter, it is now possible to
              induce a single HO double-strand break (DSB) in meiotic cells and to compare
              these events with those initiated by HO in mitotic cells. This provides, for
              the first time, a way to compare directly the recombination events initiated by
              the same DNA cleavage in these two cell types. Moreover, this system provides a
              way to examine recombination in spo11 or rad50 or other mutant meiotic cells
              that are incapable of creating normal meiotic DSBs and thus are incapable of
              initiating normal meiotic recombination. Consequently the effects of these
              mutations on later steps in meiotic recombination can be assessed, for the
              first time, by inducing a DSB with the HO endonuclease. Southern blot analysis
              revealed that SPO13::HO-induced events appear at the same time as normal
              events. A most striking result was obtained from a cytological analysis of
              spol3 red50 cells that cannot induce normal DSBs. Surprisingly, the creation of
              an HO-induced DSB at one site on one chr omosome triggered the formation of
              axes containing the synaptonemal complex protein, Zip1p, along many
              chromosomes. This suggests that the creation of DSBs along a chromosome is not
              necessary for the formation of the synaptonemal complex along that chromosome,
              and that formation of the SC is triggered in response to the detection of a
              single DSB. A major focus of the work is to understand in detail how the
              formation of the SC is triggered. Experiments to determine if SC formation
              initiated by an HO DSB depends on subsequent recombination events carried out
              by gene products such as RadS1, Rad52 and Dmc1are being carried out.  Second,
              the role of mutations known to cause mitotic cell cycle delay in response to
              DNA damage (RAD9, RAD17, RAD53, TEL1) will be assessed for their role in
              triggering SC formation after an HO DSB in meiosis. Finally, HO induced DSBs
              will be used to determine if a single DSB is sufficient to cause homologous
              chromosome synapsis, or whether HO-induced SC formation occurs between
              nonhomologous chromosomes. Finally, an experimental system is being carried out
              to determine if one HO-induced DSB per chromosome is effective in directing
              proper chromosome segregation on chromosomes that lack any other crossover
              events.
