Title       : U.S.-Pakistan Workshop on Silicon Technology, February 1998, Islamabad, Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9724178

Award Number: 9724178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17105              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nejat Veziroglu veziroglu@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 5943,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
              `US-Pakistan Symposium and Workshop on Silicon Technology`, to be held in
              February 1998, in Islamabad, Pakistan.  The US team leader is Dr. T. Nejat
              Veziroglu, Professor and Director, Clean Energy Research Institute (CERI) at
              the University of Miami, in Florida.  The Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Parvez
              Akhter, Director of the National Institute of Silicon Technology (NIST) in
              Islamabad.  The objectives of the workshop include: exchange of the latest
              knowledge on the technology and utilization of silicon in photovoltaics, as
              well as transistor applications; to highlight the known applications and
              benefits of the rapid growth in silicon technology, both for solar energy
              conversation and for computer applications; to discuss the utilization in solar
              cell technology in conjunction with the recently generated data on solar energy
              mapping in Pakistan; and to make recommendations for cooperative research and
              development between the US and Pakistan to accelerate the technology transfer
              in the field of silicon technology.  Specific topics to be discussed include:
              production procedures of silicon from quartz, rice husk, and silica sand;
              growth of single crystal and float zone technology; amorphous silicon
              technology as a viable material for solar cells; polycrystalline casting and
              ribbon technology; new materials and techniques to make thin film solar cells,
              heterojunctions, concentration and hybrids; comparison of these techniques for
              each specific applications; status of storage devices including hydrogen
              energy; and design of solar systems.   The last day will be devoted to specific
              workshops on specific topics with the purpose of identifying the most effective
              means for transfer of technology between industrialized countries and the
              developing countries.  Scope: This project deals with an area that is of
              particular importance to many developing countries that are in the so-called
              Sun-Belt.  Several of these countries lack adequate, or any, fossil fuel for
              the current demands or for any planned industrialization.  They would consider
              the development of a viable solar energy industry, either indigenous or as
              joint effort with industrialized countries, as a breakthrough in the equation
              that links economic development, environmental concerns, and needed financial
              resources.  Pakistan has been one of the countries that started on this effort
              early in the 1970's with some technical support from NSF grantees.  The US
              participants in this meeting are to be selected by a committee of two  US and
              two Pakistani experts in the field.   Both the CERI and NIST have extensive
              experience in organizing similar meetings in this area, some of which included
              other countries in South Asia.  The expected results of the workshop, including
              potential research collaboration, exchange of information, and opening avenues
              for US solar energy material companies to the Pakistani market, are helpful for
              both countries.  The proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities
              likely to enhance collaboration between US and foreign researchers in areas of
              mutual interest.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
