Title       : US-Turkey Workshop: Novel Trends in Environmental and Agricultural
               Biotechnology, May 11-14, 1998, Izmir, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9724009

Award Number: 9724009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Klein dakspk@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Tengerdy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of participation of US scientists in a
              `US-Turkey Workshop on Novel Trends in Environmental and Agricultural
              Biotechnology`, to be held May 11-14, 1998, at Ege University in Izmir, Turkey.
               The US team leaders are Dr. Donald Klein and Dr. Robert Tengerdy of the
              Department of Microbiology at Colorado State University.  The Turkish
              co-organizer is Dr. Fazilet Vardar-Sukan, Department of Biochemical Engineering
              at Ege University.  The goal of the workshop is to develop collaborative
              research between the US and Turkey in the area of environmental and
              agricultural biotechnology.  The focus of the workshop will be on basic
              research needed to develop clean technologies in integrated crop management,
              using new achievements of biotechnology.   Among the key topics to be dealt
              with are: improving soil fertility by microbial intervention; integrated pest
              management; bioprocessing of crops and crop residues for value-added products;
              waste free recycling of crop and agricultural residues; and bioremediation of
              soils and waters.  The workshop will include specific lectures about the
              current research in these areas in both the US and in Turkey, to be followed by
              sessions to identify research areas of mutual interest, and where collaboration
              would be beneficial to both countries.  The workshop material will be
              disseminated via the Internet, and the Proceedings and recommendations for
              joint projects are to be published by Ege University.  Scope: This award allows
              six experienced American scientists from academic institutions, and one from a
              national laboratory, to travel to Turkey to meet with eleven Turkish
              scientists, to discuss scientific and technical developments in the important
              area of biotechnology applications in agriculture and the environment.  The two
              sides will review developments in the scientific fields that contribute to
              developments in biotechnology, and also discuss the potential for successful
              applications of these technologies.  They plan to focus attention on the
              scientific questions that can be dealt with through US-Turkish scientific
              cooperation.  There is potential for considerable benefits from collaboration
              between the US and Turkey with its dynamic agricultural sector, especially in
              the Aegean region, and its growing industrial base, but with little domestic
              energy sources.  The collaboration could identify opportunities for totally or
              partially replacing chemical fertilizers and chemical pesticides in
              agriculture, and for increased utilization of agricultural residues for fuel
              and for other useful products.  The potential benefits of successful
              collaboration, to the US, to Turkey, and to lesser developed countries, can be
              great.  The proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities intended to
              enhance scientific collaboration between US and foreign scientists in areas of
              mutual interest.  This award is funded by INT and the Division of Biological
              and Environmental Engineering.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
