Title       : Japan JSPS Program: NMR Studies of Low-Dimensional Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9724757

Award Number: 9724757
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Recchia crecchia@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recchia  9724757    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for  the
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral  Fellowship for Dr. Charles Recchia at
              the  University of Tokyo, Tokyo,Japan. Dr. Recchia  will work with Dr. Masashi
              Takigawa, Professor  of Physics at the Institute of Solid State  Physics, on a
              research project entitled, "NMR  Studies of LowDimensional Correlated Electron 
              Systems."    The proposed research will focus on the use of  nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) to probe a new  class of materials related to hightemperature 
              superconductors.  These new materials, known as  "ladder compounds," may
              provide researchers with  important clues as to the mechanisms that are 
              responsible for exotic superconductivity.  It is  determined that the crucial
              structural elements  in high temperature superconductors are two  dimensional
              planes of copper and oxygen.  Electronic spins placed on copper atoms causes a 
              short-range magnetic order coupling, a basic  fluctuation that is thought to be
              the key to  superconductivity.  Controversy remains  regarding the detailed
              nature of this electronic  coupling and how it gives rise to 
              superconductivity.  In an effort to resolve  these issues, researchers are now
              investigating  samples that contain finite width "ladders" of  copper and
              oxygen, but the finite width  appropriate to ideal superconductive activity 
              remains unclear.  The primary goal of the research is to use  recent advances
              in NMR techniques to identify  the idealwidth of these "ladders" and, thus, 
              provide a far deeper understanding of the  electronic coupling process in novel
               lowdimensional materials.  ***
