Title       : Acquisition of a Motion Analysis Facility for the Study of Primate Locomotion at
               SUNY, Stony Brook
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9724225

Award Number: 9724225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigitte Demes bdemes@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack T. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Fleagle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jungers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Primate Locomotion Laboratory at
              SUNY Stony Brook will acquire instrumentation to supplement and increase their
              capacity to study primate locomotion. Purchase of a 3D motion analysis system
              will permit automatic and manual tracking of limb segment coordinates and will
              allow accurate quantification of 3D displacements, velocities and accelerations
              of limb segments. These data will then be coordinated with EMG data on muscle
              recruitment patterns, kinetic data on substrate forces and pressures, and
              strain data on long bone loading. A pressure plate, also purchased through this
              grant will permit determination of pressure distribution at hand and foot
              contacts.  The laboratory is one of a few in the US engaged in experimental
              analysis of functional morphology in primates and has examined the function of
              muscle and bone conformation across a wide range of anatomical parts of the
              body and primate species.  The group plans to pursue a number of studies
              including:  1. the kinematics of primate quadrupeds involved in bone strain
              studies to determine if inter-individual and interlimb variations in strain
              correlate with limb posture differences: 2. the kinematics of climbing in
              monkeys and apes to help determine whether climbing adaptations are responsible
              for any of the unique features which distinguish are and fossil hominid
              postcranial morphology; 3. the kinematics and kinetics of gibbon and spider
              monkey brachiation;  4. the kinematics and kinetics of knuckle-walking to
              understand the distribution of this unique locomotor adaptation in the hominoid
              tree;  The research will serve several functions. It will provide basic insight
              into the relationship between analytical form and function. It will also
              provide a powerful data base and point of departure for the analysis of fossil
              monkey ape and hominid remains. Many researchers from  several departments
              within the university as well as graduate students will benefit from this
              instrumentation                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
