Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution Laser-Ablation ICP-MS for Laboratory for
               Archaeological Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9724514

Award Number: 9724514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. T. Douglas Price and James Burton
              will purchase a Finnegan Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS)
              to serve as principal analytic instrument at the University of Wisconsin
              Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry. It will replace a current ICP-AES
              which is nearly 10 years old and nearing the end of its useful lifespan. The
              ICP-MS has the demonstrated capability of determining elemental abundances at,
              or below, parts-per-trillion levels and the capability of measuring individual
              isotopes for isotope-ratio studies. The machine has a laser ablation sample
              introduction  system which allows rapid analyses of either wet or dry samples
              in aqueous solution or as emissions from a laser beam focused upon solid
              matrices. It can thus be used to analyze a wide range of archaeological
              materials and the presence of a microprobe permits micron-scale as well as bulk
              analysis.  The laboratory has contributed significantly to the analysis of a
              wide range of archaeological materials: ceramics, metals, soil and human
              skeletal and dental remains. The research group has developed rapid methods to
              determine trace element signatures of pottery. It has pioneered the use of
              barium/calcium ratios as indicators of past diet, examined techniques to
              reconstruct human activities from anthropogenetic soils and employed strontium
              ratios in human bone and teeth to determine migration history. It has also
              collaborated with many researchers, both postdoctoral and student to address a
              wide variety of specific archaeological issues. With this new instrument the
              laboratory will expand its scope from elemental analyses to carbon and nitrogen
              isotope measurements which provide insight into human diet and past
              environmental conditions.  The laboratory has both provided general service to
              the anthropological community and worked to develop new analytic approaches. It
              has also served an important training function. The ICP-MS will permit all of
              these aspects to be expanded the pursued with greater efficiency.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
