Title       : Dissertation Enhancement Grant: Middle Paleogene Palynology of Colombia, South
               America: Biostratigraphic, Sequence Stratigraphic, and Paleogeographic
               Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9724122

Award Number: 9724122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16480              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Dilcher dilcher@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos Jaramillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              974122  Dilcher    This Americas Program dissertation enhancement grant will 
              fund Mr. Carlos Jaramillo, under the direction of Dr. David  Dilcher,
              University of Florida, on a study of the  palynostratigraphy and sequence
              stratigraphy of four Andean  provinces in the western, northeastern, central
              and eastern  Colombian Andes.  The study will include a detailed  taxonomic
              survey of pollen/spores and comparison with living  taxa.  It is anticipated
              that the research will provide data  for recognizing flora constituents in the
              region during the  Paleogene , as well as  refine the existent biostratigraphic
               resolution.  The main goal is to identify patterns of  palynologic responses
              relative to sea-level and base-level  changes, and distinguish them from
              evolutionary changes.  The use of palynology (pollen/spores) palynofacies are 
              proven and adequate techniques to make geological and  vegetational
              reconstructions. The research will provide an  integrated overview of the
              geological and  vegetational  development during this period,  and will provide
              a critical  link in the knowledge of the Paleogene history of northern  South
              America.    The Paleogene encompasses major evolutionary progress,  especially
              within the angiosperms, and major changes in  global circulation and climatic
              changes, sea-level  fluctuations and tectonism.  However,  its history in 
              northwestern South America remains largely unknown due to  the scarcity of
              detailed geologic research.  An adequate  understanding of important
              large-scale events, such as the  Andes uplift process and its relation to the
              high species  diversity in the area, has been hindered by this lack of 
              information.  Furthermore,  some of the most important  hydrocarbon reservoirs
              in the region are located in  Paleogene and Eocene continental rocks, in zones
              with high  structural complexities.  A better understanding of the  paleogene
              stratigraphy and biostratigraphy will enhance the  successful exploration of
              these reservoirs.  ***
