Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Versatile Non-Contact Surface Profiling Microscopes for
               Characterizing Microtopographic Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9724371

Award Number: 9724371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Cohn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Lumpp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Faguy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Pitts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mahendra K. Sunkara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724371  Cohn  Two surface profiling microscopes will be acquired that are
              capable of measuring the three dimensional topography of a variety of samples
              with extreme precision and accuracy.  One instrument is referred to as a Mirau
              correlation microscope or also as a white light scanning interferometer.  The
              other instrument is an atomic force microscope.  These prowlers are
              complementary in terms of scan range, accuracy and measurement speed.    The
              Mirau microscope has a field of view from 60 microns to 8 millimeters
              (depending on the objective) and vertical range of 0.5 millimeter.  The
              transverse resolution is set by the diffraction limit to between 0.5 micron and
              15 microns depending on the objective.  The vertical resolution is 1 angstrom. 
              The Mirau correlation microscope can be programmed to profile surfaces of up to
              100 millimeters by 100 millimeters by stepping and repeating of the
              measurements.  Stage movements are accurate to 0.5 microns.  A single field of
              view (of up to 736 x 480 sample points) is profiled and converted to a computer
              file at the rate of 7 microns per second in the vertical direction or up to 70
              seconds if the entire 0.5 millimeter range is scanned.    The atomic force
              microscope has transverse scan ranges of up to 100 microns, vertical scan
              ranges of up to 9 microns and resolution of 1.5 angstroms or less in x, y and
              z. A three dimensional scan can take from 2-5 minutes and produces a 512 x 512
              pixel image.  The system can also perform atomic force microscopy in contact,
              lateral force measurements of surface friction, and surface tunneling
              microscopy.    The profiling microscopes will be used in several funded
              research studies.  Their uses include: 1) characterizing the accuracy of a new
              method of optically patterning relief patterns into photoresist for
              applications to diffractive optics; 2) evaluating thickness and roughness of
              chemical sensing films on suspended silicon platforms.  The noncontact
              measurements possible with the two profilers will be used to avoid  mechanical
              damage to the silicon platforms that could result from contacting stylus
              prowlers, and damage to films that can result from charge buildup when imaging
              with scanning electron microscopes; 3) For a study on increasing the
              reliability of fuel cells through the use of conductive polymer electrodes. 
              The thickening of the polymerized region from nanometers to several microns
              will be observed with the interferometer during the curing process; 4)
              evaluating the structure of chemical vapor deposited thin films of diamond. 
              Measurements of individual crystal geometries will be used to understand the
              nucleation and growth of diamond; 5) for developing and refining the processes
              of fabricating imaging x-ray detector for space-based telescopes.  The
              equipment will also be available (10 hours per course) for use in two NSF
              supported laboratory courses: 1) Microfabrication in which students fabricate
              MEMS devices in a class 100 clean room; 2)  an expanded Analytical Techniques
              offered jointly by Chemistry and Chemical Engineering that will provide theory
              and hands on training in Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and scanning
              electron, atomic force, surface tunneling and Mirau correlation microscopy.   
              The proposers' research area can be classified as the development of processes
              for fabricating microelectro-mechanical and micro-optic devices.  The equipment
              would undoubtedly be of value to numerous other researchers in areas of surface
              science, rapid prototyping and microscopic imaging.  ***
