Title       : Major Research Instrumentation: Acquisition of a CAVE and Shared-Memory
               Supercomputer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9724347

Award Number: 9724347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Karniadakis gk@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmie D. Doll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Gottlieb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Forsyth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Brown University has received a Major Research Instrumentation Award for the
              acquisition of a virtual reality display system (a CAVE), a graphics computer
              to provide synchronized output to the CAVE, and a large shared-memory computer
              interconnected to the graphics computer via a high speed link.  This equipment
              will form the core of a shared research computing environment at Brown
              University.  Connectivity to resources available at federally funded computing
              laboratories will be provided through vBNS connection at Brown.    A large
              array of computer and computational science research projects drawn from
              computer science, chemistry, cognitive and linguistic sciences, geological
              sciences, mathematics, and physics will be utilizing the proposed equipment. 
              The research projects range over scientific visualization conducted by the
              Brown Graphics Group in collaboration with the NSF Science and Technology
              Center for Graphics and Visualization, interactive graphics in computational
              fluid mechanics at the Center for Fluid Mechanics, geophysical research on
              earthquake mechanics using numerical modeling, and condensed matter physics.   
              The equipment will be used by graduate students for research and by
              undergraduate students in over a dozen courses in at least six different
              science departments, as well for honors thesis projects.  In addition, new
              course units and new interdisciplinary courses in topics such as computational
              science,  neural networks, and medical imaging will be developed to take
              advantage of this powerful new facility.  Ongoing work by undergraduates that
              could take advantage of this equipment include projects that span departments
              such as computational steering, scientific visualization, interaction
              techniques for immersive virtual reality, and the creation of immersive
              interactive teaching tools.
