Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Research in High-Speed Electronics and Power
               Electronics in Bulk and Finite Inertia Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9724414

Award Number: 9724414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135447             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariesa L. Crow crow@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Sudhoff  (Principal Investigator former)
              Todd H. Hubing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Drewniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Van Doren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High-frequency test equipment and a high-power dynamometer test stand are
              proposed for multidimensional research encompassing finite inertia power
              systems (FIPS), electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), and bulk power systems
              (BPS).  The need for this research has resulted from the incorporation of power
              electronic devices into many types of systems that have been historically
              mechanical including ship propulsion transmissions, actuation in aircraft
              (fly-by-light, power-by-wire), and electric vehicles in order to increase
              efficiency, bandwidth, and reliability, and at the same time decrease size and
              weight.  Power electronic devices also provide a growing basis for maintaining
              a high degree of power quality and reliability in bulk power systems in the
              newly deregulated electric utility environment.  However, the use of power
              electronic devices has also led to many technical challenges including not only
              traditional coordination and control concerns in FIPS and BPS, but also
              high-frequency noise and electromagnetic interference.  This interference can
              cause malfunctioning of the high-speed digital circuitry controlling the power
              electronics leading to subsequent (and usually catastrophic) failure of these
              devices.  In addition, the electromagnetic interference can also result in
              malfunctioning of other nearby communications or digital electronics. 
              Multi-dimensional research at UM-Rolla has grown out of this intersection of
              power engineering and electromagnetic compatibility concerns.  UM-Rolla has
              traditionally had strong programs in power engineering and EMC, and are
              recognized as leaders in these areas.  New multi-dimensional research efforts
              between these groups grew out of experimental implementation of a scaled
              shipboard FIPS.  High-frequency noise problems resulting from rapidly switching
              power electronics caused malfunctioning in the power electronic digital control
              circuitry and catastrophic failure of the power electronics.  Significant
              collaborative research resulted between the power and EMC groups in this
              relatively unexplored area in order to find solutions to these particular
              challenges.  In particular, the power/EMC team has attracted In excess of $3.5
              million from a wide spectrum of federal and industrial sources for power
              electronics, machines and drives, power systems, and electromagnetic
              compatibility research.  This proposal requests equipment for the investigation
              of high-frequency effects in power electronic systems as well as the
              development of new design approaches for minimizing this noise.  This equipment
              will also be used for related research in finite inertia power systems,
              electromagnetic interference  and susceptibility in high-speed digital designs,
              and for bulk power systems.  The Emerson Electric Machines  and  Drives
              Laboratory  has  extensive capabilities for experimental research, and the EMC
              Laboratory has state-of-the-art high-frequency test equipment for research in
              the 1OOMHz-20GHz frequency range.  However, the primary frequency range for
              noise problems in power electronic systems is 0.01-IOOMHz, thus additional
              instrumentation is required.  The specific instruments needed in this range are
              a network analyzer, spectrum analyzer, impedance analyzer, time-domain
              reflectometer, LCR meter, and power amplifier.  Expanded research opportunities
              in characterizing, modeling, and developing design aids for avoiding
              high-frequency noise problems in power electronic systems are possible with the
              addition of the proposed test equipment.  Current facilities in the power lab
              are also not sufficient for pursuing studies of systems dominated by one prime
              mover such as next generation shipboard and aircraft applications.  A
              high-power dynamometer is required as a prime mover for this research.  The
              experimental capabilities  in both the power and EMC areas make UM-Rol a unique
                                     both universities and industries.  The proposed
              equipment will build on existing strengths for expanding research and education
              in the area of high-frequency problems in power electronic applications.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
