Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1999    
File        : a9724895

Award Number: 9724895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janine K. Reklaitis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emily M. Wadsworth  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Purdue's Women in Engineering Mentoring Program (WIEMP) was   created in 1992 to
              expand the number of women engineering   students.  A networking model was
              chosen as a way for students to  provide support to each other in personal and
              professional   advancement.  Mentors are experienced students and alumni who
              are  working in engineering fields.  The components of the mentoring  model
              focus on:  undergraduates in the first and third year;  undergraduates in the
              second and fourth year; and graduates  pursuing masters and doctorates.  As a
              consequence, the mentoring  programs provide constant support to women in the
              program.  There  is ongoing assessment of the women in the program as well as a
               summative evaluation.  Results indicate that retention is 19  percent higher
              for women in the program.  Purdue has already  institutionalized Undergraduate
              Mentoring Programs of WIEMP in  their Women in Engineering Programs.  The
              success of the program  has been cited in professional publications, and
              presentations.  In  addition, information has been distributed internally as
              well to 35  higher education institutions throughout the country.  A thorough  
              proposal demonstrates changes the university has made to affect the  enrollment
              of women in their engineering program.  The strengths of  the nominee include: 
                    .  Excellent continuity in its mentoring program whereby former      
              mentees become mentors.    .  Number of institutions acknowledging the success
              of the       program indicates possible replication.    .  Undergraduate
              programs introduced are being             institutionalized.    .  Active
              involvement is clearly seen as a bonus.    .  High rate of success.    . 
              Linking graduate students with Ph.D. alumni is great for       continuity.    .
               Mentoring is mostly independent of faculty.    .  Recruitment of women in
              engineering is excellent.      In summary, WIEMP offers outstanding mentoring
              continuity for   female engineering students that stems from their first year
              as  freshmen to afte r graduation when they can serve as alumni mentors  for
              graduate students.  Throughout the program process, evaluation  is undertaken
              to ensure student satisfaction with the mentoring  support and strategies.  The
              retention and graduation data indicate  a very high success rate.  Linking
              graduate student participants  with Ph.D. alumni changes the traditional
              educational system in a  positive way by bringing the world of work closer to
              the students'   university experience.
