Title       : Temperature Reconstruction by Stable Isotope Analysis of Ice Cores from the
               Poles to the Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9724416

Award Number: 9724416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lonnie G. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Mosley-Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks 50% matching funds to acquire two new mass spectrometers.
              The need to add two new mass spectrometers is urgent for three reasons.  First,
              in the next year Ohio State University will acquire at least 1500 meters of
              additional ice core from three newly funded (NSF, NOAA and NASA) drilling
              projects: on Dasoupu in the southern Himalaya of China, on Sajama in Bolivia,
              and on Graham Bell Island in the high Russian Arctic. The number of samples to
              be measured to produce high temporal resolution records (e.g., annual where
              possible) will greatly exceed the capability of the 7-year old obsolete mass
              spectrometer.  Secondly, substantially more environmental information (e.g.,
              estimates of relative humidity and indications of moisture source changes) can
              be gleaned from ice core samples if the deuterium/hydrogen ratio ((D) is
              measured in combination with (18(.  Thirdly, at this time all known tropical
              glaciers and ice caps are retreating in response to the recent warming which is
              particularly evident in the middle troposphere between (30o  of the equator and
              soon there will be a major push to recover these endangered archives.    The
              Ohio State University Core Research Group has the demonstrated ability to
              retrieve cores from remote and harsh environments, to extract a spectrum of
              paleoclimatic information, and publish the results in major peer-reviewed
              journals.  As discussed in the proposal, the Ohio state University isotopic
              results have contributed to the emerging view that the tropics were much colder
              during the Last Glacial Stage than previously thought and strongly suggest a
              recent warming at high elevations, particularly in the tropics.  The proposal
              mass spectrometers will enable the Ohio State University Ice Core Research
              Program to make even stronger contributions to the understanding of the Earth's
              climate system.
