Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Physiology of Reproductionin Molluscs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9724918

Award Number: 9724918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Ram jeffram@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724918  Ram    This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative  research
              study on the physiology of reproduction in  molluscs, between Dr. Jeffrey Ram,
              Wayne State University,  and Dr. Carlos S. Gallardo, Universidad Austral de
              Chile.  The aim of the project is to understand the functional  evolution of
              peptide hormones using snail egg-laying  hormone(s) (EHL) as a model system,
              and to develop  techniques for the use of the (ELH) in prosobranch snail 
              aquaculture.  The researchers have chosen the CH giganteus  species of molluscs
              for conducting experiments directed at  achieving three major objectives:
              determining the location  of ELH-imunoreactive (ELH-IR) neurons and fibers in
              the  nervous system, identifying and purifying egg-laying  hormone(s) in their
              nervous system by bioassay, with the  eventual goal of determining its
              sequence.  The proposed  project is expected to achieve both scientific and
              practical  results .  It will result in an increased understanding of  the
              functional evolution of peptide hormone, and in the  development of techniques
              for using egg-laying hormones in  prosobranch snail aquaculture   In the long
              term, results of  this study will be used in future studies on mechanisms 
              underlying regulation of electrophysiological activity in  neurosecretory
              cells.    The prosobranch gastropod molluscs form the basis of several 
              important fisheries in both US and Chile.  An increased  knowledge of the
              mechanisms controlling their reproduction,  to be used at desired intervals,
              under controlled laboratory  conditions, will help the development of
              mariculture. The  two researchers are among the leading experts in their 
              respective fields, and both will benefit by this  collaboration. Dr. Ram will
              identify new experimental  preparations for basic science investigations of
              peptide  hormone and neurosecretory cell evolution and function, and  Dr.
              Gallardo will benefit by obtaining the expertise and  experience of the US PI
              in hormonal regulation of  reproduction of molluscs.  B oth countries will
              benefit by  the practical application of molluscan endocrinology to 
              aquaculture and basic science research.    ***
