Title       : Interaction of Cytoplasmic Membrane Energy Transducer With Outer Membrane
               Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9724049

Award Number: 9724049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Postle postle@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724049  Postle    Energy for the active transport of iron-bearing 
              siderophores, vitamin B12, and other ligands across the  outer membrane of
              Gram-negative bacteria is transduced from  the cytoplasmic membrane to
              high-affinity outer membrane  transporters by a cytoplasmic membrane protein
              complex  consisting of TonB and a set of auxiliary proteins.  Postle  and
              colleagues have previously demonstrated, using in vivo  crosslinking, that
              Escherichia coli TonB directly contacts  both cytoplasmic membrane proteins and
              the outer membrane  receptors. Preliminary data, which are based on separation 
              of cytoplasmic and outer membranes by sucrose density  gradient fractionation,
              indicate that TonB can associate  with the outer membrane in the absence of the
              cytoplasmic  membrane.  These results suggest that TonB might shuttle  from
              cytoplasmic to outer membrane in the process of energy  transduction, and thus
              serve as the springboard for  characterizing the interactions between TonB and
              the outer  membrane.  By exploiting the ability of TonB to form stable 
              associations with the outer membrane, it should be possible  to determine the
              nature of these associations.  Biochemical  approaches will be used to define
              TonB-outer membrane  interactions and their relationship to the process of
              energy  transduction.  The cytoplasm of Gram-negative eubacteria is surrounded
              by a  protective envelope consisting of three concentric layers: a  cytoplasmic
              or inner membrane; a cell wall composed of  peptidoglycan (murein), proteins,
              and polysaccharides; and  an outer membrane.  Between the inner membrane and
              the wall  is the periplasmic space, which is known to contain a number  of
              important enzymes.  This envelope poses a barrier to  harmful agents in the
              environment.  However, it also poses a  barrier to the bacterium's access to
              vital nutrients such as  minerals and vitamins from the environment.  The
              bacteria  possess a complex mechanism for selectively bringing such  nutrients
              into the cytoplasm.  This mechanism inv olves  active (i.e., energyrequiring)
              transport of siderophores  (carrier proteins that bind to nutritionally vital
              minerals  such as iron), vitamin B12 and other ligands across the  outer
              membrane.  The source of the energy for this process  comes from cytoplasmic
              metabolism, and thus this mechanism  requires the transduction of energy from
              the cytoplasmic  membrane (transduction of the membrane protonmotive force) 
              across the periplasmic space to the outer membrane.  This  energy transduction
              involves a membrane protein complex  consisting of a protein called TonB plus
              other associated  proteins. TonB was long thought to be located exclusively in 
              the cytoplasmic membrane.  However, using in vivo  crosslinking and subcellular
              fractionation, Dr. Postle  showed that TonB has direct contact with both
              cytoplasmic  membrane proteins and the outer membrane receptors, and that  TonB
              can exist in 3 distinct milieus:  by itself in the  cytoplasmic membrane, in
              contact with both membranes  simultaneously, and by itself in the outer
              membrane.  Further work will use genetic, biochemical, and  other approaches to
              define the interaction  between TonB and the outer membrane and to  relate this
              to the process of energy  transduction. The significance of this work  extends
              far beyond merely the function of TonB.  In Gram-negative bacteria, there are
              more than  100 distinct transport systems where  cytoplasmic membrane proteins
              are postulated to  interact with outer membrane proteins (e.g.,  multidrug
              efflux pumps, excretion of colicins,  hemolysins, and degradative enzymes). 
              The  proposed studies on TonB may well be directly  relevant to these other
              systems also. These  studies are therefore anticipated to greatly  enhance our
              understanding of how bacterial  metabolism is linked to the environment.  ***
