Title       : Developmental Control of Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9724706

Award Number: 9724706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick H. O'Farrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                O'Farrell  9724706      To produce a body having coherent shape and structure,
              development must control the size of each body part.  Detailed knowledge of
              development and cell cycle control in Drosophila provides unique advantages for
              an exploration of the mechanisms that coordinate development, cell
              proliferation and size.  Dr. O'Farrell will examine this coordination in
              imaginal discs, the larval precursors to the adult cuticular structures. 
              Imaginal cells grow exponentially during larval life but arrest when this disc
              reaches a mature size.  Wingless (Wg) and Decapentaplegic (Dpp) are pattern
              regulators that are also synergistic activators of growth and proliferation in
              discs.  Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibits proliferation and its activity
              rises at about the time proliferation arrests in discs.  He will explore the
              hierarchy of the inputs controlling proliferation by examining the effect of a
              perturbation (e.g. induction of Wg and Dpp) on the other processes (e.g.,
              activation of NOS), and the ability of other treatments (e.g., induction of
              various cell cycle regulators) to override the perturbation.  These epistasis
              like experiments should begin to outline the pathway of regulation used in size
              control and give us entries to begin a more detailed dissection of the
              controls.  To provide probes for this pathway dissection Dr. O'Farrell will
              define the basis of cell cycle arrest upon termination of  growth.  Measurement
              of the levels of various cell cycle regulators and analysis of  the ability of
              ectopic expression to bypass the arrest will define the limiting cell cycle
              regulators.  Because control of growth (increase in mass regulates cell cycle,
              he will develop probes for growth.  The rate of protein synthesis governs when
              cell achieve the size threshold required for division, and the translational
              initiation factor eIF4E has important inputs into cell cycle regulation.  Using
              transgenes and a drug  (rapamycin) that impairs eIF4E activity, he will explore
              its involvement in growth an d cell cycle quiescence.  He will use similar
              techniques to alter cyclin D levels and activity, because it is implicated in
              the coupling of translation and cell cycle.  As a measure of growth quiescence,
              he will use a newly developed in situ procedure to assess the level of nascent
              rRNA transcripts.  Together these experiments should provide the ground work
              for detailed dissection of the controls of tissue and organ size.
